ROHNERT PARK, CALIFORNIA MUNICIPAL CODE 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances of
Rohnert Park, California 
____________ 

Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 
  
CITY OFFICIALS 
Pam Stafford 
Mayor 
____________ 
Joseph T. Callinan 
Vice Mayor 
____________ 
Amy O. Ahanotu, Councilmember 
Gina Belforte, Councilmember 
Jake Mackenzie, Councilmember 
City Council 
____________ 
Darrin W. Jenkins 
City Manager 
____________ 
Don Schwartz 
Assistant City Manager 
____________ 
Michelle Marchetta Kenyon 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Karen Murhy 
Assistant City Attorney 
____________ 
JoAnne Buergler 
City Clerk 
____________ 
Betsy Howze 
Finance Director 
____________ 
Brian Masterson 
Director of Public Safety 
____________ 
John McArthur 
Director of Public Works and Community Services 
____________ 
Victoria Perrault 
Human Resources Director 
____________ 
Mary Grace Pawson 
Director of Development Services/City Engineer 
____________ 
CITY BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
____________ 
Bicycle and Pedestrian Advisory Committee 
Terry Gault 
Stephen Gold 
Tim Hensel 
Katie Musick 
Carson Williams 
____________ 
Golf Course Oversight Committee 
Michael Bird 
Joseph Callinan 
Gerald Griffin 
Michael Harrow 
Susan Harrow 
Michael Schwarz 
Joe Sturdivant 
____________ 
Mobile Home Parks Rent Appeals Board 
L. Kurt Engelhart 
Sarah M. Finnigan 
Patrick Reymond 
Sandra Waterman 
____________ 
Parks and Recreation Commission 
Michael Bird 
Bonnie L. Black 
Chris Borr 
Linda Canterbury 
Gerald Griffin 
____________ 
Planning Commission 
Susan Adams 
Daniel A. Blanquie 
John E. Borba 
Gerard Giudice 
Susan Haydon 
____________ 
Senior Citizens Advisory Commission 
Marion Ackerman 
Cheryl Burton 
Nancy Garvey 
Elaine Sampson 
Lorreen Abbott 
____________ 
Sister Cities Relations Committee 
Alicia Bonner 
Sachiko Knappman 
Tadao Kunishi 
Olga Senyk 
Timothy Wandling 
____________ 
PREFACE 
The Rohnert Park, California Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Municipal Code Corporation, its successor in interest. 
During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company under the direction of the city attorney. 
The code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the Title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.040 is Section .040, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the Code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement No. 25, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ordinance Number 922, passed April 24, 2018. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
This code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this Code. 
Numbering System. 
The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this Code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title, then chapter, and ending with section. Each part is represented in the Code section number. For example, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. 
Title. 
A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, code adoption and definitions. The titles in this Code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are Reserved for later use. 
Chapter. 
Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. For example, Chapter 2.06, City Manager, can be added between 2.04, City Council, and Chapter 2.08, City Attorney. 
Section. 
Each section of the Code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the Code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
There are many tables of contents in this Code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the Code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).) 
Beginning with Supplement No. 25, a secondary ordinance history note will be appended to affected sections. Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the end. These history notes can be cross referenced to the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Statutory References. 
The statutory references direct the Code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Cross-Reference Table. 
When a code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help users find older or "prior" code references in the new code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the Code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the prior code section in the column labeled "Prior Code Section" and the new code section in the column labeled "Herein." 
As of Supplement No. 25, this table will no longer be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
To find a specific ordinance in the Code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the Code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the Code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
Beginning with Supplement No. 25, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 25, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the Code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the Code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this Code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
The index will be updated as necessary when the Code text is amended. 
Instruction Sheet. 
Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. The Instruction Sheet will tell the Code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the Code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the Code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
When originally published, the pages of this Code were consecutively numbered. As of Supplement No. 25, when new pages are inserted with amendments, the pages will follow a "Point Numbering System". (Example: 32, 32.1, 32.2, 32.2.1, 32.2.2., 33). Backs of pages that are blank (in codes that are printed double-sided) will be left unnumbered but the number will be "reserved" for later use 
Electronic Submission. 
In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your code more quickly but also ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com. 
For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
If you have any questions about this Code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310  
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION 
Sections: 
 
1.01.010 - Adoption. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code, there is adopted the "Rohnert Park Municipal Code" as published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington, together with those secondary codes adopted by reference as authorized by the California State Legislature, save and except those portions of the secondary codes as are deleted or modified by the provisions of the "Rohnert Park Municipal Code." 
(Ord. 300 § 1, 1975)  
1.01.020 - Title—Citation—Reference. 
This code shall be known as the "Rohnert Park Municipal Code" and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the "Rohnert Park Municipal Code" in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the "Rohnert Park Municipal Code." Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the "Rohnert Park Municipal Code" and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. 
(Ord. 300 § 2, 1975)  
1.01.030 - Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code. 
The last ordinance included in this code was Ordinance No. 294 passed April 21, 1975. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance No. 294, but prior to adoption of this code, are adopted and made a part of this code: Ordinances 295, 296, 297, 298 and 299. 
(Ord. 300 § 3, 1975)  
1.01.040 - Reference applies to all amendments. 
Whenever a reference is made to this code as the "Rohnert Park Municipal Code" or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. 
(Ord. 300 § 4, 1975)  
1.01.050 - Reference to specific ordinances. 
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. 
(Ord. 300 § 5, 1975)  
1.01.060 - Effective date. 
This code shall become effective on the date the ordinance adopting this code as the "Rohnert Park Municipal Code" shall become effective. 
(Ord. 300 § 6, 1975)  
1.01.070 - Constitutionality. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid, or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The council declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 300 § 7, 1975)  
Chapter 1.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
1.04.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases whenever used in the ordinances of the city of Rohnert Park, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases: 
A.  "City" means the city of Rohnert Park, or the area within the territorial limits of the city of Rohnert Park, and such territory outside of the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision. 
B.  "Computation of time" means the time within which an act is to be done. It shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, and if the last day be a Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. 
C.  "Council" means the city council of the city of Rohnert Park. "All its members" or "all councilmen" means the total number of councilmen provided by the general laws of the state of California. 
D.  "County" means the county of Sonoma. 
E.  "Law" denotes applicable federal law, the constitution and statutes of the state of California, the ordinances of the city of Rohnert Park, and when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder. 
F.  "May" is permissive. 
G.  "Month" means a calendar month. 
H.  "Must" and "shall." Each is mandatory. 
I.  "Oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
J.  "Ordinance" means a law of the city provided that a temporary or special law, administrative action, order or directive, may be in the form of a resolution. 
K.  "Owner" applied to a building or land includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
L.  "Person" means natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them. 
M.  "Personal property" includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt. 
N.  "Preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
O.  "Property" includes real and personal property. 
P.  "Real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Q.  "Sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
R.  "State" means the state of California. 
S.  "Street" includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in this city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use or such other public property so designated in any law of this state. 
T.  "Tenant" and "occupant" applied to a building or land includes any person who occupies whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
U.  Title of office. Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the city. 
V.  "Written" includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed or multigraphed. 
W.  "Year" means a calendar year. 
X.  All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
Y.  When an act is required by an ordinance the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed as to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. 
(Ord. 253 § 1, 1975)  
1.04.020 - Grammatical interpretation. 
The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the city of Rohnert Park: 
A.  Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders. 
B.  Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
C.  Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. 
D.  Use of Words and Phrases. Words and phrases not specifically defined shall be construed according to the context and approved usage of the language. 
(Ord. 253 § 2, 1975)  
1.04.030 - Prohibited acts include causing, permitting, etc. 
Whenever in the ordinances of the city of Rohnert Park, any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
(Ord. 253 § 3, 1975)  
1.04.040 - Construction. 
The provisions of the ordinances of the city of Rohnert Park, and all proceedings under them are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. 
(Ord. 253 § 4, 1975)  
1.04.050 - Repeal not to revive ordinances. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of such ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. 
(Ord. 253 § 5, 1975)  
Chapter 1.08 - POSTING NOTICES 
Sections: 
 
1.08.010 - Posting places. 
The following are established as the official places for the posting of all ordinances, resolutions, notices and other documents required by law to be posted: 
A.  City Hall, 130 Avram Avenue, Rohnert Park, California. 
B.  Lobby of City Department of Public Safety Building, 500 City Center Drive, Rohnert Park, California; 
C.  Lobby of City Community Center Building, 5401 Snyder Lane, Rohnert Park, California. 
(Ord. No. 812, § 1, 1-27-2009) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 812, § 1, adopted Jan. 27, 2009, deleted § 1.08.010 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, § 1.08.010 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 392 § 1, 1981; Ord. 332 § 1, 1977 and Ord. 233 § 1, 1974.  
Chapter 1.12 - RIGHT-OF-ENTRY FOR INSPECTION 
Sections: 
 
1.12.010 - Authorized person defined. 
For the purpose of this chapter the term "authorized person" means a person qualified by the city for employment by the particular department of the city for which the authorized person is conducting the inspection and who carries on his or her person properly executed identification and credentials from the Rohnert Park city manager or the department head of the particular department under whose authority or jurisdiction the inspection is being conducted, disclosing the picture, the name, the title and employer of the authorized person, together with any other or further information that the city manager or department head may desire to furnish. 
Any definition of "authorized person" in the code relating to the particular department conducting the inspection shall take precedence over this definition unless this definition is consistent with such other definition. 
(Ord. 254 § 1, 1975)  
1.12.020 - Right-of-entry for inspection. 
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any ordinance or resolution or whenever there is reasonable cause to believe there exists an ordinance or resolution violation in any building or upon any premises within the jurisdiction of the city, any authorized official of the city may, upon presentation of proper credentials, enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon him by ordinance; provided, that except in emergency situations or when consent of the owner and/or occupant to the inspection has been otherwise obtained, he shall give the owner and/or occupant, if they can be located after reasonable effort, twenty-four hours written notice of the authorized official's intention to inspect. The notice transmitted to the owner and/or occupant shall state that the property owner has the right to refuse entry and that in the event such entry is refused, inspection may be made only upon issuance of a search warrant by a duly authorized magistrate. 
Except in cases of emergency wherein the public health or safety is immediately threatened, no entry in or upon any private property shall be made unless the property owner has received personal notice either by the written notice above specified or by personal oral notice accompanied by written notice at the time of the inspection, that the property owner has the right to refuse entry if he so desires and the extent of his rights and duties if inspection is refused. In the event the owner and/or occupant refuses entry after such request has been made, the official is empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
(Ord. 254 § 2, 1975)  
Chapter 1.16 - GENERAL PENALTY 
Sections: 
 
1.16.010 - General penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of the ordinances of the city is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is specifically identified in this code as a misdemeanor. 
A.  Infractions. An infraction is punishable by: 
(1)  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation; 
(2)  A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same code provision within a twelve-month period; 
(3)  A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation of the same code provision within a twelve-month period. 
(4)  An offense, which would otherwise be an infraction, is a misdemeanor if a person has been convicted of three or more violations of the same code provision within a twelve-month period. For the purpose of this subsection, a bail forfeiture is considered a conviction of the offense charged. 
(5)  An infraction is not punishable by imprisonment. A person charged with an infraction is not entitled to a jury trial nor to a public defense unless arrested and not released. 
B.  Misdemeanors. A person who violates a provision of this code, or who fails to comply with a requirement of this code, is guilty of a misdemeanor if the violation is specifically identified in this code as a misdemeanor. A misdemeanor is punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, or imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both. For those violations specifically identified as misdemeanors in this code, an arresting officer may choose to issue a citation for an infraction rather than a misdemeanor in any one of the following instances: 
(1)  The violator identifies himself or herself to the arresting officer, produces government-issued identification to the arresting officer and the arresting officer is able to verify the authenticity of such identification; or 
(2)  The violator ceases or otherwise abates the violation after receiving notice of such violation; or 
(3)  The violator has not previously been convicted of violating the same provision of this code within two years of the currently charged violation; or 
(4)  There is no need to book the violator. 
(Ord. 743 § 1, 2005: Ord. 255 § 1, 1975)  
1.16.020 - Additional—Alternative remedy. 
In addition to or in lieu of the remedies provided in the preceding Section 1.16.010, General penalty, the city attorney may commence an action for abatement, including, but not limited to, an injunction thereof, in the manner required by law and shall take such other steps to obtain such relief as will abate or remove a violation and restrain an enjoin any person from violating any provisions of this code, or other applicable laws and rules and regulations. All costs, including attorney's fees, for the abatement of a violation of this code which constitutes a public nuisance is assessed against any property declared to be a public nuisance and the costs, including attorney's fees, shall be collected in the manner provided for by Government Code Section 38773.5. 
(Ord. 680 § 1, 2002)  
Chapter 1.20 - ARREST PROCEDURE 
Sections: 
 
1.20.010 - Arrest—Notice. 
A.  If any person is arrested for a violation of any ordinance of the city and such person is not immediately taken before a magistrate pursuant to Part 2 of Title 3 of the Penal Code of California, the arresting officer shall prepare in duplicate a written notice to appear in court containing the name and address of such person, the offense charged, and the time and place where and when such person shall appear in court. 
B.  The time specified in the notice shall be at least five but not more than fifteen days after such arrest. 
C.  The place specified in the notice to appear shall be the court of the magistrate before whom the person would be taken if the requirement of taking an arrested person before a magistrate were complied with, or shall be an officer authorized by such court to receive a deposit of bail. 
D.  The officer shall deliver one copy of the notice to appear to the arrested person; and the arrested person, in order to secure release, must give his written promise so to appear in court by signing the duplicate notice which shall be retained by the officer. Thereupon, the arresting officer shall forthwith release the person arrested from custody. 
E.  The officer shall as soon as practical file the duplicate notice with the magistrate specified therein. Thereupon, the magistrate shall fix the amount of bail which in his judgment, in accordance with the provision of Section 1275 of the Penal Code of California, will be reasonable and sufficient for the appearance of the defendant, and he shall endorse upon the notice a statement signed by him in the form set forth in Section 815A of the Penal Code of California. The defendant may, prior to the date upon which he promised to appear in court, deposit with the magistrate the amount of bail thus set. Thereafter, at the time when the case is called for arraignment before the magistrate, if the defendant shall not appear either in person or by counsel the magistrate may declare the bail forfeited and may in his discretion order that no further proceedings shall be had in such case. Upon the making of such order that no further proceedings be had, all sums deposited as bail shall forthwith be paid into the county treasury to be distributed as provided in Section 1463 of the Penal Code of the state of California. 
(Ord. 20 §§ l—5, 1963)  
1.20.020 - Nonissuance of warrant. 
No warrant shall issue on such charge for the arrest of a person who has given such written promise to appear in court unless and until he has violated such promise or has failed to deposit bail, to appear for arraignment, trial or judgment, or to comply with the terms and provisions of the judgment, as required by law. 
(Ord. 20 § 6, 1963)  
1.20.030 - Promise to appear—Violation—Warrant issuance. 
A.  When a person signs a written promise to appear at the time and place specified in such written promise and has not posted bail as provided in Section 1.20.010 E, the magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution a warrant for his arrest within twenty days after his failure to appear as promised, or, if such person promises to appear before an officer authorized to accept bail other than a magistrate and fails to do so on or before the date which he had promised to appear, then within twenty days after the delivery of such written promise to appear by the officer to a magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense. 
B.  When such person violates his promise to appear before an officer authorized to receive bail other than a magistrate, the officer shall immediately deliver to the magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense charged the written promise to appear and the complaint, if any, filed by the arresting officer. 
C.  It is provided that any person willfully violating his written promise to appear in court is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he was originally arrested, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 20 § 7, 1963)  
Chapter 1.24 - NUISANCE ABATEMENT[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 852, § 2.A., Exhibit 1, adopted Dec. 11, 2012, deleted Chapter 1.24, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, Chapter 1.24 pertained to similar subject matter. See Ordinance List and Disposition Table for derivation. 
 
1.24.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this chapter is twofold. First the purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety, economic, aesthetic and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to protect neighborhoods against property-related nuisances, blight and deterioration by establishing requirements for all buildings, whether residential or non-residential, or structures of whatever kind, and establishing requirements for the maintenance of all land, whether improved or vacant. The city of Rohnert Park has a history and reputation for well-kept properties. Property values and the general welfare of the community are founded, in part, upon the appearance and maintenance of private properties. Owners and occupants of some properties within the city permit conditions to exist which are below the minimum conditions required by this chapter and therefore injurious and detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare of residents of the city and contribute substantially and increasingly to the deterioration of residential neighborhoods and commercial areas. Abatement of conditions less than those required by this chapter will promote the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city because maximum use and enjoyment of property in close proximity to other property depends upon maintenance of both properties. This chapter shall apply to all buildings, structures and land within the city without regard to use, date of construction or alterations. 
The second purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures to abate any and all other public nuisances, whether property related or not, which the city has declared to be injurious to the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare, prosperity, peace and quiet of the city and its inhabitants. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.A.(Exh. 1), 12-11-2012)  
1.24.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Administrative hearing officer" means the city manager, or any person designated by the city manager to preside over administrative enforcement hearings and administrative appeal hearings held pursuant to this chapter. However, such person shall not preside over any hearing in which such person also serves as enforcement officer. 
B.  "Animal" means all nonhuman members of the animal kingdom, including domestic, exotic and livestock species. 
C.  "Building" and "structure" mean and include, but are not limited to, any house, garage, carport, duplex, apartment, condominium, mobile home, storage shed, any commercial establishment, warehouse, fence, wall, or other structure affixed to or upon real property, or any assemblage of materials on the private property of another for the purpose of human habitation. 
D.  "City" means the area within the territorial city limits of the city of Rohnert Park and all territory outside the city over which the city has jurisdiction by virtue of any constitutional or charter provisions, or any ordinance or law. 
E.  "City manager" means the city manager, the assistant city manager, or any person or persons designated by the city manager to act in his or her stead in connection with this chapter. 
F.  "Enforcement officer" means the city manager, or any person designated by the city manager to enforce the provisions of this code. Such employees may be employed in any city department. 
G.  "Fee" means a charge for services provided or a benefit conferred. 
H.  "Fine" means a sum imposed as punishment for an offense. 
I.  "Immediate hazard or threat" means the declaration of an intention or the ability to cause harm, danger or risk to the safety of persons or property. 
J.  "Inoperative vehicle" means any vehicle that cannot operate safely or legally upon the street or highways of the state and includes any vehicle that does not have current valid registration. With respect to a motor vehicle, in addition to the foregoing, inoperative vehicle means a vehicle that is not then capable of self-propulsion. 
K.  "Motor vehicle"/ "Vehicle" shall have the same meaning as that term is defined in California Vehicle Code Sections 415 and 670, as may be amended from time to time. 
L.  "Owner" and "property owner" as used in this chapter, and unless otherwise required by the context, shall mean the owner or owners of record of real property as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll of Sonoma County, or as otherwise known to the planning director or such other city official as may be designated by the city manager by virtue of more recent and reliable information. 
1.  With regards to animals, an "owner" or "owner/guardian" means any person who keeps or has charge of or provides custody or care to an animal for at least thirty consecutive days. This definition shall exclude veterinarians who are treating or caring for an animal in the regular practice of veterinary medicine as well as the owners or operators of an animal grooming business, kennel or pet shop while engaged in the regular practice of such business. Use of the term "owner/guardian" in place of "owner" shall not imply or bestow any change in legal status or ownership of animals by the use of such term. 
M.  "Penalty" means the punishment imposed on a wrongdoer, usually in the form of imprisonment or a fine. 
N.  "Person" means any natural person, firm, association, business or organization, corporation, partnership, trust, estate, or any other legal entity recognized by law as the subject of legal rights or duties. 
O.  "Property" means any parcel of land which is identified in the secured roll of the Sonoma County Assessor, all residential, commercial and other real property, including, but not limited to, front yards, side yards, backyards, driveways, walkways, alleys and sidewalks, and shall include any building or structure, whether fixed or moveable, located on such property. 
P.  "Public nuisance" means any act which is declared to be a nuisance by the provisions of Civil Code Section 3480 of the State of California, or by any other provisions of the laws of the State of California, or of this Municipal Code. In addition, a nuisance is hereby declared to include any violation of this code, and any condition of property which renders any property within the city of Rohnert Park harmful to property or persons who may occupy or go upon such property. 
Q.  "Responsible party" means any occupant, lessor, lessee, manager, licensee, or other person having control over a structure or parcel of land. A responsible party may be a property owner. 
R.  "Vehicle owner" shall have the same meaning as the legal owner and/or registered owner as those terms are defined in the California Vehicle Code Sections 370 and 505, as may be amended from time to time. 
S.  "Violation" means a breach of the law, including but not limited to, a violation of Civil Code Section 3480 by any property owner or any responsible party. 
T.  "Visual blight" means any unreasonable or unlawful condition or use of premises or of a building exterior which by reason of its appearance as viewed at ground level from the public right-of-way or from neighboring premises, is detrimental to the surrounding area and the property of others, or is detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of individuals residing within the community. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.A.(Exh. 1), 12-11-2012)  
1.24.030 - Unlawful property nuisances. 
It shall be unlawful and declared a public nuisance for any person owning, renting, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any property in the city of Rohnert Park, to maintain such property in such a manner that any of the following conditions are found to exist thereon: 
A.  Fire hazards, as defined in the Uniform Fire Code; 
B.  Refuse and waste matter which by reason of its location and character is in such a condition of deterioration that it constitutes visual blight, or reduces the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood, or is offensive to the senses, or detrimentally affects property in the surrounding neighborhood or community; 
C.  Polluted or stagnant water which, because of its nature or location, constitutes an unhealthy or unsafe condition; 
D.  Maintenance of property in such condition of deterioration or disrepair that the same causes visual blight, or reduces the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood, or is offensive to the senses, or is detrimental to nearby properties including, but not limited to: 
1.  Buildings which are abandoned, partially destroyed or left in an unreasonable state of partial construction. An "unreasonable state of partial construction" is defined as any unfinished building where the appearance or other conditions of said unfinished building or structure constitutes visual blight, or reduces the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood, or is offensive to the senses, or is detrimental to nearby properties. 
2.  Unpainted buildings and those having dry rot, warping, or termite infestation. Any building on which the condition of existing paint has become so deteriorated as to permit substantial decay, checking, cracking, peeling, chalking, dry rot, warping, or termite infestation on ten percent or more of the building. 
3.  Buildings with missing doors or windows containing broken glass or no glass at all where the window is a type which normally contains glass. Plywood or other materials used to cover such window space or doors, if permitted under this code, shall be painted in a color or colors compatible with the remainder of the building. 
4.  Building exteriors, walls, fences, gates, driveways, sidewalks, walkways, or alleys which for at least seventy-two hours are maintained in such condition as to become so defective, unsightly, or in such a condition of deterioration or disrepair that the same constitutes visual blight or reduces the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood or is offensive to the senses or is detrimental to nearby properties. 
5.  The accumulation of dirt, litter, or debris in vestibules, doorways, or the adjoining sidewalks, passages, or breezeways of a building for seventy-two hours or more. 
6.  Any appliance, tool, equipment, furniture, furnishing, or other item of personal property not normally kept outside including, but not limited to, any couch, love seat, sofa, sofa bed, recliner, hassock, upholstered chair, mattress, bed springs, box springs, bed frame, headboard, desk, dresser, bureau, cabinet, television, radio, stereo, stove, refrigerator, freezer, dishwasher, washing machine, dryer, shopping cart, sink, toilet, or similar items, whether or not any such item is broken or abandoned, resting or being stored on the premises stored either (a) so as to be visible from a public street, alley, or from any adjoining property for at least seventy-two hours, or (b) so as otherwise to constitute a harborage for rodents or pests or a detriment to health, safety and welfare of nearby properties, the neighborhood or the city. Nothing herein shall preclude the placement of stacked firewood for use on the premises. 
7.  Attractive nuisances dangerous to children and other persons, including, but not limited to, broken or neglected household appliances, equipment and machinery, unfenced or unmaintained pools, ponds and excavations. 
8.  Construction or packing materials or supplies, including, but not limited to, lumber, drywall, roofing tile, cement, nails, pallets, plywood, scrap lumber, or other building materials, products, or supplies; electrical, irrigation, or plumbing supplies; provided, however, that a reasonable quantity of these materials and supplies is excluded from this definition during construction covered by an active building permit upon the subject property. A project shall be deemed active if there is obvious change to the accumulation or to the project in any thirty-day period. 
9.  Construction equipment or machinery of any type or description parked or stored on property for at least seventy-two hours when it is readily visible from a public street, alley, or adjoining property, except while excavation, construction or demolition operations covered by an active building permit are in progress on the subject property or an adjoining property or where the property is zoned for the storage of construction equipment or machinery. 
10.  An accumulation of aluminum cans, newspapers, plastic bottles, glass, cardboard or cardboard boxes, or an accumulation of other recyclable materials that has been stored in public view for at least seventy-two hours and is visible from a public street, alley or from any adjoining property. 
11.  Improper maintenance of any sign or failure to remove any sign which advertises a business or product which is no longer sold on the property. 
12.  Storage of any wrecked, disabled, inoperative, salvaged or dismantled vehicle, vessel, equipment trailer, house trailer, camper shell, boat, or boat trailer as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 18010, or other vehicle or major vehicle parts stored or parked in front yards, driveways, side yards, sidewalks or walkways for at least seventy-two hours visible from a public street, unless they are stored or parked pursuant to the provisions of this code; 
13.  Firewood longer than thirty-six inches in length and greater than twenty-four inches in diameter; all firewood that is not stacked; 
14.  Property, including, but not limited to, building exteriors which are maintained for at least seventy-two hours in such a condition as to be detrimental to the public health, safety, or general welfare, or in such manner as to constitute a public nuisance as defined by Civil Code Section 3480. 
15.  Dead, decayed, diseased, or hazardous trees, weeds, and overgrown or uncultivated vegetation which are allowed to remain on property for at least seventy-two hours, which are a hazardous condition to pedestrian or vehicular traffic or which are likely to harbor rats, vermin or constitute visual blight, or which may cause a danger to public safety. 
16.  The placement of clotheslines in front yards and the drying of laundry or washed articles on front porch stair railings, or the placement of washed articles on fences, hedges, or other supporting structures located in front yards for the purpose of drying them where the foregoing are visible from any public street, alley, or from any adjoining property. 
17.  Any wall, sign, fence, gate, hedge, or structure maintained in such a condition of deterioration or disrepair as to constitute a hazard to persons or property, or that constitutes visual blight, or reduces the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood, or is offensive to the senses, or is detrimental to nearby properties. 
18.  Any property with pooled oil accumulation, oil flowing onto public rights-of-way or adjacent property, or excessive accumulations of grease or oil on paved surfaces, buildings, walls, or fences. 
19.  Any yard area, visible from a public street, alley or from any adjoining property, the non-maintenance of which causes excessive dust, or which contains the accumulation of debris, or constitutes visual blight, or reduces the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood, or is offensive to the senses, or is detrimental to nearby properties. This paragraph shall not be construed to require the use of water or the installation of drought-resistant vegetation to the tenant landscaping during any period in which the city has declared a drought. 
20.  Graffiti which remains on the exterior of any building, fence or other structure for at least seventy-two hours and is visible from a public street, alley or any adjoining property. 
21.  The keeping, storing, depositing or accumulation on the premises for an unreasonable period of time dirt, sand, gravel, concrete, or other similar materials that constitutes visual blight, or reduces the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood, or is offensive to the senses, or is detrimental to nearby properties, except when used for current excavation, construction or demolition projects for which an active building permit has been obtained. 
22.  The leaving of any garbage can or refuse container in the front or side yard area for more than twenty-four hours after collection day where such can or container is visible from a public street, alley or from any adjoining property, except as permitted by another section or chapter of this code. 
23.  Buildings, use or conditions: (1) that violate the National Electrical Code, or California Building, Plumbing, Mechanical, Fire, or Housing Codes as adopted by or imposed on the city of Rohnert Park; (2) that violate the city's zoning ordinances; or (3) that violate any other provision of local, state or federal law relating to health, safety or environmental protection. 
24.  Any obstructions, impediments, or excavations that interfere with the ordinary use by the public of any public street, way or sidewalk except when and as permitted pursuant to this code or state law; 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.A.(Exh. 1), 12-11-2012)  
1.24.040 - Other nuisances. 
The city may choose to abate any public nuisance or violation of this code through any of the abatement methods set forth in this Chapter 1.24, this code or in state or federal law. Nothing contained in this Chapter 1.24 shall be construed as limiting, prejudicing, or adversely affecting the city's ability to concurrently or consecutively use any of those proceedings as the city may deem are efficient, effective, practicable, or applicable. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.A.(Exh. 1), 12-11-2012)  
1.24.050 - Residential rental units. 
It is declared a public nuisance for any person or entity owning, leasing, renting, occupying, or having charge or possession of any residential dwelling, property or unit(s) in the city to maintain such residential rental dwelling, property or unit(s) in such a manner as to permit his/her/their tenant(s), any member of the tenant's household, their children, their guests, or their visitors while on the premises, to create or permit a violation of Section 1.24.030 of this chapter, or to violate or permit the violation of any house rule or lease provision required pursuant to this chapter. 
A violation of Section 1.24.030 of this chapter, or of any house rule or lease provision required pursuant to this chapter shall include, but shall not be limited to, any criminal or other activity on or near such premises that threatens the health, safety, or right of peaceful enjoyment of the premises of the other residents or adjacent property owners and/or drug related or criminal activity on or near such premises, wherein the owner is aware of the aforesaid violation(s) and fails to take all reasonable action(s) or to make reasonable expenditure(s) to correct the violation(s) within a reasonable period of time, which shall be designated as thirty days after notice. Such violation may, in the city's discretion, be abated pursuant to this chapter, and in addition, pursuant to the procedures for abatement which are conferred upon the city by the Civil Code Section 3493, Code of Civil Procedure Section 731, Health and Safety Code Section 11570-11579, Government Code Section 38733 and other lawful authority. 
Further, any person or entity owning, leasing out, renting out, occupying, or having charge or possession of any residential dwelling, property or unit(s) in the city shall be responsible for the administrative costs or any other costs of the city abating or causing the owner or other person responsible for the property to abate a violation of this chapter. Such costs may be recouped by the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or any other method provided by this code or other provisions of law or statute. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.A.(Exh. 1), 12-11-2012)  
1.24.060 - On-site residential manager. 
Any residential rental dwelling, property, or complex having sixteen or more rental units shall have an on-site resident manager reasonably available during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.A.(Exh. 1), 12-11-2012)  
1.24.070 - House rules. 
Each owner or manager of each residential rental dwelling, property or unit(s) shall comply with the following: 
A.  Provide each tenant, pursuant to the compliance schedule required by Section 1.24.080 of this chapter, with a written agreement, in the form of a lease, rental agreement or, for any tenancy of less than one year, other enforceable written contract, signed by the tenant and owner, or his/her agent, or his/her designee, which rental agreement shall include a copy of Section 1.24.030 of this chapter and house rules containing the following language: 
House Rules 
1.  The tenant(s), all household members, children, guests, and visitors, shall refrain from activities that violate City codes, state codes or statutes, constitute a public nuisance, or disturb the peace. 
2.  The tenant(s) acknowledge(s) responsibility for his or her (their) actions and for the actions of household members, children, guests, or visitors while on the leased premises. 
3.  The tenant(s), all household members, children, guests, or visitors are prohibited from engaging in any illegal activities on or near the leased premises, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Any criminal or civil activity that threatens the health, safety, or right of peaceful enjoyment of the premises by other residents or adjacent property owners; or 
b.  Any drug-related or criminal activity on or near the leased premises. 
4.  By signing the lease to which these House Rules are attached, the tenant(s) are on notice that any disturbance, criminal activity, or violation of these House Rules attributable to any tenant(s), household members, children, guests, or visitors shall constitute a material lease violation and shall be cause for immediate termination of tenancy and eviction from the unit. 
5.  The property manager will assign and control all parking and common areas to ensure that activities occurring there do not constitute a public nuisance, disturbance of the peace, disturbance of quiet enjoyment of the occupants of the property or neighboring properties, or a violation of any federal, state, or local law, including, but not limited to, fighting, littering, consumption of alcohol or of any illegal drug, narcotic or controlled substance, prostitution, brandishment of any weapon, urination, defecation, or intoxication. 
B.  A copy of the signed lease agreements, or addenda containing the information required under this section, and house rules shall be kept in the office of the property manager. All lease agreements, rules and regulations shall be either in English or Spanish, according to the tenant(s) native language, or shall be explained to the tenant(s) by an interpreter signing an affidavit. 
C.  A copy of the house rules in English and Spanish shall be posted in all common areas such as laundry rooms, lobbies, hallways, and community rooms. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.A.(Exh. 1), 12-11-2012)  
1.24.080 - Schedule. 
A.  Each owner or manager of a residential dwelling, property or unit(s) which is rented or leased to, or occupied by, a residential tenant or tenants shall comply with the requirements of Section 1.24.070 of this chapter according to the following schedule: 
1.  For each residential rental property, dwelling or unit(s) which is rented or leased to, or occupied by, a new tenant or tenants subsequent to the effective date of this chapter, the owner or manager shall require the incorporation of all the information required by Section 1.24.070 in a written lease or addendum at such time as the property, dwelling or unit(s) is rented or leased to, or occupied by, such new tenant or tenants. 
2.  For each residential rental property, dwelling or unit(s) which is occupied pursuant to a written lease in effect as of the effective date of this chapter, the owner or manager shall not be required to incorporate the information required by Section 1.24.070 in a new lease or addendum until such time as the existing tenancy is terminated and the property, dwelling or unit(s) is rented or leased to, or occupied by, a new tenant or tenants. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, for each such residential rental property, dwelling or unit which is rented, leased to or occupied by, an existing tenant or tenants pursuant to a written lease in effect as of the effective date of this chapter, the owner or manager shall provide each such existing tenant with a copy of the house rules within sixty days of the effective date of this chapter. 
3.  For each residential rental property, dwelling or unit(s) which is occupied as of the effective date of this chapter on a month-to-month or other holdover basis, the owner or manager shall be required to incorporate the information required by Section 1.24.070 in a new lease or lease addendum within thirty days or the earlier of either: 
a.  Notification to the existing tenant of any change in the terms or conditions of such month-to-month or other holdover tenancy, including, but not limited to any rent modification; or 
b.  One year subsequent to the effective date of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.A.(Exh. 1), 12-11-2012)  
1.24.090 - Responsibility for property maintenance. 
A.  Every owner of real property within the city is required to maintain such property in a manner so as not to violate the provisions of this chapter and such owner remains liable for violations thereof regardless of any contract or agreement with any third party regarding such property. 
B.  Every occupant, lessee, tenant or holder of any interest in real property, other than the owner thereof, who had assumed responsibility for the maintenance of such property under terms of a written lease, rental agreement, or other contractual arrangement, and to the extent of that legal responsibility for maintenance, shall produce for inspection the document establishing such obligation. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.A.(Exh. 1), 12-11-2012)  
1.24.100 - Violation. 
Any  person, firm, corporation or other entity, whether owner or responsible party of any premises, that violates the provisions of this chapter or any order issued pursuant to this chapter, shall be subject to any or all of the following: 
A.  Such person shall be guilty of an infraction; 
B.  Such person shall be prosecuted in a civil action brought by the city to enjoin any nuisance, violation of this chapter or violation of any other ordinance of the city; 
C.  Such person shall be subject to summary or administrative abatement of the nuisance by the city and be subject to fees and costs imposed by the city pursuant to the summary or administrative abatement procedures set forth in this chapter or any other provisions of law; and 
1.  Every day that any such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
2.  Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city council from authorizing the city attorney or other authorized legal representative to commence any available administrative, civil, or criminal proceeding. 
D.  Such person shall be subject to the issuance of administrative citations pursuant to the city's administrative citation procedures as set forth in Chapter 1.25. 
E.  All remedies set forth in this chapter are cumulative and may be pursued alternatively or in combination with one another. Provisions of this chapter are to be supplementary and complementary to all of the city ordinances, state law and any law cognizable as common law or in equity, and nothing herein shall be read, interpreted or construed in any manner so as to limit any exercising right or power of the city to abate any and all nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.A.(Exh. 1), 12-11-2012)  
1.24.110 - Right of entry. 
A.  Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection of any premises to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and to the extent authorized by law, an enforcement officer may enter on such premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon him or her by this chapter, subject to the requirements of the Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution and any other provisions of applicable law. 
B.  Whenever practicable, the enforcement officer shall contact the occupant of the premises prior to entry and inform the occupant of the reasons for such entry onto the premises, and if the occupant is other than the owner, the enforcement officer shall also, if practicable, contact such owner. If entry is interfered with by the owner or occupant, such enforcement officer shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure peaceable entry. 
C.  When the enforcement officer or his or her designated representative has obtained an inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant shall fail to promptly permit entry thereon by the enforcement officer or his designated representative for the purposes permitted by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.A.(Exh. 1), 12-11-2012)  
1.24.120 - Preliminary notice. 
A.  Whenever an enforcement officer charged with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter determines that a violation of a provision has occurred, the enforcement officer shall have the authority to cause the owner and any responsible party to be notified of the existence of such condition on the premises and shall direct such parties to abate the nuisance. 
B.  The notice shall contain the following information: 
1.  The names and addresses of the owner and responsible parties, if any, in violation of this chapter and the street address, legal description or other description of the premises where the violation is present; 
2.  A statement specifying the condition(s) which constitute a nuisance and the specific code section(s) which have been violated; 
3.  A request to correct the violation(s) within a certain time frame, which time frame shall be determined in the sole discretion of the enforcement officer, but which, in no event, shall be less than ten calendar days after the date of the notice; 
4.  A statement explaining the range of penalties for failure to abate the nuisance; and 
5.  The name and phone number of a contact person at the city should the recipient desire to explain why the premises should not be declared a public nuisance and why penalties should not be assessed. 
C.  A copy of the notice provided for in this section shall be served by the methods described in [Section] 1.24.130 to the owner, at the address appearing on the last equalized assessment roll of Sonoma County and upon any responsible party, including the occupant of the premises, if any. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.A.(Exh. 1), 12-11-2012)  
1.24.130 - Service of notices—Failure to receive notice. 
A.  Except as otherwise required by law, all written notices required to be given under the provisions of this chapter may be served in any of the following manners: 
1.  By personal delivery. 
2.  To the property owner, by mailing a copy of the notice by first class U.S. mail, postage prepaid, to his or her address shown on the last equalized assessment roll available on the date the notice is prepared, and to other responsible parties at their address as known to the city or at the property address. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the United States mail. 
3.  Posting of the notice at the address shown on the last equalized assessment roll available. 
B.  Giving notice in the manner provided for in subsection (A) shall be conclusively deemed to be adequate notice, and the failure of any person to see, read, understand or otherwise receive any notice required under this chapter shall not affect the validity of any proceedings undertaken under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.A.(Exh. 1), 12-11-2012)  
1.24.140 - Notice of violation and order to abate. 
A.  Whenever an enforcement officer charged with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter determines that a violation of a provision of this chapter has not been abated after the city has sent a preliminary notice in accordance with Section 1.24.120 and the time frame specified in the preliminary notice has expired, or recurs within twelve months, unless otherwise specified in the code, the enforcement officer shall have the authority to cause the owner and any responsible party to be notified that a violation of this chapter has not been abated and ordering such parties to abate the nuisance within a date specified or attend a hearing at which an administrative hearing officer will determine whether the nuisance shall be abated by the city at the expense of the responsible party. 
B.  The notice of violation and order to abate shall contain the following information: 
1.  The names and addresses of the owner and responsible parties, if any, in violation of this chapter and the street address, legal description or other description of the premises where the violation is present; 
2.  A statement specifying the condition(s) which constitute a nuisance and the specific code section(s) which have been violated; 
3.  A statement that the owner and responsible parties, if any, had been previously notified of the violation and requested to correct it; 
4.  A statement that the recipient has ten calendar days from the date of the notice to voluntarily abate the nuisance, or if the enforcement officer determines that ten days is insufficient to abate the nuisance a statement specifying a date certain by which the nuisance must be abated; 
5.  A statement that a hearing will be held, including the date and time of the hearing, if the nuisance is not voluntarily abated by the specified date; 
6.  A statement that if the owner or responsible party fails to abate the nuisance within the time prescribed in the preliminary notice or fails to appear at the hearing; the city will abate the nuisance at the expense of the owner and responsible parties and the costs of such abatement may be charged against the premises as a lien or special assessment; 
7.  A statement informing the recipient of his or her right to contest the enforcement officer's determination during the nuisance abatement hearing by presenting evidence explaining why the premises should not be declared a nuisance and abated at the expense of the parties and/or why the costs of such abatement should not become a charge against the premises; and 
8.  The name, signature and department of the citing enforcement officer. 
C.  A copy of the notice provided for in this section shall be served upon the owner of the premises, any occupants of the premises and any other responsible party in the manner provided for in [Section] 1.24.130. 
D.  The person giving such notice shall file a copy thereof in the office of the enforcement officer together with an affidavit or certificate stating the time and manner in which such notice was given. The failure of any owner or other party to receive such notice shall not affect in any manner the validity of any proceedings taken hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.A.(Exh. 1), 12-11-2012)  
1.24.150 - Abatement hearing notice and procedures. 
A nuisance abatement hearing shall be noticed and conducted pursuant to Chapter 1.26. In addition to the requirements of [Section] 1.26.040, the notice shall contain, an order to show cause why the city should not be allowed to enter the property to abate the defined nuisances in a defined manner, and why the city should not be allowed to assess the costs thereof to the owner. In addition, the notice shall advise the owner that if legal action is instituted by either the owner or city in any manner relating to the abatement of the nuisance, the prevailing party may seek recovery of its costs and attorneys' fees. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.A.(Exh. 1), 12-11-2012)  
1.24.160 - Abatement by owner. 
The owner or responsible party may, at his or her own expense, (a) abate the nuisance in the time and manner presented in the preliminary notice, notice of violation and order to abate or written determination of the hearing officer, whichever is applicable, or (b) prior to the scheduled hearing, abate a declared nuisance in accordance with the provisions of the notice of violation and order to abate issued in accordance with Section 1.24.140, provided that all necessary permits are first obtained. If an enforcement officer determines that the nuisance has been properly abated, then proceedings pursuant to this chapter may be terminated, provided, however, that the city may in its discretion, proceed with recovery of such abatement costs, including incidental expenses, incurred by the city for administration, code enforcement or abatement by the city, as it may have incurred prior to abatement by the owner. Nothing in this chapter shall relieve any owner or other responsible party of the obligation of obtaining any required permit to do any work incidental to such abatement. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.A.(Exh. 1), 12-11-2012)  
1.24.170 - Abatement by the city—Debt of owner. 
A.  In all cases where the city has determined to proceed with abatement, upon the date set forth for abatement of the nuisance in the notice and order or determination of the hearing officer, whichever is applicable, the city shall acquire jurisdiction to abate said condition at the expense of the owner and/or responsible party as herein provided. The city is authorized to cause the nuisance to be abated by city forces or by private contract. To that end, the persons authorized to abate the nuisance may enter upon private property in a manner consistent with the United States and California Constitutions. 
B.  Upon the abatement of such condition or any portion thereof by the city, all the expenses thereof shall constitute a civil debt owing to the city jointly and severally by the owner and/or responsible parties. The debt shall be collectible in the same manner as any other civil debt owing to the city and may be made a special assessment or lien upon the property pursuant to the provisions set forth in Chapter 1.27. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.A.(Exh. 1), 12-11-2012)  
1.24.180 - Summary abatement. 
Whenever any condition on or use of property causes or constitutes or reasonably appears to cause or constitute an imminent or immediate danger to the health or safety of the public, or when immediate action is required to prevent or mitigate the loss or impairment of life, health, property or essential public services, any enforcement officer or his or her authorized representative shall have the authority to institute the following procedures: 
A.  Notice. The code enforcement officer shall attempt to make contact through a personal interview, or by telephone, with the owner or the person, if any, occupying or otherwise in real or apparent charge and control thereof. In the event contact is made, he or she shall notify such person or persons of the danger involved and require that such condition be immediately removed, repaired or isolated so as to preclude harm to any person or property. 
B.  Abatement. In the event the code enforcement officer is unable to make contact as hereinabove noted, or if the appropriate persons, after notification by the code enforcement officer, do not take action as specified by such official, within seventy-two hours, or a lesser period if deemed necessary, then the code enforcement officer may, with the approval of the city manager or his/her designee, take all steps deemed necessary to remove or isolate such dangerous condition, or conditions, with the use of city forces or a contractor retained pursuant to the provisions of this code. The abatement shall include all actions necessary to secure the premises to prevent further occurrence of the nuisance. 
C.  Summary abatement actions shall not be subject to the notice and hearing requirements of this chapter, and an enforcement officer shall not be prohibited from summary abatement actions after initiation of proceedings pursuant to this chapter, if immediate action at any time becomes necessary to preserve or protect the public health or safety. Summary abatement is to be limited to those actions which are reasonably necessary to immediately remove the threat. 
D.  The expense of summarily abating a nuisance shall be a charge against the persons creating, causing, committing or maintaining it. The city may make the expense of abatement of the nuisance a debt collectible in the same manner as any other civil debt owing to the city and may be made a special assessment or lien upon the property pursuant to the provisions set forth in Chapter 1.27. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.A.(Exh. 1), 12-11-2012)  
1.24.190 - Abatement cost records. 
A.  Where the enforcement officer is required to cause the abatement of a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, he or she shall keep or cause to be kept an accounting of the cost incurred, including all time spent by city and contract personnel in addressing and abating the nuisance, incidental expenses of such abatement, and attorney fees if the city elects, at the initiation of the abatement proceedings, to seek recovery of its own attorney fees. Upon conclusion of such abatement, the enforcement officer shall submit an itemized statement of costs to the city clerk. Costs of abatement shall begin to run from the date of the notice to abate, except in cases of summary abatement, in which case costs of abatement shall begin to run from the date the enforcement officer became aware of the nuisance requiring summary abatement. 
B.  The city may seek reasonable attorney fees incurred for an abatement action and related proceedings in those individual actions or proceedings in which the city elects, at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding, to seek recovery of its own attorney fees. If the city elects to seek recovery of its own attorney fees, attorney fees may be recovered by the prevailing party in said action or proceeding. 
C.  Time spent by city personnel shall, in addition to an employee's hourly rate of pay, include city's customary overhead expenses for provision of benefits and use of office space. Time spent by contract personnel shall be charged at actual cost to the city. 
D.  The term "incidental expenses," as used in this section, includes, but is not limited to, the actual expenses of the city in the preparation of notices, specifications, and contracts, inspection of the work and costs of printing and mailings required by this chapter. "Attorney fees" shall include fees and expenses of outside counsel and time spent by the city attorney and his or her staff, calculated like other city personnel. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.A.(Exh. 1), 12-11-2012)  
1.24.200 - Hearing before city council—Report on costs. 
A.  Upon receipt of the statement of costs, the city clerk shall set for hearing before the city council the matter of the report of costs. The city clerk shall cause notice to be given in the manner provided for in Section 1.24.130 to the owner of the property to which the same relates, any responsible party, and to any other interested persons who requests notice, at least ten days in advance of such hearing and shall provide a copy of the statement of costs. 
B.  At the time and place fixed for receiving and considering the statement of costs and expenses of the abatement, the city council shall hear and pass upon the statement, together with any specific objections or protests raised by any of the persons liable to be assessed for the costs of abating such nuisance. The city council may make such revisions, corrections, or modifications to the statement as it may deem just or necessary. The hearing may be continued from time to time. 
C.  Upon conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall adopt a resolution determining the costs of abatement. The city council may also require, by resolution, that the costs be a nuisance abatement lien or special assessment upon the subject property as provided for in Chapter 1.27 of this code. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.A.(Exh. 1), 12-11-2012)  
1.24.210 - Treble costs of abatement. 
The city council provides that a court may order the owner of property responsible for a condition that may be abated in accordance with this chapter to pay treble the costs of abatement pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.7. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.A.(Exh. 1), 12-11-2012)  
1.24.220 - Limitations on filing judicial action. 
Pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6, any action appealing the city's final decision and order shall be commenced within ninety calendar days of the date the decision becomes final. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.A.(Exh. 1), 12-11-2012)  
Chapter 1.25 - ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS[2] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 852, § 2.B., Exhibit 2, adopted Dec. 11, 2012, deleted Chapter 1.25, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, Chapter 1.25 pertained to similar subject matter. See Ordinance List and Disposition Table for derivation. 
 
1.25.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to set forth a clear process by which the city may issue administrative citations, in addition to any and all other legal remedies, to address violations of any section of the code. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.B.(Exh. 2), 12-11-2012)  
1.25.020 - Applicability. 
A.  The city council has determined that the enforcement of the Rohnert Park Municipal Code throughout the city is an important public service and is vital to the protection of the public's health, safety and quality of life. The city council has determined a need for alternative methods of code enforcement and that a comprehensive code enforcement system uses a combination of judicial and administrative remedies to gain compliance with code regulations. The city council finds a need to draft precise regulations that can be effectively applied in judicial and administrative proceedings and further finds that there is a need to establish uniform procedures for the proper application of administrative code enforcement remedies and administrative hearings to resolve administrative code enforcement cases and appeals. 
B.  It is the purpose and intent of the city council to afford due process of law to any person who is directly affected by an administrative enforcement action. Due process of law includes adequate notice of the violation and enforcement remedy chosen by the city, an adequate explanation of the reasons justifying the administrative enforcement action taken by the city, and an opportunity to participate in the appropriate administrative enforcement or appeal hearing. These procedures are also intended to establish a forum to efficiently, expeditiously and fairly resolve issues raised by any administrative enforcement action. 
C.  The city manager, or designated representative thereof, is authorized to develop and implement policies and procedures relating to the qualifications, appointment and compensation of administrative hearing officers; the powers of administrative hearing officers, and all other matters relating to conducting administrative hearings as provided in this code. 
D.  The administrative citations provided for in this chapter, are an additional enforcement remedy to all other legal remedies, criminal or civil, which may be pursued by the city to address any violation of this code or other public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.B.(Exh. 2), 12-11-2012)  
1.25.030 - Definitions. 
Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, the terms used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as provided for in Chapter 1.24 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.B.(Exh. 2), 12-11-2012)  
1.25.040 - General enforcement authority. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of the Rohnert Park Municipal Code, whenever an enforcement officer charged with the enforcement of this code determines that a violation of any provision has occurred, the enforcement officer shall have the authority to issue an administrative citation in accordance with Government Code Section 53069.4 to any person responsible for the violation, subject to the limitations contained in this chapter. 
B.  Enforcement officers are authorized to enter upon any property or premises within the city to ascertain whether the property or premises is in compliance with the code, and to make any inspection as may be necessary in the performance of their enforcement duties. These inspections may include the taking of photographs, samples or other physical evidence, and the making of video and/or audio recordings. If an owner, lawful occupant, or the respective agent thereof refuses permission to enter and/or inspect, the enforcement officer may seek an administrative inspection warrant pursuant to the procedures provided by California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1822.50 through 1822.59, as may be amended from time to time, or the successor provisions thereto. 
C.  The procedures established in this chapter for the use of administrative citations, and the procedures established in other chapters of this code as means for addressing violations of this code shall be in addition to criminal, civil or other legal or equitable remedies established by law that may be pursued to address violations of this code. The use of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the city. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.B.(Exh. 2), 12-11-2012)  
1.25.050 - Administrative citation procedures—Generally. 
A.  Upon discovering a violation of this code, an enforcement officer may issue an administrative citation to a person responsible for the violation in the manner prescribed by this chapter. 
B.  Each administrative citation shall be issued in a form approved by the city manager, or his/her designee, and shall contain the following information: 
1.  The date of violation; 
2.  The address or a definite description of the location where the violation occurred; 
3.  The section of this code violated and a description of the violation; 
4.  The amount of the fine, fee or penalty for the violation; 
5.  A description of the fine, fee or penalty payment process, including a description of the time within which and the place to which the fine, fee or penalty shall be paid; 
6.  An order prohibiting the continuation or repeated occurrence of the violation described in the administrative citation; 
7.  A description of the administrative citation appeal process, including the time within which the administrative citation may be contested and the procedure for requesting a hearing; and 
8.  The name and signature of the enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.B.(Exh. 2), 12-11-2012)  
1.25.060 - Administrative citations—Continuing building violation pre-citation notices. 
A.  Prior to issuing an administrative citation for a continuing violation of this code pertaining to building, plumbing, electrical or other similar structural or zoning issues, that do not create an immediate danger to health or safety, the enforcement officer shall serve a pre-citation notice on the person responsible for the violation (and the property owner) containing the following information: 
1.  The date the violation was observed; 
2.  The address or a definite description of the location where the violation occurred; 
3.  The section of this code violated and a description of the violation; 
4.  The compliance date by which the violation shall be corrected or otherwise remedied, as determined to be reasonable by the enforcement officer; 
5.  A statement that if the violation is not corrected by the specified compliance date, that an administrative citation will be issued which imposes a penalty, and the amount of the penalty to be imposed; 
6.  A statement that if the violator believes the notice to be in error, that contact should be made with the enforcement officer issuing the citation to discuss the matter. The enforcement officer may refer any such discussion to a supervisor or department director; 
7.  The name and signature of the enforcement officer. 
B.  In the case of a continuing violation described in subsection (A) hereof, the enforcement officer shall provide the person responsible for the violation a reasonable time, not to exceed six months, to remedy or correct the violation prior to imposition of fines or penalties. In determining what is a reasonable time the city may consider the estimate of local professionals including licensed contractors. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.B.(Exh. 2), 12-11-2012)  
1.25.070 - Continuing violations. 
Each and every day or portion thereof that a violation of this code occurs or continues shall constitute a new, separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.B.(Exh. 2), 12-11-2012)  
1.25.080 - Administrative fines, fees or penalties. 
A.  The amounts of fines, fees or penalties for violations imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be set forth in the administrative fees and fines schedule established by resolution of the city council. 
B.  The administrative fees and fines schedule shall specify an increased fine or penalties for repeat violations of the same or similar provision by the same person within twelve months from the date of an administrative citation. 
C.  The administrative fees and fines schedule shall specify the amount of any late payment charges imposed for the payment of a fine, fee or penalty after its due date. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.B.(Exh. 2), 12-11-2012)  
1.25.090 - Payment of fines, fees or penalties. 
A.  The fine, fee or penalty shall be paid to the city within thirty days from the date of the administrative citation. 
B.  Payment of a fine, fee or penalty under this chapter shall not excuse or discharge any continuation or repeated occurrence of the violation that is the subject of the administrative citation. 
C.  Any administrative citation fine, fee or penalty paid pursuant to subsection A of this section shall be refunded in accordance with Section 1.26.060(B) if it is determined, after a hearing, that the person charged in the administrative citation was not responsible for the violation, that there was no violation as charged in the administrative citation or a modification to the amount owed was made. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.B.(Exh. 2), 12-11-2012)  
1.25.100 - Request for an administrative citation appeal hearing. 
A.  Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest that there was a violation or that he or she is the responsible party thereof. 
B.  Where an aggrieved, responsible party seeks to appeal an administrative citation, that person shall file a written request for a hearing with the city manager, or his/her designee, within ten calendar days from the date of the administrative citation, together with an advance deposit of the fines or penalty, except where an advance deposit hardship waiver (form may be obtained from the city administrative offices) has been filed and approved in accordance with procedures adopted by the city manager or his/her designee. 
C.  Notice of the administrative citation appeal hearing shall be given in the manner provided for in Section 1.26.040. 
D.  If the enforcement officer submits a written report concerning the administrative citation to the administrative hearing officer for consideration at the hearing, then a copy of this report shall be served with the notice of administrative citation appeal hearing. 
E.  The administrative citation appeal hearing shall be conducted in the manner provided for in Chapter 1.26 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.B.(Exh. 2), 12-11-2012)  
1.25.110 - Notices. 
A.  The administrative citation and all notices required to be given by this chapter shall be served on the responsible party in substantially the same manner as set forth in Section 1.24.130. 
B.  If the enforcement officer is unable to locate the responsible party for the violation at the property where the violation exists, then the administrative citation shall be mailed to the responsible party in the manner prescribed in Section 1.24.130 and posted in a conspicuous place on or near the property. 
C.  Failure of any person to receive any notice specified in this chapter does not affect the validity of the proceedings conducted hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.B.(Exh. 2), 12-11-2012)  
Chapter 1.26 - ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
Sections: 
 
1.26.010 - Purpose and intent. 
In order to effect a proper enforcement of this code and provide for the procedural and substantive due process rights of all persons subject to enforcement of this code, there shall be two general types of administrative hearing: (1) an enforcement hearing which is typically associated with a notice of violation and order to abate which is associated with a nuisance, and (2) an administrative citation appeal hearing which is associated with a person contesting an administrative citation. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to set forth a process for all administrative hearings unless otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.C.(Exh. 3), 12-11-2012)  
1.26.020 - Definitions. 
The terms used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as provided for in Chapter 1.24 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.C.(Exh. 3), 12-11-2012)  
1.26.030 - Administrative hearing officer. 
A.  Administrative hearing officer(s) shall be appointed by the city manager in accordance with the city manager's policy. 
B.  Independent Authority. The employment, performance evaluation, compensation and benefits of the administrative hearing officer shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned upon the amount of the administrative fines or penalties upheld, awarded, imposed, or assessed by the administrative hearing officer. 
C.  Disqualification. Any person designated to serve as an administrative hearing officer is subject to disqualification for bias, prejudice, interest, or for other reason for which a judge may be disqualified in a court of law. Rules and procedures for the disqualification of an administrative hearing officer based upon a showing of actual bias, prejudice, interest, or other reason shall be promulgated by the city manager or the city manager's designee. 
C.  Powers. The administrative hearing officer shall have the power to: 
1.  Conduct administrative enforcement hearings and administrative appeal hearings as provided under the authority of this code; 
2.  Continue a hearing based on good cause shown by one of the parties to the hearing or upon his own independent determination that due process has not been adequately afforded to a responsible party; 
3.  Exercise continuing jurisdiction over the subject matter of an administrative enforcement hearing or administrative appeal hearing; 
4.  Rule upon the merits of an administrative enforcement hearing or an administrative appeal hearing upon consideration of the evidence submitted and issue a written decision resolving the case; 
5.  Uphold, award, impose, assess, or deny a fine or penalty authorized under this code; 
6.  Assess administrative costs according to proof; 
7.  Set, increase, or decrease, according to proof, the amount of fine or penalty or the daily rate of such fine or penalty sought by the city to be awarded, imposed, or assessed in those cases where the fine or penalty is not fixed but is subject to a range as otherwise established by this code; 
8.  In those cases where the fine or penalty is not fixed but is subject to a range as otherwise established by this code, determine the date certain upon which the assessment of civil penalties shall begin; and, where the corrections are subsequently completed to the city's satisfaction, the date certain upon which the assessment of civil penalties shall end. If the violations have not been so corrected, the daily accrual of the penalties assessed shall continue until the violations are corrected or the legal maximum limit is reached; 
9.  Where appropriate in administrative enforcement actions and as a condition of compliance in correcting the violations at issue; require each responsible party to cease violating this code and to make all necessary corrections as specified by the city. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.C.(Exh. 3), 12-11-2012)  
1.26.040 - Notice of hearing. 
A.  A notice of an administrative enforcement hearing or an administrative appeal hearing shall contain, at a minimum, the following: 
1.  Date and time of hearing. 
2.  Location of hearing. 
3.  Name of administrative hearing officer. 
4.  Nature of the hearing. 
B.  The notice shall be sent a minimum of ten days prior to the hearing to appropriate parties by the methods listed in Section 1.24.130. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.C.(Exh. 3), 12-11-2012)  
1.26.050 - Manner of conducting hearing. 
A.  An administrative enforcement hearing or an administrative citation appeal hearing shall occur at the time and place designated: (1) in the notice of violation and order to abate issued in accordance with Section 1.24.140, or (2) in the notice sent in response to a request for a hearing to contest an administrative citation pursuant to Section 1.25.[100]. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no hearing to contest an administrative citation shall be held unless the penalty has been deposited in advance in accordance with Section 1.25.090 or an advance deposit hardship waiver has been obtained in accordance with procedures adopted by the city manager or his/her designee. 
B.  The appointed administrative hearing officer shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, including, but not limited to, applicable staff reports, oral, physical and documentary evidence regarding the alleged violation. 
C.  Admission of evidence and the conduct of the hearing shall be controlled by the administrative hearing officer in accordance with the fundamentals of due process. The administrative hearing officer may, among other things, set reasonable limits on the length of the hearing; limit the number of witnesses to testify for each side where their testimony would be unduly burdensome or cumulative or repetitive in nature; limit or curtail any abusive, argumentative, repetitive or otherwise irrelevant testimony; and place reasonable limits on the right to cross-examine and present evidence. 
D.  The enforcement officer shall bear the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that a violation of the code exists. 
E.  The notice of violation and order to abate or the administrative citation and any report submitted by the enforcement officer to the administrative hearing officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents. 
F.  Oral evidence may be heard on oath or affirmation. 
G.  The owner or any responsible person may be represented by anyone of their choice or may represent themselves. 
H.  The hearing shall not be conducted according to the formal rules of evidence. 
I.  Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence. 
J.  The failure of any recipient of a notice of violation and order to abate to appear at the administrative enforcement hearing shall constitute a failure to exhaust their administrative remedies. The failure of any recipient of an administrative citation to appear at the administrative citation appeal hearing shall constitute a forfeiture of the penalty and a failure to exhaust their administrative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.C.(Exh. 3), 12-11-2012)  
1.26.060 - Hearing officer decision. 
A.  After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, within ten days after the conclusion of the hearing, the administrative hearing officer shall issue a written decision to uphold, modify, or cancel the administrative citation or notice of violation/order to abate. The administrative hearing officer shall state in the decision the reasons for that decision, including the factual findings and conclusions made by the administrative hearing officer. The decision of the administrative hearing officer shall be final. 
B.  If the administrative hearing officer determines that the administrative citation or notice of violation/order to abate should be canceled and the fine or penalty was deposited with the city, then the city shall promptly refund the amount of the deposited fine or penalty, together with interest at the average rate earned on the city's investment portfolio for the period of time that the penalty amount was held by the city. 
C.  If the administrative hearing officer determines that the administrative citation or notice of violation/order to abate should be upheld or amended, the administrative hearing officer shall determine the amount of fine to be imposed. Any fine or penalty amount on deposit with the city shall be retained to meet the amount imposed. In cases of approved hardship waiver, or outstanding fines or penalties, the administrative hearing officer shall specify a date by which the fine or penalty is to be paid to the city. 
D.  In ruling on a notice of violation/order to abate, if the administrative hearing officer determines that a nuisance does exist, the administrative hearing officer shall include in his or her decision an order to abate the nuisance within ten days of mailing the decision or within such time as the administrative hearing officer deems reasonable. If the city attorney determines that the violation implicates a First Amendment right, the order shall provide that the order to abate is suspended until the responsible party exhausts his or her judicial remedies. The written determination shall further state that if the nuisance is not abated within the time provided, the nuisance shall be abated by the city at the parties' expense and the expenses may be made a lien or special assessment against the property. 
E.  In the case of an administrative citation issued for a continuing violation pertaining to building, plumbing, electrical, or other similar structural or zoning issues that do not create an immediate danger to health or safety, the administrative hearing officer shall specify a reasonable time, not to exceed six months, to remedy or correct the violation prior to the imposition of fines or penalties. In determining what is a reasonable time the administrative hearing officer may consider the estimate of local professionals including licensed contractors. 
F.  If the administrative hearing officer determines that a nuisance exists which is likely to recur after the abatement, the owner may be directed to take adequate precautions for a period of time not to exceed twelve months so that the nuisance will not recur. 
G.  The recipient of the administrative citation or notice of violation/order to abate shall be served a copy of the administrative hearing officer's written decision in a manner set forth in [Section] 1.24.130. Copies of the decision shall be sent to the owner, responsible person, the enforcement officer and the city clerk. 
H.  The administrative hearing officer's decision shall include a statement that the person who received the administrative citation or notice of violation/order to abate may contest the decision by filing a petition for review with the superior court in Sonoma County in accordance with the timelines and procedures specified in Government Code Section 53069.4. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.C.(Exh. 3), 12-11-2012)  
1.26.070 - Liability of responsible parties. 
For the purposes of this chapter, each responsible party shall be jointly and severally liable for any and all fines, fees, and penalties, and related administrative costs awarded, upheld, assessed, or imposed under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.C.(Exh. 3), 12-11-2012)  
Chapter 1.27 - COLLECTION PROCEDURES 
Sections: 
 
1.27.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to set forth a process so the city may collect any past-due fines, fees, penalties or late payments charged by use of any and all available legal means and to provide for the procedural and substantive due process rights of all persons subject to special assessments and/or liens. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.D.(Exh. 4), 12-11-2012)  
1.27.020 - Definitions. 
In addition to the items listed below, unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, the terms used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as provided for in Chapter 1.24 of this code. 
A.  "City clerk" means the city clerk of the city of Rohnert Park or his/her designee. 
B.  "City council" means the city council as the legislative body of the city. 
C.  "Debt" means money, property or their equivalent which is due or owing or alleged to be due or owing. 
D.  "Debtor" means a person owing debt. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.D.(Exh. 4), 12-11-2012)  
1.27.030 - Remedies for late, unpaid fines, fees and penalties. 
A.  Any person who fails to pay the city any fine, fee or penalty imposed pursuant to the provisions of this code on or before the date that the fine, fee or penalty is due shall be liable for the payment of any applicable late payment charges set forth in the administrative fees and fines schedule. 
B.  Unpaid fines, fees and penalties and late charges related to administrative citations shall be a debt to the city and subject to all remedies for debt collection as allowed by law. 
C.  When a violation involves real property and the fines, penalties, and related costs are not paid within the prescribed time, the amount of those fines, penalties and their related costs may be recorded as a lien upon and against the real property, as provided for in this chapter, or as an assessment lien and be collected as a special assessment. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.D.(Exh. 4), 12-11-2012)  
1.27.040 - Collection process. 
A.  Any person who fails to pay the city any fine, fee, or penalty imposed pursuant to the provisions of this code on or before the date that the fine, fee, or penalty is due will initiate the collection process provided in this code. 
B.  Whenever a notice is required to be given under this code, such notice may be given pursuant to Section 1.24.130. 
C.  A first notice of debt owed will be given to the debtor with the information required by the Fair Debt Collection Practice Act (15 USC 1692) and be required to pay all amounts owed to the city by the date indicated in the notice. 
D.  A second notice of debt owed will be given to the debtor if the amount owed is not paid by the date set in the first notice. The amount owed in the second notice will be owed by the date indicated in the notice. 
E.  If the amount owed to the city is not received by the date indicated in the second notice. The debt will be collected by use of all available legal means. 
F.  Failure to receive any notice specified in this code does not affect the validity of proceedings conducted hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.D.(Exh. 4), 12-11-2012)  
1.27.050 - Nuisance abatement lien. 
If the city makes the cost of abatement a lien against the property on which the nuisance is maintained, the city shall: 
A.  Provide notice prior to the recordation of the lien to the owner of record of the parcel of land on which the nuisance is maintained, based on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplement roll, whichever is more current; and 
B.  Follow the procedure for nuisance abatement liens set forth in Government Code Section 38773.1. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.D.(Exh. 4), 12-11-2012)  
1.27.060 - Special assessment. 
If the city makes the abatement costs a special assessment against the property on which the nuisance is maintained, the city shall: 
A.  Provide notice of the special assessment to the property owner by a method as listed in Section 1.24.130, if the property owner's identity can be determined from the county assessor's or county recorder's records, at the time of imposing the assessment, which notice shall specify that the property may be sold after three years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments; and 
B.  The city shall follow the procedures set forth in Government Code § 38773.5. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.D.(Exh. 4), 12-11-2012)  
1.27.070 - Lien procedures. 
Whenever the amount of any administrative fine, fee or penalty and/or administrative cost imposed pursuant to this chapter in connection with real property has not been satisfied in full within the time periods set forth in this chapter and/or has not been successfully challenged as provided for in Section 1.26.060(H), this obligation may constitute a lien against the real property on which the violation occurred as follows: 
A.  The lien shall have no force and effect until recorded with the county recorder. Once recorded, the administrative order shall have the force and effect and priority of a judgment lien governed by the provisions of Section 697.340 of the Code of Civil Procedure and may be extended as provided in Sections 683.110 through 683.220, inclusive, of the Code of Civil Procedure. 
B.  Interest shall accrue on the principal amount of the judgment remaining unsatisfied pursuant to law. 
C.  Prior to recording any such lien, the director of finance shall prepare and file with the city clerk a report stating the amounts due and owing. 
D.  The city clerk shall fix a time, date and place for hearing such report and any protests or objections thereto by city council. Each protest or objection must contain a description of the property in which the protesting party is interested and the grounds of such protest or objection. Protests or objections shall be limited to the amount of the lien, not the underlying violation of this code. The city council, after the hearing, shall adopt a resolution confirming, discharging or modifying the amount of the lien. 
E.  The director of finance shall cause written notice to be served on the property owner no less than ten days prior to the time set for the hearing. 
F.  Thirty days following the adoption of a resolution by the city council imposing a lien, the city clerk shall file the same judgment lien in the office of the county recorder of Sonoma County. The lien may carry such additional administrative charges as set forth by resolution of the city council. 
G.  Once payment in full is received by the city for outstanding fines, fees, penalties and costs, the director of finance shall either record a notice of satisfaction or provide the property owner with a notice of satisfaction so they may record this notice with the office of the county records. Such notice of satisfaction shall cancel the city's lien. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 2.D.(Exh. 4), 12-11-2012)  
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL  
Chapter 2.04 - CITY MANAGER 
 
2.04.010 - Office created. 
The office of the city manager of the city is created and established. The city manager shall be appointed by the city council wholly on the basis of his administrative and executive ability and qualifications and shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the city council. 
(Ord. 26 § 1, 1963)  
2.04.020 - Residence. 
Residence in the city at the time of appointment of a city manager shall not be required as a condition of the appointment. 
(Ord. 26 § 2, 1963)  
2.04.030 - Temporary manager. 
The city manager shall appoint, subject to the approval of the city council, one of the other officers or department heads of the city to serve as manager pro tempore during any temporary absence or disability of the city manager. In case of the absence or disability of the city manager and his failure to so appoint a manager pro tempore, the city council may designate some qualified city employee to perform the duties of the city manager during the period of absence or disability of said city manager. 
(Ord. 26 § 3, 1963)  
2.04.040 - Compensation. 
The city manager shall receive such compensation and expense allowances as the city council shall from time to time determine and fix by resolution, and said compensation and expenses shall be a proper charge against such funds as the city council shall designate. 
The city manager shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid by him in the performance of his duties or incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the city under direction of the city council. Reimbursement shall only be made, however, when a verified itemized claim setting forth the sums expended for such business for which reimbursement is requested has been presented to the city council for approval. 
(Ord. 26 § 4, 1963)  
2.04.050 - Powers—Duties generally. 
The city manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the city under the direction and control of the city council except as otherwise provided in this chapter. He shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city which are under his control. In addition to his general powers as administrative head and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be his duty and he shall have the powers set forth in Sections 2.04.060 through 2.04.150. 
(Ord. 26 § 5, 1963)  
2.04.060 - Law enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to enforce all laws and ordinances of the city and to see that all franchises, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the city council are faithfully observed. 
(Ord. 26 § 6, 1963)  
2.04.070 - Authority over employees. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager and he shall have the authority to control, order and give directions to all heads of departments and to subordinate officers and employees of the city under his jurisdiction through their department heads. 
(Ord. 26 § 7, 1963)  
2.04.080 - Power of appointment. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to, and he shall appoint, remove, promote and demote any and all officers and employees of the city except the city attorney. The city manager shall appoint a city treasurer, subject to the approval of the city council. 
(Ord. 705 § 1, 2003: Ord. 102 § 4, 1968: Ord. 26 § 8, 1963)  
2.04.090 - Ordinances. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager and he shall recommend to the city council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he deems necessary or expedient. 
(Ord. 26 § 9, 1963)  
2.04.100 - Attendance at council meetings. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to attend all meetings of the city council unless excused therefrom, except when his removal is under consideration. 
(Ord. 26 § 10, 1963)  
2.04.110 - Financial reports. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial conditions and needs of the city. 
(Ord. 26 § 11, 1963)  
2.04.120 - Budget. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to prepare and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed annual salary plan to the city council for its approval. 
(Ord. 26 § 12, 1963)  
2.04.130 - Purchasing agent. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager and he shall be responsible for the purchase of all supplies for all of the departments or divisions of the city. No expenditures shall be submitted or recommended to the city council except on report and approval of the city manager. 
(Ord. 26 § 13, 1963)  
2.04.140 - Hours of employment. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to devote his entire time to the duties of his office in the interests of the city. 
(Ord. 26 § 14, 1963)  
2.04.150 - Additional duties. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other action of the city council. 
(Ord. 26 § 15, 1963)  
2.04.160 - Council-manager relations. 
The city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city only through the city manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the city council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the city manager. The city manager shall take his orders and instructions from the city council only when sitting in a duly held meeting of the city council and no individual councilman shall give any orders or instructions to the city manager. 
(Ord. 26 § 16, 1963)  
2.04.170 - Interference with manager. 
No councilman shall in any manner attempt to influence the city manager in the making of any appointment or in the purchase of supplies. 
(Ord. 26 § 17, 1963)  
2.04.180 - Department cooperation. 
It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers and the city clerk, city treasurer, and city attorney to assist the city manager in administering the affairs of the city efficiently, economically and harmoniously so far as may be consistent with their duties as prescribed by law and ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. 26 § 18, 1963)  
2.04.190 - Removal. 
The removal of the city manager shall be only upon a three-member vote of the whole council in the city in regular council meeting. 
(Ord. 26 § 19, 1963)  
2.04.200 - Appointment of city clerk and treasurer—Purpose. 
The voters of the city at the regular municipal election in the years 1966 and 1968 directed that the office of city clerk and the office of city treasurer should be appointive. It is the purpose of this section and sections 2.04.210 and 2.04.220 to delegate to the city manager the power to appoint a city treasurer and a city clerk. 
(Ord. 705 § 2, 2003: Ord. 102 § 1, 1968)  
2.04.210 - Appointment of city clerk. 
The city manager shall appoint a city clerk and may appoint certain city employees to serve as a deputy city clerk. 
(Ord. 705 § 3, 2003: Ord. 102 § 2, 1968)  
2.04.220 - Appointment of city treasurer. 
The city manager shall appoint, subject to the approval of the city council, the city treasurer. 
(Ord. 102 § 3, 1968)  
Chapter 2.08 - COUNCIL PROTOCOLS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 807, adopted Oct. 28, 2008 repealed Chapter 2.08 §§ 2.08.010, 2.08.020, 2.08.030, 2.08.040, 2.08.050, 2.08.055, 2.08.060, 2.08.070, 2.08.080, 2.08.090, 2.08.100, 2.08.110, 2.08.120, 2.08.130, 2.08.140, 2.08.150, 2.08.160, 2.08.170, 2.08.180, 2.08.190, 2.08.200, 2.08.210, 2.08.220, 2.08.230, 2.08.240, 2.08.250, 2.08.260, 2.08.270, 2.08.280, 2.08.290, in its entirety. Section 1, of said ordinance, enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, Chapter 2.08 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 169 §§ 1, 2, 1972; Ord. 202 § 1, 1973; Ord. 221 § 1, 1974; Ord. 298 § 1, 1975; Ord. 319 § 1, 1976; Ord. 464 § 1, 1986; Ord. 534 § 1, 1991; Ord. 617 § 1, 1996; Ord. 634 §§ 1, 2, 1997 and Ord. 709 § 1, 2004. 
 
2.08.010 - Establishment of time and place for regular meetings of the city council. 
The city council shall, by resolution, establish the time and place for its regular meetings. 
(Ord. No. 807, § 1, 10-28-2008)  
2.08.020 - Adoption of council protocols. 
The city council shall, by resolution, adopt protocols by which the city council conducts its meetings and members of the city council conduct city business. 
(Ord. No. 807, § 1, 10-28-2008)  
Chapter 2.12 - COUNCIL MEMBERS' SALARIES 
 
2.12.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to Section 36516 of the Government Code, authorizing the council to provide by ordinance that each member of the council shall receive a prescribed salary the amount of which is based upon the population of the city as determined by estimates made by the State Department of Finance. 
(Ord. 473 § 1, 1987: Ord. 60 § 1, 1965)  
2.12.020 - Population. 
As of January 1, 2017, the latest estimate of population of the city made by the California Department of Finance is forty-two thousand sixty-seven. 
(Ord. 473 § 2, 1987: Ord. 60 § 2, 1965; Ord. No. 911 , § 1, 10-24-2017)  
2.12.030 - Salaries. 
Each council member shall receive a salary of four hundred eighty-four dollars and six cents per month, as authorized by Government Code 36516 and which shall be payable at the same time and in the same manner the salaries are paid to the other officers and employees of the city. 
(Ord. 756 § 1, 2006: Ord. 650 § 1, 1999: Ord. 549 § 1, 1991: Ord. 526 § 1, 1990: Ord. 510 § 1, 1989: Ord. 499 § 1, 1988: Ord. 473 § 3, 1987: Ord. 446 § 1, 1985: Ord. 430 § 1, 1984: Ord. 412 § 1, 1983: Ord. 398 § 1, 1982: Ord. 60 § 3, 1965; Ord. No. 911 , § 2, 10-24-2017)  
2.12.040 - Salary increase or decrease. 
Subsequent changes in salaries of members of the city council shall be governed by Section 36516 of the Government Code of the state of California. 
The population of the city shall be determined by the latest estimate of the California Department of Finance. Any salary which is decreased or increased because of a more recent population survey shall be payable only after one or more members of the council become eligible therefor by virtue of beginning a new term of office following the next succeeding general municipal election held in the city. 
(Ord. 266 § 1, 1975: Ord. 60 § 4, 1965)  
2.12.045 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 811, § 1, adopted Jan. 27, 2009, repealed § 2.12.045 in its entirety. Former § 2.12.045 pertained to compensation for community development commission service and derived from Ord. 756 § 2, 2006.  
2.12.050 - Reimbursement. 
The salaries prescribed herein are and shall be exclusive of any amounts payable to each member of the council as reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred by him in the performance of official duties for the city. 
(Ord. 60 § 5, 1965)  
2.12.060 - Operative date. 
This chapter shall become operative only on and after the date upon which one or more members of the council of the city become eligible for the salary prescribed herein by virtue of beginning a new term of office following the general municipal election next succeeding its effective date. 
(Ord. 60 § 6, 1965)  
Chapter 2.16 - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY 
 
2.16.010 - Establishment of department of public safety. 
There is established within the city a department of public safety which shall include the fire department and the police department of the city. 
(Ord. 64 § 1, 1966)  
2.16.020 - Director of public safety. 
A director of public safety shall be in charge of the department of public safety. The director shall be appointed by the city manager subject to the approval of the city council. The director shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager and may be removed by the city manager subject to the approval of the city council. 
(Ord. 64 § 2, 1966)  
2.16.030 - Duties of director. 
The director of public safety shall be responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the police department and the fire department. The director of public safety shall appoint a fire chief and a chief of police subject to the approval of the city manager and the city council. The director of public safety may also hold the office of police chief and fire chief. 
(Ord. 64 § 3, 1966)  
2.16.040 - Supervision of city manager. 
The director of public safety shall operate under the direct supervision of the city manager and in carrying out his function as the director of public safety, the director shall serve as a duly authorized representative of the city manager. 
(Ord. 64 § 4, 1966)  
2.16.050 - Fire department. 
A.  The fire chief shall be responsible for the operation of the fire department and branches thereof. 
B.  Subject to the approval of the city manager or his duly authorized representative, the fire chief shall make appointments to department officer positions approved by the city manager and authorized by the city council. 
C.  All fire department officers shall serve at the pleasure of the fire chief and may be removed from office, good cause being shown therefor, by the fire chief with the consent and approval of the city manager or his duly authorized representative. 
D.  Subject to the approval of the city manager, the fire department may adopt bylaws, operating rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter or the best interests of the city. 
(Ord. 64 § 5, 1966)  
2.16.060 - Volunteer fire auxiliary. 
A.  There is established the Rohnert Park volunteer fire auxiliary, herein referred to as the fire auxiliary. The fire auxiliary shall be supervised by the fire chief and other officers of the fire department. The Rohnert Park fire auxiliary shall be a branch of the fire department and as such shall be a governmental function of the city and shall be under the direct control of the city manager or his duly authorized representative. 
B.  Appointment of personnel into the fire auxiliary shall be made by the fire chief subject to the consent and approval of the city manager or his duly authorized representative. 
(Ord. 64 § 6, 1966)  
2.16.070 - Police department. 
A.  The police chief shall be responsible for the operation of the police department and all branches thereof. 
B.  Subject to the approval of the city manager or his duly authorized representative, the police chief shall make appointments to department officer positions approved by the city manager and authorized by the city council. 
C.  All police department officers shall serve at the pleasure of the police chief and may be removed from office, good cause being shown therefor, by the police chief with the consent and approval of the city manager or his duly authorized representative. 
D.  Subject to the approval of the city manager, the police department may adopt bylaws, operating rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter or the best interests of the city. 
(Ord. 64 § 7, 1966)  
2.16.080 - Volunteer police auxiliary. 
A.  There is established the Rohnert Park auxiliary police reserve, herein referred to as the police auxiliary. The police auxiliary shall be supervised by the director of public safety and other officers of the police department. The police auxiliary shall be a branch of the police department and as such shall be a governmental function of the city and shall be under the direct control of the city manager or his or her duly authorized representative. 
B.  Appointment of personnel into the police auxiliary shall be made by the director of public safety subject to the consent and approval of the city manager or his or her duly authorized representative. 
C.  The police auxiliary may consist of designated level one and nondesignated level one, two, and three reserves. Designated level one reserves shall have full peace officer powers, as defined in CA Penal Code Section 830.1. 
(Ord. 640 § 1, 1998: Ord. 64 § 8, 1966)  
Chapter 2.32 - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION* 
 
2.32.010 - Definitions. 
The following words shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "City" means the city of Rohnert Park of Sonoma County. 
B.  "Community recreation" and "public recreation" means recreation be engaged in under direct control of the city. 
C.  "Council" means the city council of the city. 
D.  "County" means the county of Sonoma. 
E.  "Recreation" means any activity voluntarily engaged in which contributes to the physical, mental or moral development of the individual or group participating therein, and includes, but is not limited to, any activity in the fields of music, drama, art, handicraft, science, literature, nature studies, aquatic sports and athletics, or any of them, and any informal play incorporating any such activity. 
F.  "Recreation center" means a place, structure, area or other facility under the jurisdiction of the city council used for community recreation, which may also be used for other purposes, including but not limited to, playgrounds, playing fields or courts, swimming pools, gymnasiums, auditoriums, rooms for arts and crafts, meeting places, parks and parkways, and recreational reservoirs. 
(Ord. 423 § 1 (part), 1983)  
2.32.020 - Established—Membership. 
There is established a parks and recreation commission consisting of five members who shall be appointed by the city council. Each councilperson shall appoint one member. In addition, the mayor may appoint a member of the city council to serve as an ex-officio member of the commission. All members shall serve without compensation unless otherwise prescribed by the city council. 
(Ord. 778 § 1, 2007: Ord. 694 § 4, 2003: Ord. 572 § 4, 1993: Ord. 512 § 1, 1989: Ord. 423 § 1 (part), 1983)  
2.32.030 - Term of office. 
The term of office of each commission member shall be for four years expiring on December 31. Each member shall serve at the pleasure of the city council until his/her successor is appointed and qualified. 
(Ord. 572 § 5, 1993: Ord. 466 § 2, 1986: Ord. 423 § 1 (part), 1983) 
( Ord. No. 919 , § 1, 2-27-2018)  
2.32.040 - Powers. 
The parks and recreation commission shall make recommendations to the city council, the city manager and the recreation director regarding policies, rules and regulations relating to the conduct of recreation centers, recreation, and public and community recreation within the city, and may make recommendations concerning rates or fees to be charged for use of recreation facilities of the city. The commission may make recommendations to the city council and the city manager regarding personnel needed to assist the recreation director and recreation commission. The commission shall have such other powers and duties as assigned to it by the city council. The commission shall also make recommendations to the city council, the city manager and the recreation director regarding cultural arts development in the community. The cultural arts functions shall be to: 
A.  Operate in an advisory capacity and encourage the development of programs among community groups for the cultural enrichment of the city, as well as encourage programs from outside the area to be showcased in Rohnert Park. 
B.  Encourage the beautification of the appearance of the city. 
C.  Advise the council on matters affecting the beauty and culture of the city. 
D.  Render recommendations to council boards or commissions as they regard the fields of art, aesthetics and beautification of the city. 
E.  Initiate with city council's concurrence or by request of the city council and review and make recommendations on works of art now existing or to be acquired or commissioned by the city, either by purchase, gift or otherwise, and their proposed locations when requested by city council. 
F.  Examine every two years the condition of monuments and works of art, and existing municipal facilities insofar as they serve to further the beauty of cultural enrichment of the community and make a report to the council with recommendations for their care, maintenance or improvement. 
G.  Commission art works with the approval of the city council, with special emphasis on local artists. 
H.  Act as art ambassadors, representing the city of Rohnert Park within the community and outside the community. 
I.  Act as the city council's liaison with the public in the field of art. 
J.  Create the list of guidelines to determine qualified artists in order to make recommendations to the city council regarding grant monies. 
K.  Keep abreast of the current changes and trends affecting the arts and convey changes and new ideas to the city council. 
L.  Assess the needs of our artistic community and try to find ways to address those needs. 
M.  Review and make recommendations to the city on cultural concepts of sites, documents and buildings deemed of historical importance within the influence of Rohnert Park. 
N.  The commission will report to the city council once a year on the state of cultural arts in the community and opportunities the city has to enhance the cultural arts in the community. 
(Ord. 423 § 1 (part), 1983) 
(Ord. No. 898 , § B, 4-26-2016)  
2.32.050 - Officers. 
The parks and recreation commission shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman from the appointed members. Officers of the commission shall be elected annually. 
(Ord. 423 § 1 (part), 1983)  
2.32.060 - Bylaws, rules and regulations. 
The parks and recreation commission shall, subject to approval by the city council, adopt bylaws, rules and regulations for the proper conduct of its meetings and the discharge of its powers and duties, and shall keep minutes of all formal action taken. 
(Ord. 423 § 1 (part), 1983)  
2.32.070 - Meetings—Attendance. 
One regular meeting of the parks and recreation commission shall be held in each calendar month. The time and place of such meeting, which must be held in a public place, shall be determined by the commission. A special meeting of the commission may be called by the chairman or a majority of the members of the commission, provided that twenty-four hours' notice of such meeting is given to each of the commissioners. Failure of any commissioner to attend three consecutive meetings of the commission shall constitute an automatic resignation of such commissioner unless his absence has been excused by the commission or the city council. 
(Ord. 423 § 1 (part), 1983)  
Chapter 2.40 - PEACE OFFICER STANDARDS AND TRAINING 
 
2.40.010 - Desire to receive aid. 
The city council declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state under the provisions of Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4 of the California Penal Code. 
(Ord. 48 § 1, 1964)  
2.40.020 - Adherence to state standards. 
The city, while receiving aid from the state pursuant to Chapter 1, will adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. 
(Ord. 48 § 2, 1964)  
Chapter 2.42 - PUBLIC SAFETY DISPATCHERS AND TRAINING 
 
2.42.010 - Desire to receive aid. 
The City of Rohnert Park declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the State of California under the provisions of Section 13522, Chapter 1, of Title 4, Part 4, of the California Penal Code. 
(Ord. 508 § 1, 1988)  
2.42.020 - Adherence to state standards. 
Pursuant to Section 13510(c), Chapter 1, the City of Rohnert Park will adhere to standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training (POST). 
(Ord. 508 § 2,1988)  
2.42.030 - Inquiries as deemed appropriate. 
Pursuant to Section 13512, Chapter 1, the commission and its representatives may make such inquiries as deemed appropriate by the commission to ascertain that the City of Rohnert Park's public safety dispatcher personnel adhere to standards for selection and training established by the commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. 
(Ord. 508 § 3, 1988)  
Chapter 2.44 - CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY* 
 
2.44.010 - Adoption authority. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to Section 935 of the California Government Code. 
(Ord. 795 § 1 (part), 2008)  
2.44.020 - Claims presentation procedures. 
All claims against the city for money or damages not otherwise governed by the Government Tort Claims Act, California Government Code Sections 900 et seq., or other state law (hereinafter "claims") shall be presented within the timeframe and in the manner prescribed by Part 3 of Division 3.6 of Title 1 of the California Government Code (commencing with Section 900), as that part may be amended from time to time, and as further provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 795 § 1 (part), 2008)  
2.44.030 - Form. 
All claims shall be made in writing and verified by the claimant or by his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator. No claim may be filed on behalf of a class of persons unless verified by every member of that class as required by this section. In addition, all claims shall contain the information required by California Government Code Section 910. 
(Ord. 795 § 1 (part), 2008)  
2.44.040 - Audit. 
All claims shall be audited by the city clerk for compliance with this chapter and submitted to the city council for approval or rejection as provided for in California Government Code Section 37202. 
(Ord. 795 § 1 (part), 2008)  
2.44.050 - Claim prerequisite to suit. 
In accordance with California Government Code Sections 935(b) and 945.4, all claims shall be presented as provided in this chapter and acted upon by the city prior to the filing of any legal action on such claims. No such action may be maintained by a person who has not complied with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 795 § 1 (part), 2008)  
2.44.060 - Suit. 
Any legal action brought against the city upon any claim or demand shall conform to the requirements of Government Code Sections 940-949. Any action brought against any employee of the city shall conform with the requirements of California Government Code Sections 950-951. 
(Ord. 795 § 1 (part), 2008)  
Chapter 2.48 - UNCLAIMED PROPERTY 
 
2.48.010 - Chief of police to receive property and money. 
The chief of police shall make provision for receiving and safekeeping property and money that is found and delivered to him or coming into his possession. A police property report shall be made by the officer receiving such property or such money. 
(Ord. 292 § 1, 1975)  
2.48.020 - Safekeeping for six months. 
Property and money received as provided by Section 2.48.010 shall be stored in a safe place for a period of six months unless sooner claimed by the true owner and shall then be deemed to be unclaimed property or unclaimed money and be subject to disposal as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 292 § 2, 1975)  
2.48.030 - Redemption—Charges. 
During said six-month period such property may be delivered or such money paid to the true owner. Such property shall be delivered upon proof of ownership satisfactory to the chief of police. Charges for the care of the property or money not exceeding ten percent of the value of the property or the amount of the money may be charged for its safekeeping. If ownership cannot be determined to the satisfaction of the chief of police he may refuse to deliver such property or to order the payment of such money to anyone until ordered to do so by a court having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 292 § 3, 1975)  
2.48.040 - Delivery to finder. 
If the true owner does not appear during the six-month period and claim the property or money, it may be delivered back to the person who delivered it to the chief of police if at the time of delivery such person indicated in writing that he wished to assert a claim to the property or money as a finder. Charges may be imposed as provided in Section 2.48.030. 
(Ord. 292 § 4, 1975)  
2.48.050 - Disposition of money. 
All money so received by the chief of police and not delivered to the true owner during the six-month period or to the finder shall within thirty days thereafter be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. 292 § 5, 1975)  
2.48.060 - Auction. 
Property so received and not delivered to the true owner or finder shall be disposed of by public auction or appropriation to the use of the city not less than five days after a notice describing the articles to be disposed of and announcing the date, time, and place of the auction is published once in a newspaper of general circulation within the city or posted in at least three conspicuous public places within the city. 
(Ord. 292 § 6, 1975)  
2.48.070 - Costs chargeable to city. 
Any costs or charges for keeping or depositing the property or money and the costs or charges for the advertising and sale shall be a proper charge against the city. 
(Ord. 292 § 7, 1975)  
2.48.080 - Appropriation by city. 
Any articles of property appropriated to the use of the city shall be made available to the department in need thereof upon approval of such appropriation by the city manager. 
(Ord. 292 § 8, 1975)  
2.48.090 - Proceeds of the auction. 
After the auction is completed the chief of police shall deliver the proceeds of the auction to the city clerk or other appropriate city officer for deposit in the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. 292 § 9, 1975)  
2.48.100 - Property not sold at auction. 
Any property advertised and offered for sale but not sold and not suitable for appropriation to the use of the city shall be deemed to be of no value and shall be disposed of in such manner as may be determined by the chief of police. 
(Ord. 292 § 10, 1975)  
2.48.110 - Dangerous or perishable property. 
Any property coming into the possession of the chief of police which he determines to be dangerous or perishable may be disposed of immediately, without notice, in such manner as he determines to be in the public interest. 
(Ord. 292 § 11, 1975)  
2.48.120 - Property held as evidence not affected. 
This chapter does not apply to property held by the chief of police as evidence. 
(Ord. 292 § 12, 1975)  
Chapter 2.52 - EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION AND FUNCTIONS 
 
2.52.010 - Purposes. 
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this city in the event of an emergency, the direction of the emergency organization, and the coordination of the emergency functions of this city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons. 
(Ord. 204 § 1, 1973)  
2.52.020 - Emergency defined. 
As used in this chapter, "emergency" means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of external peril to the safety of persons and property within this city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of this city, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. 
(Ord. 204 § 2, 1973)  
2.52.030 - Disaster council created—Membership. 
The Rohnert Park disaster council is created and shall consist of the following: 
A.  The mayor, who shall be chairman; 
B.  The director of emergency services, who shall be vice chairman; 
C.  The assistant director of emergency services; 
D.  Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in a current emergency plan of this city adopted pursuant to this chapter; 
E.  Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional, or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility as may be appointed by the director with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(Ord. 204 § 3, 1973)  
2.52.040 - Disaster council—Powers and duties. 
It shall be the duty of the Rohnert Park disaster council and it is empowered to develop and recommend for adoption by the city council emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The disaster council shall meet upon call of the chairman or, in his absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice chairman. 
(Ord. 204 § 4, 1973)  
2.52.050 - Director and assistant director of emergency services—Created. 
A.  There is created the office of director of emergency services. The city manager shall be the director of emergency services. 
B.  There is created the office of assistant director of emergency services. The director of public safety shall be the assistant director of emergency services. 
(Ord. 204 § 5, 1973)  
2.52.060 - Director of emergency services—Powers and duties. 
The director is empowered to: 
A.  Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a "local emergency" if the city council is in session or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect; 
B.  Request the Governor to proclaim a "state of emergency" when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency; 
C.  Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter; 
D.  Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this city and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them; 
E.  Represent this city in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein; 
F.  In the event of the proclamation of a "local emergency" as herein provided, the proclamation of a "state of emergency" by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a "state of war emergency," the director is empowered: 
1.  To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council, 
2.  To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use, 
3.  To require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a "state of emergency" in the county in which this city is located or the existence of a "state of war emergency" to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he deems necessary in the execution of his duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers, 
4.  To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency, and 
5.  To execute all of his ordinary power as city manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him by this ordinance or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the city council, all powers conferred upon him by any statute, by any agreement approved by the city council, and by any other lawful authority. 
(Ord. 204 § 6(A), 1973)  
2.52.070 - Director of emergency services—Order of succession designation. 
The director of emergency services shall designate the order of succession to that office to take effect in the event the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the city council. 
(Ord. 204 § 6(B), 1973)  
2.52.080 - Assistant director duties. 
The assistant director shall, under the supervision of the director and with the assistance of emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this city; and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the director. 
(Ord. 204 § 6(C), 1973)  
2.52.090 - Emergency organization. 
All officers and employees of the city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of Section 2.52.060 F. 3, be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in the city during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the city. 
(Ord. 204 § 7, 1973)  
2.52.100 - Emergency plan. 
The Rohnert Park disaster council shall be responsible for the development of the city emergency plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 204 § 8, 1973)  
2.52.110 - Expenditures. 
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. 
(Ord. 204 § 9, 1973)  
2.52.120 - Penalty for violations. 
It is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for not to exceed six months, or both, for any person during an emergency to: 
A.  Wilfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter; 
B.  Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or protection thereof; 
C.  Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state. 
(Ord. 204 § 10, 1973)  
Chapter 2.56 - CITY HOLIDAY 
 
2.56.010 - Designated. 
Annually during the month of August, the last Saturday and Sunday of the month shall be designated as "Rohnert Park Days" and the mayor may by proclamation declare said days to be a legal holiday within the city for the purpose of commemorating the founding of the city on August 28, 1962. 
(Ord. 30 § 1, 1963)  
Chapter 2.64 - CITY ELECTIONS 
 
2.64.010 - Municipal elections. 
The general municipal election of the city of Rohnert Park shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of each even numbered year. 
(Ord. 442 § 2, 1984: Ord. 393 §§ 1 (part) and 2 (part), 1981)  
2.64.020 - Elected city officials affected by general election dates. 
Those elected officials whose terms, prior to the adoption of this chapter would have expired no later than the fourth Tuesday after the date of the general municipal election which would have been held in June of even numbered years shall, instead, continue in their office until no later than the fourth Tuesday after the date of the general municipal election to be held in November of even numbered years. 
(Ord. 442 § 2, 1984: Ord. 393 §§ 1 (part) and 2 (part), 1981)  
2.64.030 - Operative date of this chapter. 
This chapter requiring the general municipal election to be held on the same day as the statewide general election shall become operative upon its approval by the Sonoma County Board of supervisors. 
(Ord. 442 § 2, 1984: Ord. 393 §§ 1 (part) and 2 (part), 1981)  
Chapter 2.65 - CAMPAIGN FINANCE REGULATIONS 
 
2.65.010 - Purpose. 
The city council seeks to reduce the actual and perceived influence of contributions on elected officials by limiting the amount of campaign contributions for candidates and to further the goal of an informed electorate by supplementing the campaign disclosure requirements and related regulations set forth in the Political Reform Act of 1974. 
(Ord. 750 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.65.020 - Definitions. 
"Candidate" means any individual who is a candidate for an elected city office in a city election. 
"City election" means any general election, special election or recall election. 
"Election cycle" means the applicable period as set forth in Section 2.65.060 of this chapter. 
"Person" means an individual, committee, proprietorship, firm, partnership, joint venture, syndicate, business trust, company, corporation, limited liability company, association and any other organization or group of persons acting in concert. 
"Political Reform Act of 1974" means California Government Code section 81000 et seq., as amended from time to time. 
"Recall election cycle" means the applicable period as set forth in Section 2.65.060. 
Unless expressly defined in this chapter, or the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, words and phrases in this chapter shall have the same definition and meaning as when they are used in the Political Reform Act of 1974, as that Act may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. 750 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.65.030 - Contribution limitations—General. 
A.  No person shall make to any candidate or candidate-controlled committee, and no such candidate or candidate-controlled committee shall accept from any person, a contribution or contributions totaling more than five hundred dollars in an elective city office election cycle. 
B.  The contribution limitations set forth in subsection (A) of this section shall also apply to any committee that collects contributions for the purpose of making expenditures in support of or opposition to the recall of an elective city officer, and to contributions received by such elective city officer, during a recall election cycle. 
C.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to a candidate's contribution of his or her personal funds, community property funds, or domestic partnership funds to his or her own campaign committee. 
D.  A contribution shall not be considered to be received if it is not negotiated, deposited or utilized and, in addition, is returned to the donor within fourteen days of receipt. 
E.  The five hundred dollar limitation established by this section shall be reviewed by the city council in January of every fourth year commencing in 2010 to determine whether such limitation shall remain the same or be increased or decreased. Any amendment of the limitation must be done by ordinance and shall be preceded by at least one public hearing. 
(Ord. 750 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.65.040 - Contribution limitations—Aggregation of contributions. 
The contributions of any person whose contributions are directed and controlled by another person shall be aggregated with those of the controlling person for purposes of the contribution limits. With respect to family contributions, contributions by a husband and wife or by domestic partners shall be treated as separate contributions and shall not be aggregated. Contributions by children under eighteen years of age shall be treated as contributions by their parent(s), custodian(s), or guardian(s) and shall be attributed proportionately to each parent, custodian or guardian. 
(Ord. 750 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.65.050 - Multiple campaign committees. 
A.  A candidate in a city election shall have no more than one candidate-controlled committee and such controlled committee shall have only one bank account out of which all qualified campaign and officeholder expenses related to that office shall be made. 
B.  This section does not prevent a candidate in a city election from establishing another candidate-controlled committee solely for the purpose of running for a state, federal, county or other elective office, or for opposing his or her recall. 
(Ord. 750 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.65.060 - Election cycles. 
A.  General and Special Election Cycles. For the purposes of this chapter and with regards to campaigns for elective city offices, contributions to a candidate shall be deemed election contributions if such contributions are made at any time between the date that the candidate assumed office following the previous election and extending to the close of the third business day prior to the subsequent election date for that office seat. 
B.  Recall Election Cycle. For the purposes of this chapter and with regards to recall elections, contributions shall be deemed to have been made during a recall election cycle if they are made at any time after a committee has been formed pursuant to the provisions of the Political Reform Act of 1974 in support of a recall election, or after the clerk of the city of Rohnert Park has approved a recall petition for circulation and gathering of signatures, whichever occurs first. A recall election cycle shall end whenever any of the following events occur: 
1.  The recall proponent fails to return signed petitions to the clerk of the city of Rohnert Park within the time limits prescribed by the California Elections Code; 
2.  All committees formed in support of the recall have been terminated pursuant to the provisions of the Political Reform Act of 1974; or 
3.  Ten days after a recall election has been held. 
(Ord. 750 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.65.070 - Use of surplus funds for future city elections. 
Campaign funds acquired in one city election may not be used in any other future city election. 
(Ord. 750 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.65.080 - Disclosure requirement. 
A.  Each candidate or candidate-controlled committee in a city election shall provide detailed itemization, as defined in the California Political Reform Act of 1974, for all contributions received in a cumulative amount of one hundred dollars or more. 
B.  Each candidate or candidate-controlled committee in a city election shall file a third pre-election Campaign Disclosure Statement (Government Form 460 or any successor form thereto), as provided by the California Fair Political Practices Commission, for the period from the end of the period covered by the second pre-election statement to 11:59 p.m. on the third business day immediately preceding election day (normally Thursday). Such statement shall be filed with the clerk of the city of Rohnert Park by 5:00 p.m. on the second business day immediately preceding election day (normally Friday). 
(Ord. 750 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.65.090 - Disclosure of occupation and employer. 
No campaign contribution required to be reported by the Political Reform Act of 1974 (cumulative or otherwise) shall be deposited into a campaign bank account of a candidate or of a candidate-controlled committee, unless the disclosure information required by the Political Reform Act of 1974, including the name, address, occupation and employer of the contributor, or, if self-employed, name of business, is on file in the records of the recipient of the contribution. This information is to be reported on each campaign statement required to be filed by the Political Reform Act of 1974. 
(Ord. 750 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.65.100 - Disclosure of cumulative contributions. 
Cumulative contributions for each contributor of one hundred dollars or more in an election cycle shall be itemized and reported on each campaign statement required to be filed by the Political Reform Act of 1974. 
(Ord. 750 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.65.110 - Penalties. 
A.  Criminal Penalties. Any person who knowingly or willfully violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition to other penalties provided by law, the penalty upon conviction of such person shall be by a fine in accordance with Government Code Section 91000. 
B.  Civil Penalties. Any person who intentionally or negligently violates any of the reporting requirements of this chapter may be sued in a civil action in accordance with Government Code Sections 91004 and following. 
C.  Cumulative Remedies. The foregoing remedies shall be deemed non-exclusive, cumulative and in addition to any other remedy the city of Rohnert Park may have at law or in equity. (Ord. 750 § 1 (part), 2005) 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-24-2010)  
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE  
Chapter 3.04 - PURCHASING PROGRAM[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 843, § 2, adopted Feb. 28, 2012, repealed Ch. 3.04, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, Ch. 3.04 pertained to similar subject matter. See Ordinance List and Disposition Table for derivation. 
 
3.04.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish efficient policies and procedures to govern the purchase of materials, supplies, equipment, vehicles and service and to clearly define authority for the purchasing function. 
(Ord. No. 843, § 2, 2-28-2012)  
3.04.020 - Applicable policies. 
The city's purchasing functions shall be governed by the city's purchasing policy, which shall be adopted by resolution of the city council, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 843, § 2, 2-28-2012)  
Chapter 3.08 - SPECIAL GAS TAX IMPROVEMENT FUND 
 
3.08.010 - Fund created. 
To comply with the provisions of Section 2113, Chapter 3, Division 3 of the Streets and Highways Code, there is created in the city treasury of the city a special fund to be known and designated as the "special gas tax street improvement fund." 
(Ord. 268 § l (part) 1975: Ord. 6 § 1, 1962)  
3.08.020 - Moneys received—Disposition. 
All moneys received by the city from the state of California under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein for, or for engineering, or for the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways by the city shall be paid into said fund. 
(Ord. 6 § 2, 1962)  
3.08.030 - Moneys expended—Purpose. 
All moneys in the fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by, and subject to the provisions of Sections 2107—2116, inclusive, of Chapter 3, Division 3 of the Streets and Highways Code. 
(Ord. 268 § 1 (part), 1975: Ord. 6 § 3, 1962)  
Chapter 3.12 - ASSESSMENT AND TAX COLLECTION—TRANSFER OF FUNCTIONS TO THE COUNTY 
 
3.12.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and expressions when used in this chapter shall for the purpose of this chapter have meanings as follows: 
A.  "City" as used in this chapter means the city of Rohnert Park, a municipal corporation, situated in the county of Sonoma, state of California. 
B.  "County" as used in this chapter means the county of Sonoma, a political subdivision of the state of California. 
(Ord. 16 § 1, 1962)  
3.12.020 - Transfer of duties. 
The assessment and tax collection duties and the collection of assessments levied for municipal improvements, now performed by the assessor and the tax collector of the city, are transferred to the assessor and the tax collector of the county for the purpose of assessment and collection of and for ad valorem property taxes that become a lien after December 3, 1962, and the collection of assessments for municipal improvements becoming due and payable on and after July 1, 1963. 
(Ord. 16 § 2, 1962)  
3.12.030 - Abolition of offices of city assessor and city tax collector. 
The offices of city assessor and city tax collector are abolished as of the first day of July 1963 and thereafter all duties performed by the city assessor other than the assessing of property in the city, and all duties performed by the city tax collector other than the collection of ad valorem taxes on property becomes a lien after December 3, 1962 and the collection of assessments for municipal improvements becoming due and payable on and after July 1, 1963, are transferred to and are to be performed by the city clerk. 
(Ord. 16 § 3, 1962)  
Chapter 3.16 - REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX 
 
3.16.010 - Title. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance of the City of Rohnert Park." It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California. 
(Ord. 90 § 1, 1967)  
3.16.020 - Tax imposed. 
There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars, a tax at the rate of fifty-five cents for each one thousand dollars or fractional part thereof. 
(Ord. 703 § 1, 2003: Ord. 540 § 1, 1991: Ord. 90 § 2, 1967)  
3.16.030 - By whom paid. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.16.020 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed, or issued. 
(Ord. 90, § 3, 1967)  
3.16.040 - Instrument securing debt exempt. 
Any tax imposed to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. 
(Ord. 90 § 4, 1967)  
3.16.050 - Governmental agencies exempt. 
Any deed, instrument in writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory or political subdivision thereof, is a party, shall be exempt from any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter when the exempt agency is acquiring title. 
(Ord. 128 § 1, 1970: Ord. 90 § 5, 1967)  
3.16.060 - Reorganization or adjustment exempt. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan or reorganization or adjustment: 
A.  Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended; 
B.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation as defined in subdivision M of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code as amended; 
C.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or 
D.  Whereby a mere change in identity form or place or organization is effected. 
Subdivisions A to D, inclusive of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. 
(Ord. 90 § 6, 1967)  
3.16.070 - Securities and exchange commission conveyances exempt. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (A) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if: 
A.  The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79K of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935; 
B.  Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed; 
C.  Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. 
(Ord. 90 § 7, 1967)  
3.16.080 - Realty partnerships exempt. 
A.  In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if: 
1.  Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and 
2.  Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned. 
B.  If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
C.  Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection B and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
(Ord. 90 § 8, 1967)  
3.16.090 - Administration. 
The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. 90 § 9, 1967)  
3.16.100 - Refunds. 
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California. 
(Ord. 90 § 10, 1967)  
Chapter 3.20 - SALES AND USE TAX 
 
3.20.010 - Short title. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the uniform local sales and use tax ordinance. 
(Ord. 7 § 1, 1962)  
3.20.020 - Rate. 
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be as follows: 
A.  The present rate of .95% shall continue to and including the 30th day of September, 1984. 
B.  From and after October 1, 1984, the rate shall be .975%. 
(Ord. 441 § 1, 1984: Ord. 100 § 1, 1968: Ord. 7 § 2, 1962)  
3.20.030 - Operative date. 
"Operative date" means the first day of the first calendar quarter following September 24, 1962. 
(Ord. 7 § 3, 1962)  
3.20.040 - Purpose. 
The city council declares that the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
B.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
C.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposed a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes; 
D.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 7 § 4, 1962)  
3.20.050 - Contract with state. 
Prior to the operative date this city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax chapter; provided, that if the city has not contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following September 24, 1962. 
(Ord. 7 § 5, 1962)  
3.20.060 - Sales tax. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in Section 2.20.020 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on and after the operative date. 
(Ord. 7 § 6, 1962)  
3.20.070 - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of- state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to the State Sales and Use Tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Ord. 7 § 7, 1962)  
3.20.080 - Use tax. 
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this city at the rate stated in Section 3.20.020 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to State Sales or Use Tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Ord. 7 § 8, 1962)  
3.20.090 - Adoption of provisions of state law. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. 7 § 9, 1962)  
3.20.100 - Limitations on adoption of state law. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word "State" is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the state of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 7 § 10, 1962)  
3.20.110 - Permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 212 § 1, 1974: Ord. 7 § 11, 1962)  
3.20.120 - Exclusions. 
There shall be excluded from the measure of tax: 
A.  The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer; 
B.  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state; 
C.  The gross receipts from sales to, and the storage, use or other consumption of property purchased by, operators of common carrier and waterborne vessels to be used or consumed in the operation of such common carriers or waterborne vessels principally outside this city; 
D.  The storage or use of tangible personal property in the transportation or transmission of persons, property or communications, or in the generation, transmission or distribution of electricity or in the manufacture, transmission or distribution of gas in intrastate, interstate or foreign commerce by public utilities which are regulated by the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California. 
(Ord. 7 § 12, 1962)  
3.20.130 - Exclusions and exemptions. 
A.  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer. 
B.  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city, in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter. 
C.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
D.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use, or other consumption of the tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
(Ord. 428 § 1, 1983: Ord. 212 § 2, 1974: Ord. 7 § 12.5, 1962)  
3.20.131 - Exclusions and exemptions. 
A.  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer. 
B.  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter. 
C.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes. 
D.  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax. 
E.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carrier of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
F.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire of compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
(Ord. 428 § 2, 1983)  
3.20.140 - Application of provisions relating to exclusions and exemptions. 
A.  Section 3.20.130 shall be operative January 1, 1984. 
B.  Section 3.20.131 shall be operative on the operative date of any act of the legislature of the state of California which amends Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code or which repeals and reenacts Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code to provide an exemption from city sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne vessels in the same, or substantially the same, language as that existing in subdivisions (i) (7) and (i) (8) of Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code as those subdivisions read on October 1, 1983. 
(Ord. 428 §§ 3, 4, 1983: Ord. 212 § 3, 1974: Ord. 7 § 12.6, 1962)  
3.20.150 - Amendments to state code adopted. 
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. 7 § 13, 1962)  
3.20.160 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. 7 § 14, 1962)  
3.20.170 - Penalty for violations. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 7 § 15, 1962)  
Chapter 3.21 - TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX 
 
3.21.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the City of Rohnert Park Transactions and Use Tax Ordinance. The City of Rohnert Park hereinafter shall be called "city." This chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the city. 
(Ord. No. 821, § 1, 6-8-2010)  
3.21.020 - Operative date. 
"Operative Date" means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than one hundred ten days after the adoption of this chapter, the date of such adoption being as set forth below. 
(Ord. No. 821, § 1, 6-8-2010)  
3.21.030 - Purpose. 
This chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.  To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which authorizes the city to adopt this tax ordinance which shall be operative if a majority of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose. 
B.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
C.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefore that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes. 
D.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 821, § 1, 6-8-2010)  
3.21.040 - Contract with state. 
Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax ordinance; provided, that if the city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract. 
(Ord. No. 821, § 1, 6-8-2010)  
3.21.050 - Transactions tax rate. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the city at the rate of one-half percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after the operative date of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 821, § 1, 6-8-2010)  
3.21.060 - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Ord. No. 821, § 1, 6-8-2010)  
3.21.070 - Use tax rate. 
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of this ordinance for storage, use or other consumption in said territory at the rate of one-half percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Ord. No. 821, § 1, 6-8-2010)  
3.21.080 - Adoption of provisions of state law. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 821, § 1, 6-8-2010)  
3.21.090 - Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code: 
A.  Wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefore. However, the substitution shall not be made when: 
1.  The word "state" is used as a part of the title of the State Controller, State Treasurer, State Board of Control, State Board of Equalization, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California. 
2.  The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter. 
3.  In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where the result of the substitution would be to: 
a.  Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or 
b.  Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provision of that code. 
4.  In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
B.  The word "city" shall be substituted for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Ord. No. 821, § 1, 6-8-2010)  
3.21.100 - Permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor's permit shall not be required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 821, § 1, 6-8-2010)  
3.21.110 - Exemptions and exclusions. 
A.  There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the State of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-administered transactions or use tax. 
B.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from: 
1.  Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
2.  Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this paragraph, delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied: 
a.  With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-city address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and 
b.  With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address. 
3.  The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this chapter. 
4.  A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of this chapter. 
5.  For the purposes of subparagraphs 3. and 4. of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
C.  There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this chapter, the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property: 
1.  The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax ordinance. 
2.  Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California. 
3.  If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this chapter. 
4.  If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of this chapter. 
5.  For the purposes of subparagraphs 3. and 4. of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
6.  Except as provided in subparagraph 7., a retailer engaged in business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer. 
7.  "A retailer engaged in business in the City" shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the city. 
D.  Any person subject to use tax under this chapter may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. 
(Ord. No. 821, § 1, 6-8-2010)  
3.21.120 - Amendments. 
All amendments subsequent to June 8, 2010 to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this chapter, provided however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this chapter. 
The foregoing amendments shall not require voter approval. 
The following amendments to this chapter must be approved by the voters of the city: increasing the tax rate or revising the methodology for calculating the tax such that a tax increase would result; imposing the tax on transactions and uses not previously subject to the tax (unless such amendment occurs automatically by operation of the preceding paragraph); or extending the tax beyond the fifth anniversary of the operative date. The city council may otherwise amend this ordinance without submitting the amendment to the voters for approval. 
(Ord. No. 821, § 1, 6-8-2010)  
3.21.130 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. No. 821, § 1, 6-8-2010)  
3.21.140 - Annual audit and public report. 
Annually the city council retains an independent auditor to conduct an audit of and provide audited financial statements for all of the city's financial activities. The auditor shall include an accounting of the revenue received from the tax and expenditures thereof in the audited financial statements. The auditor's report shall be presented to the council and made available to the public. Additionally, the Director of Administrative Services shall annually prepare and present to the council and the public a report in conjunction with the audit that reviews the status and performance of the programs and services funded wholly or partially with proceeds of the tax. 
(Ord. No. 821, § 1, 6-8-2010)  
3.21.150 - Termination date. 
The authority to levy the tax imposed by this chapter shall not expire, unless terminated by a unanimous vote of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 821, § 1, 6-8-2010; Ord. No. 875, § 1, 7-23-2013)  
Chapter 3.24 - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX 
 
3.24.010 - Title. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the uniform transient occupancy tax ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. 53 § 1, 1965)  
3.24.020 - Definitions. 
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter: 
A.  "Hotel" means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof. 
B.  "Occupancy" means the use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms or portion thereof in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. 
C.  "Operator" means the person who is proprietor of the hotel whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator or the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
D.  "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
E.  "Rent" means the consideration charged, whether or not received for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credit, and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
F.  "Tax administrator" means the city clerk or his authorized agent. 
G.  "Transient" means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to June 16, 1965 may be considered. 
(Ord. 53 § 2, 1965)  
3.24.030 - Tax imposed. 
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of twelve percent of the rent charged by the operator. Said tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax administrator may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the tax administrator. 
(Ord. 685 § 1, 2002: 561 § 1, 1992: Ord. 402 § 1, 1982: Ord. 203 § 1, 1973: Ord. 104 § 1, 1968: Ord. 53 § 3, 1965)  
3.24.040 - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be imposed upon: 
A.  Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax herein provided in subsection A of Section 3.24.040;* 
B.  Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty. 
No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the tax administrator. 
(Ord. 538 § 1, 1991: Ord. 53 § 4, 1965) 
*  State and Federal employees are not exempt from payment of the tax. 46 Ops. Atty. Gen. 16.  
3.24.050 - Operator's duties. 
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. 53 § 5, 1965)  
3.24.060 - Registration. 
Within thirty days after June 16, 1965, or within thirty days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register said hotel with the tax administrator and obtain from him a "transient occupancy registration certificate" to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Said certificate shall, among other things, state the following: 
A.  The name of the operator; 
B.  The address of the hotel; 
C.  The date upon which the certificate was issued; 
D.  "This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the Tax Administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the Tax Administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this city. This certificate does not constitute a permit." 
(Ord. 53 § 6, 1965)  
3.24.070 - Reporting and remitting. 
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of every month or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the tax administrator, make a return to the tax administrator on forms provided by him, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of tax collected shall be remitted to the tax administrator. The tax administrator may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the tax, and he may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax administrator. 
(Ord. 538 § 3, 1991: Ord. 53 § 7, 1965)  
3.24.080 - Penalties and interest. 
A.  Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax. 
B.  Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten percent penalty first imposed. 
C.  Fraud. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section. 
D.  Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. 
E.  Penalties Merged With Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. 
(Ord. 53 § 8, 1965)  
3.24.090 - Failure to collect and report tax—Determination of tax by tax administrator. 
If any operator fails or refuses to collect said tax and to make within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of said tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator procures such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest, and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known place of address. Such operator may within ten days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest, and penalties, if any, determined by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the tax administrator shall give not less than five days' written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in said notice why said amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest, and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest, and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing the tax administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest, and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.24.100. 
(Ord. 53 § 9, 1965)  
3.24.100 - Appeal. 
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator with respect to the amount of such tax, interest, and penalties if any, may appeal to the council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk, within fifteen days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the city clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his last known place of address. The findings of the council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. 
(Ord. 53 § 10, 1965)  
3.24.110 - Records. 
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable time. 
(Ord. 53 § 11, 1965)  
3.24.120 - Refunds. 
A.  Whenever the amount of any tax, interest, or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter it may be refunded as provided in subsections B and C of this section provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax administrator. 
B.  An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator. 
C.  A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection A of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, or when the transient having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax. 
D.  No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant established his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. 
(Ord. 53 § 12, 1965)  
3.24.130 - Actions to collect. 
A.  Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. 
Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. 
Such records shall be maintained at the operator's premises or shall be available for delivery to the tax administrator within one week of the request. The records shall include at least the following: 
1.  Daily summaries of room occupancies; 
2.  A record of each occupancy charge for which an exemption is claimed, including the name of the individual occupancy, the room, days of occupancy, and reasons for exemption; 
3.  List of bad debts claimed for exemption, including names and addresses of debts and amount of room rent unpaid. 
(Ord. 538 § 3, 1991: Ord. 53 § 13, 1965)  
3.24.140 - Violations—Misdemeanor—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable therefor by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as aforesaid. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as aforesaid. 
(Ord. 53 § 14, 1965)  
Chapter 3.28 - PUBLIC FACILITIES FEE 
 
3.28.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purposes and intent of this chapter are as follows: 
A.  To implement the goals and objectives of the city's general plan; 
B.  To mitigate the impacts caused by new and anticipated developments indentified in the city's general plan; 
C.  To ensure that new development in the city receives the full range of public facilities necessary to support the city-adopted level of service (LOS) experienced by existing development; 
D.  To establish uniform procedures for the imposition, calculation, collection, expenditure and administration of the public facility financing requirements imposed on new development in the city; 
E.  To ensure that new development pays its full proportionate share of the cost of providing such public facilities at the city-adopted level of service (LOS) standards for each facility; 
F.  To ensure that all applicable legal standards and criteria are properly incorporated in these provisions. (Ord. 715 § 1 (part), 2004) 
(Ord. No. 840, § 5, 11-22-2011)  
3.28.020 - Definitions. 
"Act" means the Mitigation Fee Act set forth in Section 66000 through 66025 of the Government Code, as it may be amended from time to time. 
"Assisted Living" means any use meeting the definition of "congregate care/assisted living large" set forth in Chapter 17.04 of this Municipal Code. 
"City" means the city of Rohnert Park, California. 
"City council" means the city council of the city of Rohnert Park, California. 
"City manager" means the city manager of the city of Rohnert Park, California or his/her designee. 
"Development Permit" means any permit or approval from the city including, but not limited to a general plan amendment, zoning or rezoning of property, a conditional use permit, subdivision map, revised final planned development, building permit or other permit for construction or reconstruction. 
"General Office" means any use meeting the definition of "professional office" set forth in Chapter 17.04 of this Municipal Code. 
"Hotel/Motel" means any use meeting the definition of "bed and breakfast", "hotel" or "motel" set forth in Chapter 17.04 of this Municipal Code. 
"Impact producing development" means any new development that, in accordance with the findings required by this chapter, places additional demand upon the city's infrastructure system. 
"Multi-Family Residential" means any use meeting the definition of "dwelling, single-family attached", "dwelling, multi-family" or "mobile home" in Chapter 17.04 of the Municipal Code. 
"Municipal Code" means the Municipal Code of the city of Rohnert Park, California. 
"New development" means development requiring a development permit. 
"Planning director" means the planning director of the city or his/her designee. 
"PFFP" means the public facilities finance plan adopted by the city council, as it may be updated and amended from time to time. 
"PF fee" means the public facilities fee. 
"Senior Housing" means any use meeting the definition of "senior housing" in Chapter 17.04 of the Municipal Code. 
"Single Family Residential" means any use meeting the definition of "dwelling, single-family detached" in Chapter 17.04 of the Municipal Code. 
"Warehouse" means any use meeting the definition of "warehousing" in Chapter 17.04 of this Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 715 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.28.030 - General provisions—Applicability. 
A.  Term. This chapter shall remain in effect unless and until repealed, amended or modified by the city council in accordance with applicable state law and local ordinances and procedures. 
B.  Annual Review. At least once every year, and in accordance with Government Code section 66006, the city manager shall prepare a report to city council on the subject of the PF fees, which report shall include the following: 
1.  A brief description of the type of fee in the account or fund; 
2.  The amount of the fee; 
3.  The beginning and ending balance of the account or fund; 
4.  The amount of fees collected and the interest earned; 
5.  An identification of each public improvement on which the fees were expended and the amount of the expenditures on each improvement, including a total percentage of the costs of the public improvements that was funded with fees; 
6.  An identification of the approximate date by which the construction of the public improvement will commence if the local agency determines that sufficient funds have been collected to complete financing on an incomplete public improvement; 
7.  A description of each interfund transfer or loan made from the account or fund, including the public improvement on which the transferred or loaned fees will be expended, and, in the case of an interfund loan, the date on which the loan will be repaid, and the rate of interest that the account or fund will receive on the loan; 
8.  The amount of refunds made pursuant to Government Code section 66001(e) and any allocations pursuant to Government Code section 66001(f); 
9.  Other such data, analysis or recommendations that the city manager may deem appropriate or as requested by the city council. 
C.  Development Affected. This chapter shall apply to all impact producing residential and nonresidential development as of the date of adoption of this chapter. That portion of PF fees attributable to sewer costs shall apply to each and every new connection to the sewer system. 
D.  Development not Affected. This chapter shall not apply to development for which a PF fee, or its equivalent, has been paid for a particular public facility prior to the adoption of this chapter; nor shall a PF fee be imposed on any use, development, project, structure, building, fence, sign or other activity which is not impact producing. Provided, that portion of the PF fees attributable to sewer costs shall apply to each and every new connection to the sewer system unless sewer capacity fees have previously paid to the city for the development. 
E.  Relationship to other land use regulations. Neither this chapter nor the specific PF fee resolutions shall affect, in any manner, the permissible use of property, density/intensity of development, design and improvement standards or other applicable standards or requirements of this code, all of which shall be operative and remain in full force and effect without limitation. (Ord. 715 § 1 (part), 2004) 
(Ord. No. 840, § 6, 11-22-2011)  
3.28.040 - Public facilities fee established. 
A.  A Public Facilities (PF) fee is hereby established and is applicable to all residential and nonresidential development in the city to pay for public improvements identified in the city's general plan and public facilities finance plan. The city council shall, in a council resolution, set forth: 
1.  The specific amount of the fee; 
2.  The benefit and impact areas on which the PF fee is imposed; 
3.  The specific public improvements to be financed; 
4.  The estimated cost of these facilities; and 
5.  The reasonable relationship between this fee and the various types of new developments and set forth time for payment. 
(Ord. 715 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.28.050 - Public facilities fee determination. 
A.  The PF fee is determined by the land use of the proposed development. The schedule of land uses is set forth as follows: 
Residential Land Use Class: 
Single Family Residential 
Multi-Family Residential 
Senior Housing 
Assisted Living 
Commercial Land Use Class: 
General Office 
Hotel 
Retail 
Industrial Land Use Class: 
Industrial 
Warehouse 
 
B.  The total PF fee is calculated by adding together fee components associated with the planned facilities. The PF components are set forth as follows: 
Traffic 
Public Safety 
Public Facilities 
Water 
Sewer 
Drainage 
 
C.  The PF fee for residential development shall be based upon the number of units constructed. The Residential Land Use Class applies to all areas designated as "Residential" on the city's general plan diagram, as it may be amended from time to time. 
1.  Residential development of detached single-family units shall pay the single family residential rate. 
2.  Residential development of multi-family units or mobile home parks shall pay the multi-family residential rate. 
3.  Residential development of senior housing shall pay the senior housing rate. 
4.  Residential development of large assisted living/congregate care facilities shall pay at the assisted living rate. 
5.  Bed and Breakfasts developed in Residential areas shall pay the hotel/motel rate set forth for the Commercial Land Use Class. 
D.  The PF fee for commercial development shall be based upon three factors: 
1.  The gross floor area, as defined in Chapter 17.04 of the Municipal Code including any patio area under a horizontal projection of the roof, the floor above or other covering, when such area is used for activities integral to the commercial business which is used to calculate the Traffic, Public Safety, Public Facilities and Water components; 
2.  The daily flow rate in gallons under average dry weather flow conditions, as determined by the city engineer, which is used to calculate the sewer component; and 
3.  The gross disturbed site area which is used to calculate the drainage component. 
E.  The Commercial Land Use Class applies to all areas designated as "Commercial" on the city's general plan diagram, as it may be amended from time to time. 
1.  Commercial development of general offices shall pay the general office rate. 
2.  Commercial development of hotels, motels or bed and breakfasts shall pay the hotel/motel rate. 
3.  All other development in Commercial areas shall pay the retail rate. 
F.  The PF fee for industrial development shall be based upon three factors 
1.  The gross floor area, as defined in Chapter 17.04 of the Municipal Code, including any patio area under a horizontal projection of the roof, the floor above or other covering, when such area is used for activities integral to the industrial business. 
2.  The daily flow rate in gallons under average dry weather flow conditions, as determined by the city engineer, which is used to calculate the sewer component; and 
3.  The gross disturbed site area which is used to calculate the drainage component 
G.  The Industrial Land Use Class applies to all areas designated as "Industrial" on the city's general plan diagram, as it may be amended from time to time. 
1.  General offices developed in industrial areas shall pay the general office rate set forth for the Commercial Land Use Class. 
2.  Industrial development of warehouses shall pay the warehouse rate. 
3.  All other development in industrial areas shall pay the industrial rate. 
H.  The PF fee for mixed use development shall be the sum of the appropriate residential development rates (based on units) and nonresidential development rates (based on square footage, daily flow rate and gross disturbed site area) for each use proposed on the site. 
I.  The PF fee for institutional development shall be based on the nonresidential rate that most closely reflects the proposed use (e.g. institutional offices shall pay at the general office rate). 
J.  The PF fee for land uses not shown in the above table will be determined by the city manager or his designee who shall determine such fee based on analysis of the public service impacts of the proposed use in relation to other uses described in subsection (A), above. 
K.  If a development permit is issued that would alter the amount of the PF fee due for the development or require the payment of a new or additional PF fee, any such previously paid fees shall be credited against the new total fee due, as determined by the planning director; provided, however, that, in no event, shall the city refund the fees previously paid because of a change in land use. 
L.  The PF fee for additions to, or replacement or intensification of an existing nonresidential use shall be paid only on the net increase in square footage, net increase in average dry weather flow rate or net increase in site disturbance compared to that which existed as of October 1, 2011. 
M.  Exemptions. The following new developments are exempted from paying the PF fee: 
1.  Second dwelling units on residential single-family lots meeting the definition of "second dwelling or residential unit" established in Chapter 17.04 of the Municipal Code; 
2.  Additions of accessory structures meeting the definition of "accessory building or use" established in Chapter 17.04 of the Municipal Code; 
3.  Addition of habitable living space to an existing single-family unit; and 
4.  Construction of public buildings necessary to provide service to new development. (Ord. 715 § 1 (part), 2004) 
(Ord. No. 840, § 7, 11-22-2011)  
3.28.060 - Public facilities fee collection. 
The public facilities fee shall be imposed upon building permit issuance and shall be paid at the rate in effect at the time of building permit issuance, or at such earlier time as permitted by law as set forth in Government Code Section 66007. Provided, that portion of the public facilities fee based upon the cost of providing sewer or water connections shall be imposed and paid upon application for the service, unless collection at an earlier time is permitted by law. (Ord. 715 § 1 (part), 2004) 
(Ord. No. 840, § 8, 11-22-2011)  
3.28.070 - Public facilities fee fund established—Accounts, appropriations and refunds. 
A.  Accounts and Limited Use of Fees. The revenue raised by payment of this fee shall be placed in a separate and special account and such revenues, along with any interest earnings on the account, shall be used solely to: 
1.  Pay for the city's future construction of facilities described in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 3.28.040 above, or to reimburse the city for those described or listed facilities constructed by the city with funds advanced by the city from other resources; or 
2.  Reimburse developers who have been required or permitted by Section 3.28.080 below to install such listed facilities, which are oversized with supplemental size, length or capacity. 
If a fee account has previously been established pursuant to a separate ordinance for deposit of funds from development impact fees, such account shall be deemed to be a PF fee account pursuant to this chapter. The city shall establish and implement necessary accounting control to ensure that the fee funds are properly deposited and appropriated in accordance with this chapter and other legal requirements. 
B.  Appropriations. The city, as part of the annual budget and capital improvements programming process shall, each year, identify the public facility projects anticipated to be funded in whole or in part with the PF fees. The recommendations shall be based upon the annual review set forth in Section 3.28.030 and other such information as may be relevant. 
The recommendations shall be consistent with the provisions of this chapter, the specific fee resolutions, applicable legal requirements and guidelines to be adopted by the city council. 
C.  Refunds. The revenue raised through the imposition of the PF fees is intended to fund public facilities that mitigate the impacts of new development. In accordance with Government Code Section 66001 the city may continue to collect PF fees until the identified public facilities improvement program is complete. Upon completion of the program, the city shall issue PF fee refunds in accordance with Government Code Section 66001, subsections (e) and (f). 
D.  Abandonment of development after initiation of construction. A property owner who has paid a PF fee for an impact producing development for which a building permit has been issued and construction initiated, but which is abandoned prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, shall not be eligible for a refund unless the uncompleted building is completely demolished and any utility service is disconnected. Application for a refund shall be made upon forms provided by the city. Upon receipt of a complete application for refund, the city manager shall review the application and documentary evidence submitted by the applicant as well as other information and evidence as may be deemed relevant and make a determination of whether a refund is due. Refunds by direct payment shall be made following an affirmative determination by the city manager. (Ord. 715 § 1 (part), 2004) 
(Ord. No. 840, § 9, 11-22-2011)  
3.28.080 - Credits and reimbursements. 
A.  Credit for Developer Construction of Facilities. Whenever a developer is required, as a condition of approval of a development permit, to construct a public facility described in the City's Public Facilities Finance Plan, and when such construction is necessary to ensure efficient and timely construction of the facilities network, a credit against the PF fee, which would otherwise be charged pursuant to this article on the development project, shall be offered. The credit shall not include the portion of the improvement needed to provide services or mitigate the need for the facility or the burdens created by the development. This credit provision is supplemental to the provisions relating to reimbursement in the city's subdivision ordinance and Government Code Sections 66000 and following. 
B.  Overlap with Other Fees. To the extent that the PF fee includes components for financing projects already included in fees collected under other city ordinances, such other fees, when paid, shall be a credit against the appropriate components of the PF fee. 
C.  Overlap with Bond Financing Districts. To the extent that some or all of the projects proposed to be financed by the PF fee are financed through a community facilities district, special assessment district or other financing mechanism, participation in such other financing mechanism shall be a credit against the appropriate component of the PF fee. (Ord. 715 § 1 (part), 2004) 
(Ord. No. 840, § 10, 11-22-2011)  
3.28.090 - Appeals and exemptions. 
A.  Appeals. An appeal of any decision of the city pursuant to this chapter shall be made pursuant to Government Code Section 66020. 
B.  Exemptions. A developer of any project subject to the PF fee may apply to the city for a reduction or adjustment to that fee, or a waiver of that fee, based upon: 
1.  The absence of a reasonable relationship or nexus between the impacts of that development and either the amount of the fee charged or the type of facilities to be financed; or 
2.  A lack of proportionality between the impacts of that development and either the amount of the fee charged or the type of facilities to be financed. 
The application shall be made in writing and filed with the city clerk not later than ten days prior to the public hearing on the development permit application for the project. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of waiver, reduction or adjustment. The city council shall consider the application at the public hearing on the permit application or at a separate hearing held within sixty days after the filing of the fee adjustment application, whichever is later. The decision of the city council shall be final. If a reduction, adjustment or waiver is granted, any change in use within the project shall invalidate the waiver, adjustment or reduction of the fee. 
If the city council grants an exemption to an impact producing development resulting in a waiver in whole or in part of PF fees otherwise due, the amount of the PF fee waived shall be provided by the city from other funds which shall be deposited in the public facilities fund. 
(Ord. 715 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.28.100 - Interpretation and conflict. 
A.  Liberal Construction. This chapter shall be liberally construed in order to effectuate its purposes. 
B.  To the extent of any conflict between other city ordinances or regulations and this chapter, this chapter shall be controlling. 
C.  Validity of Proceedings. The inadvertent failure of any person to receive a notice, resolution order or other matter shall not affect in any way whatsoever the validity of any proceeding taken pursuant to this chapter or prevent the city from proceeding with any hearing so noticed. 
(Ord. 715 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.28.110 - Alternative methods of financing public facilities. 
This chapter provides a method for financing the construction of public facilities. This chapter does not limit the application of any other state laws or city ordinances or procedures that provide for the financing of public facilities. The city may use these provisions instead of, or in conjunction with, any other available method of financing part of all of the costs of providing public facilities. 
(Ord. 715 § 1 (part), 2004)  
Chapter 3.32 - COST RECOVERY—FEE AND SERVICE CHARGE SYSTEM 
 
3.32.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this chapter are: 
A.  To establish and codify a system of fees for the recovery of the costs of the city in providing certain services, products and regulatory activities. 
B.  To provide for the collection and periodic review of such fees. 
(Ord. 717 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.32.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Applicant" means the individual or entity requesting any service from the city. 
B.  "City" means the City of Rohnert Park, Sonoma County, California. 
C.  "City clerk" means the city clerk of the City of Rohnert Park or his/her designee. 
D.  "City council" means the city council as the legislative body of the city. 
E.  "City manager" means the city manager of the City of Rohnert Park or his/her designee. 
F.  "Cost Recovery Fee" means any fee established under this chapter to recover the costs of the city in providing a service. 
G.  "Service" means: (1) any activity provided by the city for the direct and measurable benefit of specific individuals, entities or properties; or (2) any activity provided by the city in response to the specific request of individuals or entities; or (3) any regulatory oversight provided by the city that can be reasonably attributed to activities affecting specific individual, entities or properties. 
(Ord. 717 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.32.030 - General provisions—Applicability. 
A.  Categories of Costs to be Recovered. The following will be considered in establishing any cost recovery fee: 
1.  Direct costs including, but not limited to, salaries, wages, overtime, fringe benefits, contract services and any other direct expense incurred in providing the service; 
2.  Indirect costs including, but not limited to, maintenance and operations of city buildings and equipment, communication expenses, computer costs, printing and reproduction, vehicle expenses, insurance, debt service, depreciation expenses and other indirect costs when distributed as a percentage of direct costs; 
3.  General overhead including, but not limited to, the costs of the city, its city council, its officials and departments distributed as a percentage of direct cost. 
B.  Annual Review. Annually and in conjunction with the city's budget process, the city manager shall make or cause to be made a written report to the city council on the cost recovery program for the next fiscal year. The report shall be considered by the city council at a public hearing and shall include the following information: 
1.  The services for which cost recovery fees are charged; 
2.  The amount of the cost recovery fee charged for each service; 
3.  The percentage of actual costs recovered by each cost recovery fee; 
4.  Recommendations for modifications to the services for which cost recovery fees are charged, the amounts of cost recovery fees or the percentage of costs recovered in order to assure that the cost recovery fees continue to recover the reasonable and proportional share of costs from applicants requesting services. 
C.  Term. This chapter shall remain in effect unless and until repealed, amended or modified by the city council under applicable law. 
(Ord. 717 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.32.040 - Cost recovery fees established. 
A.  Established. Cost recovery fees are to be established by resolution and are applicable to all requests for any service to support the cost of providing the service or services requested. 
B.  Schedule of Fees. The city council shall, by resolution, set forth (1) the list of services for which cost recovery fees are established, (2) the portion of the actual cost that is to be recovered through each cost recovery fee, and (3) the specific amount of the cost recovery fee. 
The cost recovery fees shall not exceed the reasonable costs incurred by the city in providing the services nor shall the cost recovery fees exceed any maximum limit prescribed by State law. 
(Ord. 717 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.32.050 - Cost recovery fees—Collection. 
A.  Fees of one thousand dollars or less. Any cost recovery fee under one thousand dollars shall be paid by applicant at the time of the request for services. 
B.  Fees of More than One Thousand Dollars. For any cost recovery fee exceeding one thousand dollars, the city may enter into an agreement with the applicant to provide for payment, with appropriate allowance for indirect costs and overhead, as the costs giving rise to the cost recovery fees are incurred. The form and content of such agreement is subject to city council approval. 
C.  Collection Procedures. The city manager, upon consultation with the head of each city department affected by any cost recovery fee, is authorized and directed to issue administrative procedures consistent with this chapter to facilitate the provisions of this chapter, including the establishment and collection of the cost recovery fees. 
(Ord. 717 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.32.060 - Protests and appeals. 
A.  Protest. An applicant may protest the imposition of any cost recovery fee only after paying such fee and by filing a written protest specifying the reasons for such protest with the city manager within thirty days of such payment. Within thirty days of the filing of such protest, the city manager shall determine whether the costs recovery fee or any part of it was incorrectly determined and/or inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter and so inform the applicant and the city council in writing. 
B.  Appeal. To the extent that the applicant is not satisfied with the city manager's decision, the applicant may appeal all or part of the decision in writing to the city clerk with copy to the city manager. Within thirty days of the filing of such appeal, the city council, by resolution, shall establish a date for a public hearing on such appeal which date shall be at least thirty, but not more than ninety days from the date of such resolution. At the conclusion of such hearing, the city council may adjust the amount of the cost recovery fee and/or the percentage share based upon expressed findings that the adjustment is necessary in order to assure that the amount to be paid does not exceed the reasonable costs incurred by the city in providing the service. The determination of the city council is final. 
(Ord. 717 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.32.070 - Interpretation and conflict. 
A.  Liberal Construction. This chapter shall be liberally construed in order to effectuate its intent and purposes. 
B.  Conflict. To the extent of any conflict between other city ordinance, resolution or regulation and this chapter, this chapter shall control. 
C.  Validity. The failure of any person to receive a notice, resolution order or other matter shall not affect in any way whatsoever the validity of any proceeding taken pursuant to this chapter or prevent the city from proceeding with any hearing so noticed. 
(Ord. 717 § 1 (part), 2004)  
Chapter 3.36 - AFFORDABLE HOUSING LINKAGE FEE 
 
3.36.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to: (1) implement the goals and objectives of the housing element of the city of Rohnert Park, (2) mitigate the housing impacts caused by new, changed, and expanded nonresidential development in the city of Rohnert Park, and (3) provide housing affordable to persons of low and moderate income. 
(Ord. 771 § 2 (part), 2006)  
3.36.020 - Definitions. 
The following words and expressions when used in this chapter shall for the purpose of this chapter have meanings as follows: 
"Addition" means adding gross square feet to an existing nonresidential development project subject to this section. 
"Affordable housing" means for sale or rental housing, the total cost of monthly payments for which does not exceed the amount set forth in Health and Safety Code Sections 50050 and following. 
"Affordable housing linkage fee" means the affordable housing linkage fee imposed upon nonresidential development. 
"Changed nonresidential development" means the transition of existing nonresidential space from one type of use to another which results in an increase in the density of employment within the space. 
"City manager" means the city manager of the city of Rohnert Park or his or her designee. 
"Development or development project" means any project undertaken for the purpose of development, including new, expanded, remodeled, or changed nonresidential development. Development includes a project involving the approval of a tentative map or involving the issuance of a permit for construction, but not a permit to operate. 
"Director of community development" means the director of community development of the city of Rohnert Park or his or her designee. 
"Expanded nonresidential development" means construction that results in a net increase in the gross square footage of an existing nonresidential development. 
"Gross square feet" or "gross square footage" means the area included within the surrounding walls of a nonresidential development as determined by the director of community development. This area does not include enclosed parking for vehicles. 
"Linkage fee" means a monetary exaction which is charged by the city to fund the construction or provision of affordable housing units. 
"Low and moderate income" means a household with total annual income at or below the limits set forth in Health and Safety Code Sections 50050 and following. 
"Nexus study" means the Sonoma County Workforce Housing Linkage Fee Study published by Economic and Planning Systems, Inc. 
"Remodeled nonresidential development" means all interior tenant or owner improvements to existing nonresidential space which result in an increase in the density of employment within the space. 
(Ord. 771 § 2 (part), 2006)  
3.36.030 - Affordable housing linkage fee for nonresidential development. 
A.  Affordable Housing Linkage Fee. Developers of nonresidential projects must pay the affordable housing linkage fee for nonresidential development in the amount set forth by city council resolution. 
B.  Alternatives to Payment of Affordable Housing Linkage Fee. 
1.  Dedication of Land. As an alternative to the payment of the affordable housing linkage fee, a developer of a nonresidential project may submit a request to mitigate the impacts of his or her proposed development by dedicating land. The city council may approve such a request if it determines that the proposed dedication will further affordable housing opportunities in the city to an equal or greater extent than the payment of the affordable housing linkage fee or construction of affordable units. 
2.  Construction of Units. As an alternative to the payment of the affordable housing linkage fee, a developer of a nonresidential project may submit a request to mitigate the impacts of his or her proposed development by constructing units affordable to very-low and low-income persons. The city council may approve such a request if it determines that the proposed dedication will further affordable housing opportunities in the city to an equal or greater extent than the payment of the affordable housing linkage fee or dedication of land. 
C.  Time of Payment. The requirements of this chapter must be satisfied before building permit issuance or, where a building permit is not required, the issuance of a use permit for the new, expanded, remodeled, or changed nonresidential development. 
D.  Annual Review. The city council will annually review the affordable housing linkage fee requirement to determine whether it is reasonably related to the impacts of development and whether the described affordable housing units are still needed. 
(Ord. 771 § 2 (part), 2006)  
3.36.040 - Application. 
A.  Determination of Development Projects. The affordable housing linkage fee requirement will be applied to nonresidential development projects involving the construction of a new building, construction of additional gross square footage to existing buildings, and interior remodels that increase the employment density, and changes in use that do not require interior remodels but that increase the employee density of the nonresidential development as determined by the director of community development. 
B.  Determination of Land Uses. Nonresidential land uses will be divided into three classifications: commercial, retail, and industrial. The director of community development determines the land use classifications that best describe the nonresidential development, or portion thereof in the case of "mixed use" developments, for the purposes of assigning the fee to be charged. The director of community development shall use the applicable table set forth in the city council resolution establishing the specific affordable unit or housing linkage fee requirements to determine the appropriate classification. 
C.  Change of Land Use. When the director of community development determines that a change of use has been requested to convert existing space from: (1) commercial to industrial or retail, or (2) industrial to retail, a fee equal to the difference in the per square foot fee must be paid prior to the issuance of a use permit. A change of use from residential to nonresidential is subject to the same fee calculation as new construction. 
(Ord. 771 § 2 (part), 2006)  
3.36.050 - Fee adjustment. 
A.  Adjustment. A developer of any project subject to the affordable housing linkage fee may apply to the director of community development for a reduction in, an adjustment to the requirement, or a waiver of the fee, if he or she can demonstrate the absence of any reasonable relationship between the impacts of that development and the fee charged. The application shall be made in writing and filed with the community development director no later than the time of application for a building permit authorizing construction of the project that is subject to the fee or, where a building permit is not required, a use permit. The application shall state completely and in detail both the applicant's factual basis and legal theory for adjustment or waiver and compare its proposal with the analysis set forth in the nexus study. The director of community development shall consider the application and render a decision in writing within thirty days. The decision of the director of community development is appealable as set forth below. 
B.  Appeal Procedure. A decision of the director of community development on an application for a fee reduction, adjustment or waiver may be appealed to the city manager. Any person wishing to appeal a decision of the director of community development shall file an appeal with the city clerk not later than ten days from the date of issuance of the written decision of the director of community development. The written appeal shall state completely and in detail the factual and legal grounds for the appeal. The city manager shall consider the appeal at a public hearing within sixty days after the filing of the appeal. The decision of the city manager is final. 
C.  Cost for Reduction, Adjustment, or Waiver Request or Appeal. The cost of the request for a fee adjustment and appeal shall be borne by the applicant. 
D.  Refund of Fee. If the affordable housing linkage fee is paid and the building permit is later canceled or voided, or if a use permit which triggers the application of the fee fails to vest within the terms of the use permit, the director of community development may, upon written request of the developer, order return of the fee and interest earned on it less administrative costs if: (1) the fees paid have not been committed, and (2) work on the private development project has not progressed to a point that would permit commencement of a new, changed, or expanded use for which an affordable housing linkage fee would be payable. 
(Ord. 771 § 2 (part), 2006)  
3.36.060 - Use of affordable housing linkage fees. 
A.  Use and Disbursement of Monies in the Fund. Monies in the affordable housing linkage fund shall be used in accordance with and in support of activities to implement the city's adopted housing element. Activities shall be limited to direct expenditure for capital projects or incidental noncapital expenditures, related to capital projects, including, but not limited to, land acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, subsidization, counseling or assistance to other governmental entities, private organizations or individuals to expand affordable housing opportunities to low- and moderate-income households. Monies in the affordable housing linkage fund may be disbursed, hypothecated, collateralized, or otherwise employed for these purposes from time to time as the director of community development determines is appropriate to accomplish the purposes of the affordable housing fund. These uses include, but are not limited to, assistance to housing development corporations, equity participation loans, grants, predevelopment loan funds, participation leases, loans to develop affordable housing or other public/private partnership arrangements. The affordable housing funds may be expended for the benefit of both rental or owner-occupied housing. 
B.  Accounting of Fees. All affordable housing linkage fees shall be deposited into a segregated account and all expenditures of these funds shall be documented and included in an annual report which shall be available for public inspection. 
(Ord. 771 § 2 (part), 2006)  
Title 5 - BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS  
Chapter 5.04 - BUSINESS LICENSES—GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
5.04.010 - Definitions. 
A.  "Average number of persons employed," as used in this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12, shall be determined by ascertaining the total number of hours of service performed by all employees of applicant within the city during the previous calendar year, and dividing the total number of hours of service thus obtained by the number of hours of service constituting a year's work of one full-time employee according to the custom of laws governing such employment. In computing the average number of persons employed, a fraction of one-half or more of the customary or equal annual full-time employees shall be considered as one additional employee. For the purpose of this section, the term "person employed" includes proprietors and persons who have an interest in the business as well as relatives and members of the family who render services. 
B.  "Business," as used in this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12, includes professions, trades, and occupations and all and every kind of calling whether or not carried on for profit. 
C.  "City" as used in this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12, means the city of Rohnert Park, a municipal corporation of the state of California, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form. 
D.  "Collector," as used in this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12 means the city manager or his designee. 
E.  "Gross receipts," as used in this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12, shall include the total of amounts actually received or receivable from sales and the total amounts actually received or receivable for the performance of any act or service, whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not such act or service is done as a part of or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares or merchandise. Included in "gross receipts" shall be all receipts, cash, credits, and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom, on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever. Excluded from "gross receipts" shall be the following: 
1.  Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales. 
2.  Credit allowed on property accepted as part of the purchase price and which property may later be sold; 
3.  Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser; 
4.  Such part of the sale price of property returned by purchasers upon rescission of the contract of sale as is refunded either in cash or by credit; 
5.  Amounts collected for others where the business is acting as an agent or trustee to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom collected, provided the agent or trustee has furnished the collector with the names and addresses of the others and the amounts paid to them; 
6.  That portion of the receipts of a general contractor which represents payments to subcontractors; provided that: 
a.  Such subcontractors are licensed under this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12; and 
b.  The general contractor furnishes the collector with the names and addresses of the subcontractors and the amounts paid each subcontractor; 
7.  Receipts of refundable deposits, except that refundable deposits forfeited and taken into income of the business shall not be excluded. 
F.  "Person," as used in this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12 includes all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, Massachusetts businesses, or common law trusts, societies, and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the city, other than as an employee. 
G.  "Sale," as used in this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12 includes the transfer, in any manner or by any means whatsoever, of title to property for a consideration; the serving, supplying or furnishing for a consideration of any property; and a transaction whereby the possession of property is transferred and the seller retains the title as security for the payment of the price shall likewise be deemed a sale. The foregoing definitions include any transaction which is or which, in effect, results in a sale within the contemplation of law. 
H.  "Sworn statement," as used in this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12 means an affidavit sworn to before a person authorized to take oaths, or a declaration or certificate made under penalty of perjury. 
(Ord. 201 § 1, 1973)  
5.04.020 - Effect on other ordinances. 
Persons required to pay a license tax for transacting and carrying on any business under this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12 shall not be relieved from the payment of any license tax for the privilege of doing such business required under any other ordinance of the city, and shall remain-subject to the regulatory provisions of other ordinances. 
No license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12 shall be construed as authorizing the conduct or continuance of any illegal or unlawful business. 
(Ord. 201 § 2, 1973)  
5.04.030 - License and tax payment required. 
There are imposed upon the businesses; trades, professions, callings, and corporations specified in this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12 license taxes in the amounts hereinafter prescribed. It is unlawful for any person to transact and carry on any business, trade, profession, calling or occupation in the city without first having procured a license from the city to do so and paying the tax hereinafter prescribed or without complying with any and all applicable provisions of this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12. 
This section shall not be construed to require any person to obtain a license prior to doing business within the city if such requirement conflicts with applicable statutes of the United States or of the state of California. Persons not so required to obtain a license prior to doing business within the city nevertheless shall be liable for payment of the tax imposed by this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12. 
(Ord. 201 § 3, 1973)  
5.04.040 - Branch establishments. 
A separate license must be obtained for: 
A.  Each branch establishment or location of the business transacted and carried on, and 
B.  For each separate type of business at the same location. Each license shall authorize the licensee to transact and carry on only the business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in such license. If a separate federal income tax return is filed for a particular business, it shall, for purposes of this section, be conclusively presumed to be a separate business for which a separate license is required. 
(Ord. 201 § 4, 1973)  
5.04.050 - Constitutional apportionment. 
None of the license taxes provided for by this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12 shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of the equal protection and due process clauses of the constitutions of the United States and the state of California. 
In any case where a license tax is believed by a licensee or applicant for a license to place an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of such constitutional clauses, he may apply to the collector for an adjustment of the tax. Such application may be made before, at, or within six months after payment of the prescribed license tax. The applicant shall, by sworn statement and supporting testimony, show its method of business and such information as the collector may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden or violation. The collector shall then conduct an investigation, and, after having first obtained the written approval of the city attorney, shall fix as the license tax for the applicant, an amount that is reasonable and nondiscriminatory, or, if the license tax has already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount over and above the license tax so fixed. In fixing the license tax to be charged, the collector shall have the power to base the license tax upon any measure which will reasonably assure that the license tax assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on businesses of like nature so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the license tax as prescribed by this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12. 
(Ord. 201 § 5, 1973)  
5.04.060 - Exemptions. 
A.  Nothing in this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12 shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person transacting and carrying on any business exempt by virtue of the constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or of the state of California from the payment of such taxes as are herein prescribed. 
B.  Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this section shall file a sworn statement with the collector stating the facts upon which exemption is claimed, and in the absence of such statement substantiating the claims, such person shall be liable for the payment of the taxes imposed by this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12. 
C.  The collector shall, upon a proper showing contained in the sworn statement, issue a license to such person claiming exemption under this section without payment of the city of the license tax required by this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12. 
D.  The collector, after giving notice and a reasonable opportunity for hearing to a licensee, may revoke any license granted pursuant to the provisions of this section upon information that the licensee is not entitled to the exemption as provided herein. 
E.  The following businesses and persons shall be exempt from taxation under this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12: 
1.  Banks, as defined under Article 13, Section 16 of the California Constitution; 
2.  Insurers as defined under Article 13, Section 14-4/5 of the California Constitution; 
3.  Businesses involved in the manufacture, importation and sale of alcoholic beverages; 
4.  Cafe musicians as that term is defined in Section 16000.5 of the California Business and Professions Code; 
5.  Veterans, as defined in Sections 16001 and 16001.5 of the California Business and Professions Code; 
6.  Businesses carried on exclusively for the benefit of philanthropic, social service, benevolent or patriotic purposes. 
7.  Vendors whose business is conducted exclusively in connection with special events offered by: (1) the community services department of the city, or (2) other city-sponsored special events. For the purposes of this section the term "vendor" shall refer only to those vendors selling produce, pre-packaged food, or arts and craft items. 
(Ord. 289 § 1, 1975; Ord. 201 § 6, 1973) 
(Ord. No. 849, § 2, 10-23-2012)  
5.04.070 - Contents of license. 
Every person required to have a license under the provisions of this chapter and chapters 5.08 and 5.12 shall make application as hereinafter prescribed for the same to the collector of the city; and, upon the payment of the prescribed license tax, the collector shall issue such person a license which shall contain the following information: 
A.  The name of the person to whom the license is issued; 
B.  The business licensed; 
C.  The place where such business is to be transacted and carried on; 
D.  The date of the expiration of such license; and 
E.  Such other administrative information as may be necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12. 
Whenever the tax imposed under the provisions of this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12 is measured by the number of vehicles, devices, machines, or other pieces of equipment used, or whenever the license tax is measured by the gross receipts from the operation of such items, the collector shall issue only one license; provided, that he may issue for each tax period for which the license tax has been paid one identification sticker, tag, plate, or symbol for each item included in the measure of the tax or used in a business where the tax is measured by the gross receipts from such items. 
(Ord. 201 § 7, 1973)  
5.04.080 - Application—First license. 
Upon a person making application for the first license to be issued hereunder or for a newly-established business, such person shall furnish to the collector a sworn statement upon a form provided by the collector, setting forth the following information: 
A.  The exact nature or kind of business for which a license is requested; 
B.  The place where such business is to be carried on, and if the same is not to be carried on at any permanent place of business the places of residences of the owners of same; 
C.  In the event that application is made for the issuance of a license to a person doing business under a fictitious name, the application shall set forth the names and places of residences of those owning said business; 
D.  In the event that the application is made for the issuance of a license to a corporation or a partnership, the application shall set forth the names and places of residences of the officers or partners thereof; 
E.  In all cases where the amount of license tax to be paid is measured by gross receipt or average number of persons employed, the application shall set forth such information as may be therein required and as may be necessary to determine the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant; 
F.  Any further administrative information which the collector may require to enable him to issue the type of license applied for. 
If the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant is measured by gross receipts or average number of persons employed, he shall estimate the gross receipts or average number of persons to be employed for a period to be covered by the license to be issued. Such estimate, if accepted by the collector as reasonable, shall be used in determining the amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant; provided, however, the amount of the license tax so determined shall be tentative only, and such person shall, within thirty days after the expiration of the period for which such license was issued, furnish the collector with a sworn statement, upon a form furnished by the collector, showing the gross receipts or average number of persons employed during the period of such license, and the license tax for such period shall be finally ascertained and paid in the manner provided by this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12 for the ascertaining and paying of renewal license taxes for other businesses, after deducting from the payment found to be due, the amount paid at the time such first license was issued. 
The collector shall not issue to any such person another license for the same or any other business, until such person shall have furnished to him the sworn statement and paid the license tax as herein required. 
(Ord. 201 § 8, 1973)  
5.04.090 - Renewal license. 
In all cases, the applicant for the renewal of a license shall submit to the collector, on or before January 1st, an application for renewal containing a sworn statement upon a form to be provided by the collector, setting forth such information concerning the applicant's business during the preceding calendar year as may be required by the collector to enable him to verify the amount of the license tax to be paid by said applicant pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12. 
(Ord. 201 § 9, 1973)  
5.04.100 - Statements and records. 
No statements shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of the same preclude the city from collecting by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable hereunder. Such statement and each of the several items therein contained shall be subject to audit and verification by the collector, his deputies, or authorized employees of the city, who are authorized to examine, audit, and inspect such books and records of any licensee or applicant for license, as may be necessary in their judgment to verify or ascertain the amount of license fee due. 
All persons subject to the provisions of this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and Chapter 5.12 shall keep complete records of business transactions, including sales, receipts, purchases, and other expenditures, and shall retain all such records for examination by the collector. Such records shall be maintained for a period of at least three years. No person required to keep records under this section shall refuse to allow authorized representatives of the collector to examine said records at reasonable times and places. 
(Ord. 201 § 10, 1973)  
5.04.110 - Information confidential. 
It is unlawful for the collector or any person having an administrative duty under the provisions of this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12 to make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any person required to obtain a license, or pay a license tax, or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth in any statement or application, or to permit any statement or application, or copy of either, or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person. Provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent: 
A.  The disclosure to, or the examination of records and equipment by, another city official, employee, or agent for collection of taxes for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing any provisions of this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12, or collecting taxes imposed hereunder; 
B.  The disclosure of information to, or the examination of records by, federal or state officials, or the tax officials of another city or county, or city and county, if a reciprocal arrangement exists, or to a grand jury or court of law, upon subpoena; 
C.  The disclosure of information and results of examination of records of particular taxpayers, or relating to particular taxpayers, to a court of law in a proceeding brought to determine the existence of amount of any license tax liability of the particular taxpayers to the city; 
D.  The disclosure after the filing of a written request to that effect, to the taxpayer himself, or to his successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, of information as to the items included in the measure of any paid tax, any unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties, further provided, however, that the city attorney approves each such disclosure and that the collector may refuse to make any disclosure referred to in this paragraph when in his opinion the public interest would suffer thereby; 
E.  The disclosure of the names and addresses of persons to whom licenses have been issued, and the general type or nature of their business; 
F.  The disclosure by way of public meeting or otherwise of such information as may be necessary to the city council in order to permit it to be fully advised as to the facts when a taxpayer files a claim for refund of license taxes, or submits an offer of compromise with regard to a claim asserted against him by the city for license taxes, or when acting upon any other matter; 
G.  The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or business done in the city. 
(Ord. 201 § 11, 1973)  
5.04.120 - Failure to file statement or corrected statement. 
If any person fails to file any required statement within the time prescribed, or if, after demand therefor made by the collector, he fails to file a corrected statement, or if the collector is not satisfied with the information supplied in statements or applications filed, or if any person subject to the tax imposed by this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12 fails to apply for a license, the collector may determine the amount of license tax due from such person by means of such information as he may be able to obtain and shall give written notice thereof to such person. 
(Ord. 201 § 12, 1973)  
5.04.130 - Appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the collector with respect to the issuance or refusal to issue such license may appeal to the council by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk of the council within fifteen days after receipt of written notice of the decision of the collector. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing such appeal. The clerk of the council shall give notice to such person of the time and place of hearing by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States post office at Rohnert Park, California, postage prepaid, addressed to such person at his last known address. The council shall have authority to determine all questions raised on such appeal. No such determination shall conflict with any substantive provision of this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12. 
(Ord. 201 § 13, 1973)  
5.04.140 - Additional power of collector. 
In addition to all other power conferred upon him, the collector shall have the power, for good cause shown, to extend the time for filing any required sworn statement or application for a period not exceeding thirty days, and in such case to waive any penalty that would otherwise have accrued, except that seven percent simple interest shall be added to any tax determined to be payable from the date such tax is determined to have been due. 
(Ord. 201 § 14, 1973)  
5.04.150 - License nontransferable—Changed location and ownership. 
No license issued pursuant to this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12 shall be transferable; provided, that where a license is issued authorizing a person to transact and carry on a business at a particular place, such licensee may upon application therefor and paying a fee of five dollars have a license amended to authorize the transacting and carrying on of such business under the license at some other location to which the business is or is to be moved. Provided further, that transfer, whether by sale or otherwise, to another person under such circumstances that the real or ultimate ownership after the transfer is substantially similar to the ownership existing before the transfer, shall not be prohibited by this section. For the purpose of this section, stockholders, bondholders, partnerships, or other persons holding an interest in a corporation or other entity herein defined to be a person are regarded as having the real or ultimate ownership of such corporation or other entity. 
(Ord. 201 § 15, 1973)  
5.04.160 - Duplicate license. 
A duplicate license may be issued by the collector to replace any license previously issued hereunder which has been lost or destroyed upon the licensee filing statement of such fact, and at the time of filing such statement, paying to the collector a duplicate license fee of five dollars. 
(Ord. 201 § 16, 1973)  
5.04.170 - Posting and keeping licenses. 
A.  Any licensee transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is carried on. 
B.  Any licensee transacting and carrying on business but not operating at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license upon his person at all times while transacting and carrying on the business for which it is issued. 
C.  Whenever identifying stickers, tags, plates, or symbols have been issued for each vehicle, device, machine, or other piece of equipment included in the measure of a license tax, the person to whom such stickers, tags, plates, or symbols have been issued shall keep firmly affixed upon each vehicle, device, machine, or piece of equipment the identifying sticker, tag, plates, or symbol which has been issued therefor at such locations as are designated by the collector. Such sticker, tag, plate, or symbol shall not be removed from any vehicle, device, machine, or piece of equipment kept in use, during the period for which the sticker, tag, plate, or symbol is issued. 
D.  No person shall fail to affix as required herein any identifying sticker, tag, plate, or symbol to the vehicle, device, machine, or piece of equipment, for which it has been issued at the location designated by the collector, or to give away, sell, or transfer such identifying sticker, tag, plate, or symbol to another person, or to permit its use by another person. 
(Ord. 201 § 17, 1973)  
5.04.180 - License tax—How and when payable. 
Fifty percent of any annual license tax established by this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12 shall be due and payable on July 1, 1973, for the period commencing on July 1, 1973, and ending December 31, 1973, thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided, all license taxes under the provisions of this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12 shall be due and payable in advance on the first day of January of each year; provided that license taxes covering new operations, commenced after the first day of January, may be prorated fifty percent for the final six months of the license period. 
(Ord. 201 § 18, 1973)  
5.04.190 - Delinquent taxes—Penalties installment payment. 
For failure to pay a license tax when due, the collector shall add a penalty of twenty-five percent of the license tax on the first day of each month after the due date thereof; providing that the amount of such penalty to be added shall in no event exceed fifty percent of the amount of the license tax due. When the last day of the month falls on a day when the city hall is closed, payment of the license tax due may be made on the first working day of the next month without penalty. Penalties in such cases shall attach on the second working day of the succeeding month. Any license issued pursuant to this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12 may be suspended by the collector upon the failure of the licensee to pay any charges imposed by this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12 or to file reports as required by this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12 within sixty days after such charges or reports become delinquent. No license shall be issued, nor shall one which has been suspended or revoked be reinstated or reissued, to any person, who, at the time of applying therefor, is indebted to the city for any delinquent license taxes, unless such person, with the consent of the collector, enters into a written agreement with the city, through the collector, to pay such delinquent taxes, plus seven percent simple annual interest upon the unpaid balance, in monthly installments, or oftener, extending over a period of not to exceed one year. 
In any agreement so entered into, such person shall acknowledge the obligation owed to the city and agree that, in the event of failure to make timely payment of any installment, the whole amount unpaid shall become immediately due and payable and that his current license shall be revocable by the collector upon thirty days notice. In the event legal action is brought by the city to enforce collection of any amount included in the agreement, such person shall pay all costs of suit incurred by the city or its assignee, including a reasonable attorney's fee. The execution of such an agreement shall not prevent the prior accrual of penalties on unpaid balances at the rate provided hereinabove, but no penalties shall accrue on account of taxes included in the agreement, after the execution of the agreement, and the payment of the first installment and during such time as such person shall not be in breach of the agreement. 
(Ord. 201 § 19, 1973)  
5.04.200 - Refunds of overpayments. 
No refund of any overpayment of taxes imposed by this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12 shall be allowed in whole or in part unless a claim for refund is filed with the collector within a period of six months from the last day of the calendar month following the period for which the overpayment was made, and all such claims for refund of the amount of the overpayment must be filed with the collector on forms furnished by him. Upon the filing of such a claim and when he determines that an overpayment has been made, the collector may refund the amount overpaid. 
(Ord. 201 § 20, 1973)  
5.04.210 - No fixed place of business—Tax rate determination. 
Every person not having a fixed place of business within the city who engages in business within the city shall pay a license tax at a rate commensurate with the amount of business done in the city, the amount of time spent in the city and such other factors as may be determined by the city to compute a just and proper tax. In making the determination of the rate and amount of such just and proper tax, the tax collector shall use the tax rate paid by comparable businesses doing business and located within the city duly adjusted by factors determined by the city to reflect the proper tax level attributable to such businesses. 
(Ord. 289 § 2, 1975: Ord. 201 § 23, 1973)  
5.04.220 - Rules and regulations. 
The collector may make rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12 as may be necessary or desirable to aid in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12. 
(Ord. 201 § 24, 1973)  
5.04.230 - Enforcement. 
It is the duty of the collector, and he is so directed to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.02, and the chief of police shall render such assistance in the enforcement hereof as may from time to time be required by the collector or the city council. 
The collector in the exercise of the duties imposed upon him hereunder, and acting through his deputies or duly authorized assistants, may examine or cause to be examined any place of business in the city to ascertain whether the provisions of this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12 have been complied with. 
The collector, and each and all of his assistants and any police officer, have the power and authority, upon obtaining an inspection warrant therefor, to enter, free of charge, and at any reasonable time, any place of business required to be licensed herein and demand an exhibition of its license. Any person having such license theretofore issued, in his possession or under his control, who wilfully fails to exhibit the same on demand, is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties provided for by the provisions of this chapter. It is the duty of the collector and each of his assistants to cause a complaint to be filed against any and all persons found to be violating any of said provisions. 
(Ord. 201 § 25, 1973)  
5.04.240 - License tax a debt. 
The amount of any license tax and penalty imposed by the provisions of this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12 shall be deemed a debt to the city. An action may be commenced in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction, for the amount of any delinquent license tax and penalties. 
(Ord. 201 § 26, 1973)  
5.04.250 - Remedies cumulative. 
All remedies prescribed hereunder are cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the city does not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. 201 § 27, 1973)  
5.04.260 - Effect on past actions—Unexpired licenses. 
Neither the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter nor its superseding of any portion of any other ordinance of the city shall in any manner be construed to affect prosecution for any violation of any other ordinance committed prior to June 18, 1973, nor shall it be construed as a waiver of any license or any penal provision applicable to any such violation, nor be construed to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit required by any ordinance to be posted, filed or deposited, and all rights and obligations thereunto appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
Where a license for revenue purposes has been issued to any person by the city and the tax paid for the business for which the license has been issued under the provisions of any ordinance heretofore enacted and the term of such license has not expired, then the license tax prescribed for said business by this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.12 shall have subtracted therefrom the prorated amount of the unexpired license. 
(Ord. 201 § 28, 1973)  
5.04.270 - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 5.08 and 5.12 or knowingly or intentionally misrepresenting to any officer or employee of this city any material fact in procuring the license or permit herein provided for is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 201 § 29, 1973)  
Chapter 5.08 - LICENSE TAX—BUSINESSES IN GENERAL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Prior history: Ords. 201, 289, 426 and 481. 
 
5.08.010 - Classification A—Retail sales. 
Every business engaged in selling to the general public at retail in the goods, wares, merchandise or commodities, including restaurants and other food dispensers, unless otherwise provided for in this chapter and Chapters 5.04 and 5.12 shall pay an annual license tax based upon the average number of persons employed within the city during the previous calendar year at the following rates: 
One employee 	$50.00 
Each additional employee 	$15.00 each 
Maximum 	$5,000.00 
 
New businesses will be prorated for the first year on a quarterly basis. 
(Ord. 594 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 550 § 1 (part), 1991)  
5.08.020 - Classification B—Services. 
Every person engaged in the business of providing a service or similar business or occupation in the city shall pay an annual license tax based upon the average number of persons employed within the city in such service or similar business or occupation during the previous calendar year as set forth in the following schedule: 
One employee 	$50.00 
Each additional employee 	$15.00 each 
Maximum 	$5,000.00 
 
The businesses referred to in this classification include the following plus any similar business or occupation: appliance repair, art galleries, auto rentals, backflow prevention (testing only), bail bonds, barbershops, beauty salons, blueprinting, bookkeeping services, business schools, car wash, catering, cleaners, collection agencies, correspondence schools, credit service, dance studios, day care centers, dental laboratories, draftsman, employment agencies, estimators, finishing schools, furniture refinishing, gardening, golf courses, grinding service, handyman, home child care, hostess service, hydraulic jack service, income tax service, janitorial service, lapidaries, leatherette repair, locksmiths, manicurists, masseuses, medical laboratories, mobile home service, music instruction, nursery schools, parking lots, photography, piano tuners, pool service, publishers, realtors, real estate brokers, real estate salespersons, rental service, rototilling, sawshops, secretarial service, security service, sewer cleaning, shoe repair, sign painters, silver shop repair, swim centers, soft water service, tailoring and dressmaking, taxidermist, telephone answering service, title companies, travel agencies, tree service, wig styling. 
New businesses will be prorated for the first year on a quarterly basis. 
(Ord. 594 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 550 § 1 (part), 1991)  
5.08.030 - Classification C—Professional and semiprofessional. 
Every person engaged in professional, semiprofessional and connected businesses in the city shall pay an annual license tax based upon each professional and semiprofessional engaged within the city in such business during the previous calendar year, according to the following schedule: 
Each professional and semiprofessional 	$200.00 
 
The business referred to in this classification are as follows: advertising, auditors, appraisers, architects, assayers, attorneys, bacteriologists, business or investment counselors, brokers of all types (excluding real estate brokers which are included in Classification B), certified public accountants, chemists, chiropodists, chiropractors, computer programmers, computer consultants, dentists, designers, decorators, electrologists, engineers, engravers, family counselors, financial planners, geologists, health service facilities, insurance or claim adjusters, landscape architects, management and planning consultants, morticians, oculists, opticians or optometrists, orthodontists, orthopedic surgeons, osteopaths, pathologists, psychiatrists, psychologists, physical therapists, physicians, podiatrists, radiologists, surgeons, surveyors, veterinarians or any similar business or occupation. 
Each business licensed under this section shall pay an additional fifteen dollars for each nonprofessional employee, engaged within the city in the operation of the business. 
New businesses will be prorated for the first year on a quarterly basis. 
(Ord. 594 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 550 § 1 (part), 1991)  
5.08.040 - Classification D—General building contractor or subcontractor. 
Every person who conducts the business of general building contractor or subcontractor in the city shall pay an annual license tax based upon the following schedule: 
A. General contractor 	$250.00 a year 
150.00 one-half year 
50.00 one job only 
100.00 Small contractor* 
 
* Small contractor is defined as a general contractor with gross receipts of less than $75,000 for a calendar year. This special status will be granted only after submittal of federal income tax return for the prior year. Tax returns must be submitted every year to retain this status. 
B. Electrical, plumbing, and other subcontractors not specified 	$150.00 a year 
100.00 one-half year 
35.00 one job only 
75.00 Small contractor* 
 
* Small contractor is defined as a subcontractor with gross receipts of less than $75,000 for a calendar year. This special status will be granted only after submittal of federal income tax return for the prior year. Tax returns must be submitted every year to retain this status. 
Half year licenses are from January to June or July to December. 
(Ord. 608 § 1, 1995: Ord. 594 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 550 § 1 (part), 1991)  
5.08.050 - Classification E—Wholesalers. 
Every business engaged in selling goods, wares or merchandise at wholesale except for wholesale salesmen as defined by Business and Professions Code Section 16002, within the city, and every business engaged in manufacturing, processing or fabricating goods, wares or merchandise, shall pay an annual license tax based upon the average number of persons employed within the city during the previous calendar year at the following rates: 
One employee 	$50.00 
Each additional employee 	$15.00 each 
Maximum 	$5,000.00 
 
New businesses will be prorated for the first year on a quarterly basis. 
(Ord. 594 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 550 § 1 (part), 1991)  
Chapter 5.12 - LICENSE TAX—SPECIFICALLY ENUMERATED BUSINESSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Prior history: Ords. 201, 210, 287, 289,400,409 and 426. 
 
5.12.010 - License and tax payment required. 
Every person transacting and carrying on the businesses herein enumerated shall obtain a license and pay a license tax as set out in this chapter. 
(Ord. 593 § 2 (part), 1994: Ord. 550 § 2 (part), 1991)  
5.12.020 - Utilities. 
Every person in the business of operating a public utility within the city, shall obtain a license and pay an annual license tax based upon the average number of persons employed within the city during the previous calendar year at the following rates: 
One employee 	$50.00 
Each additional employee 	$15.00 each 
Maximum 	$5,000.00 
 
(Ord. 593 § 2 (part), 1994: Ord. 550 § 2 (part), 1991)  
5.12.030 - Hospitals. 
Every person carrying on the business of conducting, managing or operating a hospital, rest home, sanitarium, convalescent home or other similar establishment or institution within the city shall pay an annual license tax in the amount of fifty dollars for the first bed and five dollars for each additional bed; provided, however, that any such hospital or sanitarium conducted or carried on by the city or any other political subdivision shall be exempt from the payment of the license tax specified in this section. 
(Ord. 593 § 2 (part), 1994: Ord. 550 § 2 (part), 1991)  
5.12.040 - Rentals. 
A business license tax is imposed upon the business of renting living accommodations as follows: 
Single family, condominium, duplex, triplex, fourplex: 
For the first unit per year 	$50.00 
For each additional unit per year 	$25.00 each 
Apartments, hotels and motels: 
For the first unit per year 	$50.00 
For each additional unit per year 	$5.00 each 
 
The minimum rate applies to each separate location. 
For the purpose of the imposition of the tax hereby imposed, an owner-occupied unit shall not count as a taxable unit. Units shall mean the smallest rental unit let for rent or lease in hotels, motels, apartments, single family homes, duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes, condominiums, mobile homes, or any other structure in which people are housed. 
(Ord. 593 § 2 (part), 1994: Ord. 550 § 2 (part), 1991)  
5.12.050 - Trailer parks and mobile home parks. 
For the business of renting or letting parking space for recreational vehicles, automobile trailers or mobile homes which are used for living quarters or housekeeping purposes, or conducting an automobile trailer park or mobile home park for such trailers, a license fee shall be paid according to the number of trailer spaces within the city for rent or to let as follows: at the rate of fifty dollars per year for the first unit and five dollars for each additional unit. 
(Ord. 593 § 2 (part), 1994: Ord. 550 § 2 (part), 1991)  
5.12.060 - Taxicabs, limousines and independent bus services. 
For the business of operating a taxicab, limousines or independent bus services, which shall include the picking up and/or delivering of passengers within the limits of the city, a charge shall be made for each person or firm engaged in such business which shall be determined by the number of taxicabs operated, and the rate for each such taxicab so operated shall be the sum of seventy-five dollars per year for one taxicab and fifty dollars for each additional taxicab. 
(Ord. 593 § 2 (part), 1994: Ord. 550 § 2 (part), 1991)  
5.12.070 - Motor vehicle delivery. 
Every person who collects, gathers, picks up, loads, or delivers goods, wares or merchandise within the city from or to a point inside or outside the city, by means of a motor vehicle, four or more times within any twelve month period, shall pay a license tax of seventy-five dollars. 
A vehicle delivering to or from a licensed person with a fixed place of business within the city is exempt when the vehicle is the property of the licensed person. 
(Ord. 593 § 2 (part), 1984: Ord. 550 § 2 (part), 1991)  
5.12.080 - Peddlers and solicitors. 
Each peddler or solicitor for retail orders for services, goods, wares, merchandise, property of all kinds, books, maps, pictures, mobile ice cream, candy and any other type of food sales, photographs or enlargements of pictures or photographs, provided such peddler is not dealing in items involved in interstate commerce, shall pay a license tax based upon the duration of activity as follows: 
A.  Fifteen dollars a day, per person; 
B.  One hundred dollars for six months, per person; 
C.  Two hundred dollars a year, per person. 
This classification includes vendors who sell items on private property belonging to others. 
(Ord. 593 § 2 (part), 1994: Ord. 550 § 2 (part), 1991)  
5.12.090 - Astrologers. 
For every person who, within the city, carries on, practices or professes to practice the business or art of astrology, palmistry, phrenology, life readings, fortune-telling, cartomancy, handwriting analysis, chirography, clairvoyance, clairaudience, crystal gazing, hypnotism, mediumship, prophecy, augury, divination, magic, necromancy, numerology, or similar business, trade or calling, and who shall not be prohibited from doing or conducting any of these practices, professions, businesses or callings by any statute of this state, ordinance of the city, or by any other law, and who demands or receives a fee or exhibition thereof at any place where an admission fee is charged, four hundred dollars per quarter or fraction thereof. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to those persons providing bona fide and incidental entertainment and amusement for the guests and patrons of and on the premises of any other business duly licensed by the city for which no separate or additional charge or consideration shall be paid by the guests and patrons or received or accepted by the persons who perform or practice such business or arts. 
(Ord. 593 § 2 (part) 1994: Ord. 550 § 2 (part), 1991)  
5.12.100 - Coin-operated machines. 
Every person who rents, leases or operates any coin-operated weighing, amusement, mechanical or electronic play device, vending or other coin-operated machines (excluding coin-operated car washes and coin or bill operated service stations) in the city shall pay a license fee on gross receipts, directly attributable to the business activities conducted within the city, pursuant to the following: 
All applicable machines or play devices other than laundry machines 	2 percent of gross receipts with no maximum 
Laundry equipment 	.5 percent of gross receipts with no maximum. 
 
(Ord. 593 § 2 (part), 1994: Ord. 550 § 2 (part), 1991)  
5.12.110 - Laundry equipment. 
Every person who rents, leases or operates any laundry equipment, whether or not coin-operated, in the city, shall pay a license fee on his gross receipts, directly attributable to the business activities conducted within the city, pursuant to the schedule applicable to weighing and coin-operated businesses. 
(Ord. 593 § 2 (part) 1994: Ord. 550 § 2 (part), 1991)  
5.12.120 - Junkyards. 
Junkyards and wrecking yards shall pay a tax of five hundred dollars per year. 
(Ord. 593 § 2 (part) 1994: Ord. 550 § 2 (part), 1991)  
5.12.130 - Circuses, carnivals, tent shows and sideshows. 
Circuses, carnivals, tent shows and sideshows shall pay a tax of four hundred dollars per consecutive 24 hours. 
(Ord. 593 § 2 (part) 1994: Ord. 591 § 1, 1994: Ord. 550 § 2 (part), 1991)  
5.12.140 - Auctioneers. 
Every person who auctions property within the city shall pay a license fee of one hundred dollars for the first day and fifty dollars for each additional day during the year; provided, however, no license fee for the privilege of auctioning real estate shall be collected from any real estate auctioneer, whose business is limited exclusively to auctioning real estate, unless he maintains a permanent place of business within the city. 
(Ord. 593 § 2 (part) 1994: Ord. 550 § 2 (part), 1991)  
5.12.150 - Liquidators. 
Liquidators, or any business specializing in conducting "going-out-of-business" sales shall pay the following tax: 
First day 	$150.00 
Each additional day 	75.00 
 
(Ord. 593 § 2 (part) 1994: Ord. 550 § 2 (part), 1991)  
5.12.160 - Theaters. 
Theaters shall pay the following tax: 
A. Indoor: 	
1. 200 seats or smaller 	$100.00 
2. 201 seats or greater 	200.00 
B. Outdoor: 	
1. Less than 100 spaces 	150.00 
 
(Ord. 593 § 2 (part) 1994: Ord. 550 § 2 (part), 1991)  
5.12.170 - Self-storage rental. 
Every person who rents space to the public for storage shall pay one dollar per space per year with a minimum fee of one hundred dollars. 
(Ord. 593 § 2 (part) 1994: Ord. 550 § 2 (part), 1991)  
5.12.180 - Seasonal vendors. 
Any person engaged in seasonal vending to the public (Christmas tree, pumpkin patch or any similar activity) shall pay a business license fee of one hundred dollars per activity. 
(Ord. 593 § 2 (part) 1994: Ord. 550 § 2 (part), 1991)  
Chapter 5.16 - DANCES AND DANCE HALLS 
 
5.16.010 - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms, as used in this chapter shall mean or include: 
A.  "Dance" means any gathering of persons in or upon any premises other than a private home or residence or a class in which instruction in dancing is given for hire, where dancing is participated in. Dances, as defined herein, shall be classified as follows: "General dance" includes any dance to which persons eighteen years of age or older are admitted. "Special dance" includes any dance to which no persons fifteen years of age or younger or twenty-one years of age or older are admitted as participants. 
B.  "Dance hall" means any building or place in which a dance is held. 
C.  "Person" includes any person, copartner-ship, firm, corporation, association, club or any legal entity. 
(Ord. 112 § 1, 1969)  
5.16.020 - Permit required—Compliance with laws. 
It is unlawful for any person to own, conduct, operate, or maintain or to cause or to permit to be conducted, operated, or maintained, any dance hall or to conduct, promote, or sponsor or to cause or to permit to be conducted, promoted, or sponsored any dance within the city without first having obtained a permit from the chief of police. 
Any place or premises where a dance is to be held must conform to all existing ordinances of the city and laws of the state of California. 
(Ord. 112 § 2, 1969)  
5.16.030 - Application for permit. 
Application for a dance permit or dance hall permit shall be made in writing to the chief of police and shall be made in such form and shall contain such information as the chief of police shall require. Every applicant for a permit may be required to furnish such evidence of good moral character as the chief of police shall require. In granting or denying a permit, the chief of police shall give particular consideration to the peace, order, and moral welfare of the public; provided, however, that only one class of dance, as enumerated in Section 5.16.010(A), shall be permitted in any dance hall on the same day up to and including two a.m. of the following day. 
The chief of police may consider but is not limited to, the following factors in issuing or granting a permit: 
A.  The moral character of the applicant; 
B.  Suitability of the premises in relation to the surrounding neighborhood; 
C.  Number of permits in the immediate vicinity; 
D.  Physical suitability of the premises with reference to floor space and lighting; 
E.  Proximity to bar facilities, if any; 
F.  Type of dance to be conducted. 
(Ord. 112 § 3, 1969)  
5.16.040 - Permit—Appeal. 
Any decision of the chief of police either granting or denying an application for a dance or dance hall permit may be appealed to the city council by any interested person within ten days after such decision. The city council may, but shall not be required to hold a public hearing on such appeal. 
(Ord. 112 § 4, 1969)  
5.16.050 - License fees. 
Every person granted a dance hall permit by the chief of police shall pay to the city clerk a license fee of one hundred dollars annually, payable in advance. 
The license fee prescribed in this section is due and payable on a calendar year basis, starting January 1, 1969. Fees for new licenses issued prior to January 1, 1969, or after the first day of January of that year, or in any subsequent calendar year, shall be prorated with regard to the calendar year on a monthly basis. 
The license fee provisions of this section shall not apply to any dance hall used exclusively for any of the following dances: 
A.  Dances of a bona fide social character to which admission is limited strictly on invitation of the person acting as host, and for which no fee, either by way of admission or in any other manner, is charged. 
B.  Dances given by any public agency or by any educational, recreational or social agency, or by any bona fide fraternal, charitable, or religious or benevolent or any other non-profit organization having a regular membership association primarily for mutual, social, mental, political, and civic welfare, to which admission is limited to members and guests, and revenue accruing therefrom to be used exclusively for the benevolent purposes of said organization. 
C.  Dances conducted by any dancing academy or dancing class in which instruction in dancing is given for hire. 
D.  Dance studios previously taxed under the business license ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. 284 § 1, 1975; Ord. 112 § 5, 1969)  
5.16.060 - Regulations. 
A.  Hours. "Special" dances shall be conducted only between the hours of six a.m. and twelve midnight; "general" dances shall be conducted only between the hours of six a.m. and two a.m. of the following day; provided, however, the chief of police may, in his discretion, allow, by order permitting the same, the conduct of "general" dances at other than the hours stated in this subsection. 
B.  Supervision. The chief of police may require that one or more special police officers and/or special police women, satisfactory to the chief of police, be in attendance. The cost of such special police officers shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant and a deposit of such cost may be required in advance. 
C.  Minors Prohibited—Exceptions. No person under eighteen years of age shall enter or be, or shall be permitted to enter or be in any dance hall at any time a "general" dance is being conducted therein, unless such person is accompanied by parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody thereof. 
No person under fifteen years of age shall enter or be, or shall be permitted to enter or be, in any dance hall wherein a "special" dance is being held unless said person is accompanied by parent, guardian, or other person having the care and custody thereof. 
D.  Adults Prohibited. No person twenty-one years of age or older shall attend or be permitted to attend a "Special" dance as a participant therein, unless express provision is set forth by the chief of police in the dance permit. 
E.  Pass-out Checks—Exception. The chief of police may require as a condition of any permit that no person admitted to a dance shall be permitted to leave and thereafter re-enter the dance premises during the course of said dance, and that no pass-out checks be issued unless required by the physical arrangement of the premises. 
(Ord. 112 § 6, 1969)  
5.16.070 - Penalty—Revocation of permit. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars and not more than five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the jail of the county for a term of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter or any of the terms and conditions of any dance or dance hall permit by a permittee hereunder is deemed to be disorderly and improper conduct and is grounds for revocation of the permit without further notice, provided, however, that upon request the chief of police shall hold a public hearing within five days of the revocation as to whether such revocation of the permit shall remain in force. Any revocation of a permit is subject to appeal to the city council as provided in Section 5.16.040. 
(Ord. 112 § 7, 1969)  
Chapter 5.20 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE 
[3]
Footnotes: 
 
5.20.010 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  Taxicabs provide an essential component of the public transit system that serves the city. Taxicabs are operated by private individuals and companies that use public rights-of-way in the delivery of their service. 
B.  Appropriate efforts must be undertaken to ensure that taxicab operators, companies, their employees, and their drivers take all reasonable actions to protect the public health, safety, and welfare when providing taxicab services. 
C.  The city's administration of taxicab regulations should not unduly burden the taxicab industry. However, the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare shall be deemed paramount in the enforcement and interpretation of the taxicab regulations. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
"Department of public safety" means the police department of the city of Rohnert Park. 
"Director of public safety" means the police chief of the city of Rohnert Park, or the chief's designee. 
"Driver" means every individual who operates any taxicab or vehicle for hire as an employee of a business owner, independently owns the taxicab or vehicle for hire and operates under the auspices of such owner, or has independently contracted with such owner to operate the taxicab or vehicle for hire pursuant to a lease, license, or any other form of agreement. 
"Franchisee" means any entity engaged in the business of carrying passengers in a taxicab, whether comprised of an individual, group of individuals, partnership, limited partnership, joint venture, corporation, or any other organizational structure identified by name, phone number, central dispatch, color scheme, monogram, or insignia distinguishing itself from any other entity engaged in such business, and to whom a taxicab franchise agreement has been granted by the city. 
"Limousine" means a motor-propelled vehicle used for the transportation of passengers for hire along public streets, not over a defined route, but as to a destination in accordance with and under the direction of the person hiring such vehicle. A limousine operates from a fixed location and is hired on a contract basis only. Limousines are pre-arranged and not "hailed." 
"Motor vehicle" or "vehicle" means every motor vehicle used for public hire propelled by mechanically produced power and intended for use on public streets and highways, except street cars, trains, and motor buses. 
"Pedicab" means a bicycle that has three or more wheels, that transports, or is capable of transporting, passengers on seats attached to the bicycle, that is operated by an individual, and that is used for transporting passengers for any form of consideration; or a bicycle that pulls a trailer, sidecar, or similar device, that transports, or is capable of transporting, passengers on seats attached to the trailer, sidecar, or similar device, that is operated by an individual, and that is used for transporting passengers for any form of consideration. 
"Stand" or "taxi stand" means a portion of the public street designated by the city for the sole use of authorized taxicabs while awaiting employment. 
"Taxicab" or "taxi" or "cab" means every motor vehicle having a seating capacity of less than eight passengers that regularly engages in the business of carrying passengers for hire over the public streets of the city not operating on a fixed route or schedule. For the purposes of this chapter, this shall not include the sole act of delivering any passenger to a location within the city from beyond the boundary limits of the city. This definition does not include limousines, pedicabs, buses, or other vehicles subject to regulation by the public utilities commission of the state. 
"Taximeter" means any mechanical or electronic instrument, appliance, device, or machine by which the charge for hire of a motor vehicle is mechanically calculated, either for distance traveled or time consumed, or both, and upon which instrument, appliance, device, or machine such charge is indicated by figures. 
"Vehicle for hire" means any motor or electric vehicle offered to the public for hire with the services of a driver, whether equipped with a taximeter, used for the transportation of passengers over the public streets of the city, irrespective of whether such operations extend beyond the boundary limits of the city, at rates per distance, trip, per hour, per day, per week, per month, and where transportation is under the control, as to route, of the persons hiring it; except however, that vehicles for the sole transportation of handicapped persons, hearses, ambulances, interurban trains, motor, or trolley buses are not included within this definition. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.030 - Authority to issue rules and regulations. 
A.  The director of public safety shall be charged with administering and enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The director of public safety is authorized to establish rules and regulations that are consistent with and necessary to administer this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.040 - Limitation of liability. 
By adopting the ordinance codified in this chapter, the city is assuming an undertaking only to promote the general welfare. It is not assuming, nor is it imposing on its employees, any obligation the breach of which may create liability in money damages to any person who claims that the breach was a substantial factor in causing injury. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.050 - Requirement of franchise agreement. 
A.  Any person or entity who engages in providing taxicab service within the city shall be required to enter into a nonexclusive franchise agreement with the city to provide such service. 
B.  In addition to the franchise agreement, every franchisee shall obtain and maintain at all times during the franchisee's operations all applicable permits and licenses required by any public agency having jurisdiction over the operation of the business. 
C.  Grace Period. Any person or entity operating a taxicab service within the city as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may continue to operate such taxicab service without a franchise agreement until February 1, 2016, so long as such taxicab service is operated pursuant to a valid certificate of public convenience and necessity and business license. Following this date, no person or entity may operate a taxicab service within the city except in compliance with this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.060 - Granting of nonexclusive franchise agreement. 
A.  The director of public safety is authorized to grant nonexclusive franchises to qualified persons or entities in accordance with this chapter. 
B.  In order to be granted a nonexclusive franchise, each applicant is required to provide the following: 
1.  A signed and completed application for a nonexclusive franchise on a form approved by the director of public safety and the city attorney; 
2.  Proof of insurance in the amounts specified in Section 5.20.330 and a vehicle permit as set forth in Section 5.20.140; 
3.  A signed indemnification and hold harmless agreement as required in Section 5.20.130; 
4.  A current schedule of rates or fares charged for carrying passengers; 
5.  A statement of the location of the garage from where the taxicab(s) will be dispatched, the location of the business office, and a land line phone number. 
C.  The director of public safety shall have the discretion to deny any application for a nonexclusive franchise under any of the following circumstances: 
1.  Failure to comply with any of the provisions set forth in subsection B; 
2.  Evidence that the applicant's franchise was previously terminated within five years prior to the date of the application; 
3.  Evidence that the applicant previously operated a taxicab service in the city without holding a valid franchise after the date this chapter takes effect; or 
4.  A finding that the applicant lacks sufficient experience or equipment to safely comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
D.  Any applicant whose application for a franchise is denied shall have the right to appeal the denial to the council as provided under Section 5.20.100. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.070 - Franchise terms and conditions. 
The franchise agreement shall provide, but not be limited to: 
A.  Nonexclusive Right of Franchisee. The agreement shall provide that the franchisee is granted a nonexclusive franchise to provide taxicab service within the city. 
B.  Franchise Fee. The agreement shall provide that the franchisee must pay to the city a franchise fee in the amount of two percent of the gross revenues generated by the franchisee from services performed within the city on the dates specified in the agreement. The city council shall retain the power, by resolution, to amend the amount of the franchise fee as the city council deems necessary to protect the interests of the city. 
C.  Additional Terms and Conditions. The city council shall retain the power, by resolution, to provide for the inclusion in such agreement of such additional terms and conditions as the city council deems necessary to protect the interests of the city. For instance, additional terms and conditions may include, but not be limited to: 
1.  Driver training requirements regarding matters such as city regulations, company procedures, defensive driving, map reading, local geography, customer relations, security and public safety, and requirements for non-discrimination; 
2.  Responsibility for drivers' compliance with city regulations and laws, including but not limited to financial responsibility for fines and penalties for persistent patterns of driver violations; 
3.  Availability of wheelchair accessible taxicabs; and 
4.  Super ultra-low emission vehicle standards for taxicabs. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.080 - Supervision authority. 
The director of public safety shall have the authority to supervise the operations of the franchisee and the provision of taxicab services. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.090 - Termination of franchise. 
A.  The city shall have the right to terminate a franchise based on the director of public safety's determination that an event of default has occurred as defined in the franchise agreement. 
B.  The franchise shall have no right or authority to engage in taxicab operations in the city for a period of five years from the date of the termination. After five years, should the franchisee provide proof that the event causing the franchisee to default has been corrected, and at the sole and complete discretion of the city, the franchisee may be reinstated upon resubmittal of an application to provide nonexclusive taxicab service. 
C.  Any franchisee whose franchise is terminated shall have the right to appeal such determination to the city council as provided in Section 5.20.100. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.100 - Appeal of franchise denial or termination. 
A.  Any person whose application for a franchise is denied or whose franchise is terminated may appeal such decision to the city council by filing with the city clerk, within ten days from and after the date of denial or termination of the franchise, a written notice of appeal and shall set forth the grounds for such appeal. 
B.  The city council shall hold an appeal hearing not later than forty-five days following the receipt of the written request. The city council shall render its decision after the close of the appeal hearing and its decision shall be final. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.110 - Rates, fees and charges. 
The city council may by resolution, or an approved franchise agreement, place a limit on the rates, fees and charges (collectively "fees") franchisees may charge to their customers within the city. No franchise shall charge any fees which are greater than the maximum permitted, unless otherwise authorized in this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.120 - Failure to obtain franchise agreement—Violation. 
It is unlawful for any person or entity to provide taxicab services within the city without obtaining a franchise as required. A violation of this provision shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.130 - Indemnification of city. 
Each franchisee for taxicab services shall, in written agreement, indemnify and hold harmless the city and its agents, officers and employees from and against any and all claims asserted or liability established for damages or injuries to any person or property that arise from, or are connected with, or are caused by the willful or negligent acts or omissions of the franchisee, or its agents, officers, employees or contractors. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.140 - Vehicle permit application. 
A.  Vehicle Permit Application. Each franchisee operating in the city must have a vehicle permit from the city for each vehicle that will be operated as a taxicab. The vehicle permit application shall be typed or printed and signed by the owner of the taxicab business, and shall set forth all the information required in the permit application form and accompanying documentation, including, but not limited to the following: 
1.  A copy of the current valid state of California vehicle registration under the owner's name or business name, license plate number and corresponding vehicle identification number of each vehicle to be operated in the city; 
2.  A current "certificate of inspection" from the Sonoma County Weights and Measures Department listing the vehicle or vehicles with certified taximeters; 
3.  Valid vehicle brake inspection certificate from a California state-approved vehicle brake inspection station along with any work order form from the inspection station for each vehicle to be operated in the city; 
4.  Certificates of insurance from the insurance carrier verifying the coverage required by this chapter for each vehicle to be operated in the city. 
B.  Issuance of Vehicle Permit. 
1.  A vehicle permit may be granted only if the city determines that the applicant has complied with all of the following: 
a.  Has submitted a complete application; 
b.  Has not made any omission or untrue statement or provided fraudulent documentation with the franchise application; 
c.  Has complied with all provisions of this chapter; 
d.  Has submitted a color scheme or insignia pursuant to Section 5.20.170. 
2.  The city may deny a vehicle permit if it determines that approval would pose an unreasonable risk to the public safety or welfare. 
3.  Issuance of a vehicle permit is conditional upon the applicant obtaining a franchise to provide taxicab services and ensuring that any driver of the vehicle has been issued a driver's permit as set forth below. 
4.  Any and all fees associated with this permitting process are nonrefundable. 
C.  The city may charge a fee for processing each application for a vehicle permit and shall recover the cost of each inspection and/or re-inspection of the vehicle. The fee shall be set, and may be adjusted, by city council resolution. The city shall notify the applicant of a denial of issuance of a permit in writing. The notice shall contain a statement of the facts upon which the city has acted in denying issuance of the permit. The notice shall contain a statement of the appeal procedure contained in Section 5.20.470, Permit appeals. 
D.  The taxicab vehicle permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be effective only for the calendar year for which the permit is issued. All permits shall expire on December thirty-first of the year for which the permit is issued and must be renewed annually by submitting a completed application to the city no later than November fifteenth. Any applications or applications for renewal which are submitted after this date are subject to a late fee, as established by resolution of the city council. A renewal of a taxicab vehicle permit may be denied on any grounds that are grounds for denial or revocation as set forth in this chapter. 
E.  Vehicle permits may be suspended or revoked by the city for violation of any of the terms of this chapter, for violation of any of the permit terms or for misuse or abuse of the privilege granted by this chapter. 
F.  Grace Period. Any person or entity operating a taxicab service within the city as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter pursuant to a valid certificate of public convenience and necessity and business license, may continue to operate such taxicab service within the city without a vehicle permit until October 1, 2015. Following this date, no person or entity may operate a taxicab service within the city without the vehicle permit. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.150 - Maintenance and operation. 
A.  It is unlawful for any owner or driver to operate, or cause to be operated, any taxicab that has any defective, unsafe, or unsanitary condition. 
B.  No owner or driver shall transport any number of persons unless each person can be safely accommodated within the taxicab. 
C.  No driver of a taxicab shall refuse to transport any person who desires and requests to purchase transportation in a sober and orderly manner, if such taxicab is in service and available to the public at that time. 
D.  All taxicabs shall be checked daily to ensure that equipment is in proper working condition. 
E.  The interior and exterior of any vehicle shall be clean and well maintained meeting California Vehicle Code requirements and the requirements of this chapter at all times when in operation. 
F.  It is unlawful for a taxicab to be stored or parked on any public street for a period of time exceeding ten minutes, except as provided in Section 5.20.320. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.160 - Equipment and conditions. 
A.  Each taxicab operated under a taxicab permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall at all times have: 
1.  One operable safety belt for each passenger carried; 
2.  A spare tire, capable of being used on any of the wheels of the vehicle; 
3.  A set of tools for changing tires; 
4.  A workable flashlight readily available to the driver; 
5.  Two independently acting and entirely separate braking systems in proper operating order; 
6.  Safety or shatterproof glass; 
7.  A two-way radio and/or operable cellular telephone in an "on and operating" position for the entire time the taxicab is in service and available to the public; 
8.  An interior light of not less than two candlepower so arranged as to illuminate the entire passenger compartment. The light shall be kept constantly lighted at all times while any passengers are being loaded into or unloaded from any vehicle; 
9.  No after-market window tinting, shades or blinds over the windows of any vehicle while it is occupied. 
B.  Each taxicab shall be maintained in such condition so that: 
1.  All doors, windows, hood, and trunk will open and close securely; 
2.  The inside of the taxicab and the luggage compartment are free of litter and trash, and shall not soil, rip, or otherwise damage the passenger's clothing or effects; 
3.  The exterior of the taxicab is clean and in good repair, and does not have any peeling paint, dents, paint primer, rust, or missing components that are discernable from a distance of five feet from the taxicab. 
C.  Upon receipt of a citizen's complaint or police officer's observation regarding the mechanical condition of a taxicab, or following the taxicab's involvement in an accident, the city may require any or all of the following: 
1.  A visual inspection of the taxicab by a representative of the city; 
2.  An interview by a representative of the city with the owner or driver of the taxicab regarding the mechanical condition of the taxicab; 
3.  A sworn statement that the taxicab is in safe operating condition, made by either the proprietor of a service or repair garage engaged in auto repair who is licensed by the state of California, or by a mechanic licensed by the state of California and employed by the franchisee, who has inspected and examined the taxicab; 
4.  If the owner, driver, or operator of the taxicab refuses to submit to an inspection the city may issue an order prohibiting such vehicle from use in taxicab service. 
D.  Upon determination that any vehicle operated under a vehicle permit is not in safe operating condition, the city may issue an order requiring that the vehicle be taken out of service until it has been repaired to the satisfaction of the city. 
E.  Members of the department of public safety are authorized to cite any person for operating a taxicab without a valid taxicab certificate, license, or permit required by this chapter and may impound and retain possession of any vehicle used in violation of this chapter as allowed by Government Code Section 53075.61, and as it may be amended. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.170 - Vehicle markings and insignia. 
A.  Taxicab color scheme approval. 
1.  A unique and characteristic color scheme approved by the city shall be used by each franchisee operating a taxicab in the city to distinguish all of the taxicabs the franchisee operates. The scheme shall not be used by any other franchisee. 
2.  No change in the color scheme or distinguishing characteristics of any taxicab shall be made without prior written permission from the department of public safety. 
B.  It is unlawful to operate a taxicab within the city that does not have printed or placed upon the vehicle, which is either painted or permanently affixed: 
1.  The name of the taxi company on both sides and the rear of the vehicle. All lettering shall not be less than three inches in height; 
2.  The company's telephone number printed or placed upon both sides of the vehicle. All lettering shall not be less than two inches in height; 
3.  A number to identify each taxicab assigned by the city at the time vehicle permit is awarded. This number shall be printed or placed upon the rear of the vehicle and both the driver and passenger front fenders. The lettering shall not be less than three inches in height; 
4.  All lettering and numbering shall be affixed to the vehicle at all times and shall be of a color that contrasts with the color of the vehicle; 
5.  The dome light marker on top of the vehicle shall read the same as the company name printed on both sides and the rear of the vehicle or shall only read "taxi"; 
6.  The city issued vehicle permit shall be located inside the lower left corner (driver side) of the rear window. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.180 - Commercial signs and advertisements. 
Commercial and advertisement signs may be affixed onto the vehicle, but shall not in any way obstruct the view of the driver or the identification insignia on the vehicle. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.190 - Vehicle inspection. 
A.  Before a vehicle permit is issued, each vehicle for which a vehicle permit is requested shall be delivered to one of the state of California approved vehicle brake inspection stations for inspection to ascertain whether such vehicle and equipment comply with the provisions of this chapter. Approved state of California vehicle brake inspection stations can be located on the state of California website at http://www.autorepair.ca.gov/ . 
B.  Any vehicle which is found after inspection to be unsafe or in any way unsuitable for service, shall not be issued a vehicle permit and may immediately be ordered out of service. Before a vehicle permit is issued or the vehicle is again placed in service, it shall be placed in a safe and sanitary condition, inspected, and a completed inspection form filed with the department of public safety. Each vehicle to be operated shall be reinspected upon annual renewal of the vehicle permit. 
C.  Final inspection of each vehicle shall be conducted by the department of public safety to ensure that the vehicle has met all the requirements of this chapter. 
D.  Any and all fees associated with this permitting process shall be nonrefundable. 
E.  The director of public safety is charged with the authority to enforce this chapter. Members of the department of public safety shall have the right, after displaying the proper identification, to enter into or upon any permitted vehicle for hire in the city for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated. The scope of this inspection is limited to determining compliance with the requirements of this chapter and may be done at random without notice, warrant, or individualized suspicion of wrongdoing. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.200 - Sale or transfer of business. 
A.  Any franchise granted by the city shall not be transferred, sold, leased, assigned, relinquished or delegated to another person, either in whole or in part, without the prior written approval of the city. The city shall not unreasonably withhold approval of a franchise sale or assignment provided that it does not unreasonably impact competition and the buyer or assignee meets all of the requirements established by this chapter and is qualified to perform the obligations required. 
B.  The franchisee shall promptly notify the director of public safety, in writing, in advance of any proposed sale, assignment or transfer. In the event that the city approves any sale, assignment or transfer, the approval shall not relieve the franchisee of any of its obligations or duties under the franchise agreement unless it is modified in writing to that effect. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.210 - Transfer of vehicle. 
In the event a franchisee sells or transfers title of a taxicab for which a permit has been issued, or in the event the vehicle has been destroyed or totaled, the franchisee shall notify the department of public safety within ten days. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.220 - Suspension or revocation of vehicle permit. 
A.  The city shall have the power to suspend or revoke a vehicle permit issued under this chapter on any grounds stated in this chapter and on any of the following grounds: 
1.  Failure to maintain insurance as required by this chapter, including renewal of insurance prior to the expiration date of the policy; 
2.  The violation by the franchisee of any terms, conditions, or requirements of this chapter; 
3.  Failure to notify the city thirty days prior to the effective date of liability insurance cancellation or change of insurer; 
4.  If, subsequent to the issuance of a permit, grounds for denial under this chapter have occurred or arisen, or the applicant has been found to have knowingly made a false statement of fact required to be revealed in the permit application; 
5.  Failure to maintain vehicle in good order and repair as prescribed herein; 
6.  Failure to pay any fees or damages lawfully assessed as a result of the ownership or operation of any vehicle licensed under this chapter; 
7.  Failure to maintain driver's daily manifests or falsifying such manifests; 
8.  Repeated violations by the franchisee or its drivers of the traffic laws of the city, county, or state; 
9.  Knowingly maintaining any taximeter that is inaccurate and results in overcharges to any passenger. 
B.  Vehicle permits suspended or revoked shall immediately be surrendered to the department of public safety. 
C.  The director of public safety shall notify in writing any vehicle permit holder whose permit has been suspended or revoked. The notice shall state all of the reasons for the action as well as any laws or regulation violated by the vehicle permit holder. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.230 - Taxi driver permit application. 
A.  Permit Application. Each taxicab driver operating in the city must have a taxi driver permit from the city as set forth herein. The driver permit application shall be typed or printed and signed by the driver and shall set forth all the information required in the permit application form and accompanying documentation, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The name and business address, residence address, business telephone number and residence telephone number of the applicant; 
(2)  A general statement that the applicant has complied, or prior to the commencement of operation of the vehicle, will comply with all of the provisions of this chapter; 
(3)  Every applicant shall submit to Livescan Fingerprinting at an approved California Department of Justice fingerprinting location and shall submit a copy of their completed Livescan form and receipt of payment with his or her application; 
(4)  Each applicant for a driver's permit shall submit with his or her application two current two-inch by two-inch professional quality color photos (passport photos) of the applicant taken within the previous thirty days. One photo shall be attached to the driver's permit. The other photo shall be kept on file with the city; 
(5)  A completed and signed notice of intent to hire from a franchisee; 
(6)  Proof of compliance with federal controlled substance and alcohol testing requirements with satisfactory proof of a negative test result. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.240 - Driver's permit. 
A.  No person shall operate or drive any taxicab within the city unless that person has obtained a valid taxi driver's permit from the city. 
B.  A driver's permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance and must be renewed annually by submitting a completed application to the city no later than forty-five days before expiration of the current permit. Any application for renewal that is submitted late is subject to a late fee, as established by resolution of the city council. A renewal of a driver's permit may be denied on any grounds for denial or revocation as set forth in this chapter. 
C.  A driver's permit shall be void upon termination of employment. The employer shall notify the city within five days of termination of employment of a driver, and shall return the permit to the city within those five days either by mail or in person. 
D.  Prior to issuing a driver's permit, the city shall determine whether the applicant has a valid driver's license and shall review the applicant's driving history. The city may not issue a driver's permit to the applicant if the city determines that: 
1.  The applicant's driving record shows a violation point count of four or more points in the preceding twelve-month period, six or more points in the preceding twenty-four-month period, or eight or more points in the preceding thirty-six-month period as outlined in the Vehicle Code Section 12810 et seq.; 
2.  The applicant has been convicted of reckless driving or driving under the influence of any alcoholic beverage, drug or intoxicating substance, or combination thereof, taking into consideration the nature and circumstances of the conviction, the age of the applicant at the time of conviction, the time elapsed since the conviction, and any evidence of rehabilitation; 
3.  The applicant's driving history demonstrates that the applicant is not likely to operate a motor vehicle in a safe manner; or 
4.  The applicant does not hold a valid California state driver's license. 
E.  The city may not issue a driver's permit to anyone who has been convicted of a felony or of a crime involving moral turpitude or is required to register pursuant to Section 290 of the California Penal Code or is required to register in another state or country as a sex offender in a manner comparable to Penal Code Section 290. In making this determination, the nature and circumstances of the conviction, the age of the applicant at the time of conviction, the time elapsed since the conviction, and any evidence of rehabilitation may be considered. 
F.  The city shall not issue a driver's permit to anyone under the age of twenty-one years. 
G.  No driver's permit will be issued or renewed unless the applicant has taken and passed, with negative results, a controlled substance and alcohol test in accordance with Government Code Section 53075.5 as it may be amended or renumbered. This test shall be taken no more than thirty days preceding the date the application is filed for a new permit or renewal of a permit. If an applicant takes a controlled substance and alcohol test with positive results, the employing taxicab operator shall report the results to the city. 
H.  The city may charge a fee for processing each application for a driver's permit. The fee shall be set, and may be adjusted, by city council resolution. The city shall immediately notify the applicant of a denial of issuance of a driver's permit in writing. The notice shall contain a statement of the facts upon which the city has acted in denying issuance of the driver's permit. The notice shall contain a statement of the appeal procedure contained in Section 5.120.470, Permit appeals. 
I.  Any and all fees associated with this permitting process shall be nonrefundable. 
J.  Grace Period. Any person operating or driving a taxicab within the city as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may continue to operate or drive such taxicab within the city under an existing and valid taxi driver permit until February 1, 2016. Following this date, no person or entity may operate or drive a taxicab within the city without the taxi driver permit required by this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.250 - Contents of driver's permit. 
Each driver's permit issued under this chapter shall contain a serial number and shall set forth the name, age, and physical description of the person permitted, the issued and expiration date of the permit, a current photograph of permittee and the name of the employer. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.260 - Suspension or revocation of driver's permit. 
The city shall have the power to suspend or revoke a driver's permit issued under this chapter, on any grounds stated in this chapter and on any of the following grounds: 
1.  Suspension, revocation or expiration of the driver's privilege granted by the California Department of Motor Vehicles to operate a motor vehicle; 
2.  The violation by the driver of any terms, conditions, or requirements of this chapter; 
3.  If, subsequent to the issuance of the permit, grounds for permit denial under this chapter have occurred or arisen, or the applicant has been found to have knowingly made a false statement of fact required to be revealed in the permit application; 
4.  Failure of the driver to pay any judgment against the driver for personal injury or death, or property damage arising out of the driver's operation of a motor vehicle, within thirty days after the judgment has become final; 
5.  The driver has consumed drugs, alcohol, or any other intoxicating substance or is under the influence of drugs, alcohol, or intoxicating substances, while on duty or is convicted of a crime relating to drugs or alcohol; 
6.  Overcharging, or the attempt to overcharge, taxicab fares by the driver; 
7.  Operation of a taxicab in an unsafe manner or any conduct that places any passenger, motorist, or pedestrian at unreasonable or unnecessary risk; 
8.  Transfer, sale, or assignment of the permit to an individual other than the person specified on the permit application; 
9.  If the applicant refuses or fails to submit to a controlled substance and alcohol test required by this chapter; 
10.  If the applicant tests positive for any controlled substance or alcohol pursuant to a test taken in accordance with this chapter; 
11.  If the applicant or applicant's employer submits a false controlled substance and alcohol test declaration or employment declaration/result. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.270 - Number of permits. 
The city shall have discretion on the number of vehicle and driver's permits issued. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.280 - Replacement of lost or destroyed permits. 
For permits that are lost or destroyed, the city, upon receipt of an affidavit from the owner explaining the reason(s) for a replacement, may issue a replacement permit. The city may charge a fee associated with the cost of replacing a permit. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.290 - Change of employment by driver. 
All taxicab drivers changing their employment to a new or different taxicab employer shall notify the city within five days of the change. A new driver's permit shall be obtained and contain the name of the new employer. The city may charge a fee associated with the cost of issuing a new permit. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.300 - Permits nontransferable. 
All drivers' permits issued by the city are the property of the city and shall not be sold, assigned or transferred. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.310 - Standards for driver conduct. 
A.  All taxicab drivers shall be clean and neat in appearance, and shall wear shoes at all times while on duty. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude any franchisee from establishing a dress code or similar rules to regulate the appearance of all drivers. 
B.  It is unlawful to solicit fares by misrepresenting in any manner the identity of the owner of the taxi for hire or the business for which the fare is solicited. It is also unlawful to misrepresent the location, travel time or distance to any destination to which a passenger seeks transportation. 
C.  It is unlawful to interfere in any manner whatsoever with any person who is negotiating for, inquiring about transportation in or employing a vehicle for hire. 
D.  It is unlawful for a driver of any taxicab to obstruct any street or sidewalk. 
E.  A driver of any taxicab shall offer to provide assistance and, if requested, shall provide reasonable assistance to each passenger in entering and leaving the vehicle unless the passenger indicates otherwise. 
F.  Drivers shall confirm that passengers are securely seated and their possessions, if any, are secure, and the door closed, before beginning the trip. 
G.  Drivers shall ensure that passengers and their possessions are safely clear of the vehicle and in an appropriate disembarking location before leaving the destination. 
H.  Drivers shall board passengers at the nearest safe, legal and feasible point to the passenger's location and shall disembark passengers at a point from which they can safely proceed. 
I.  Lost Property—Report and Recordkeeping Required. All property of value found by drivers or franchisees in the vehicles for hire operated by them, or delivered to them by any person who has found it, shall be reported to the department of public safety within forty-eight hours, unless the property has been claimed by and returned to the rightful owner within that time. Every franchisee shall keep a record of all such property, whether returned to the owner of the property or not, for a period of not less than ninety days. 
J.  Service Denial. It is unlawful for a driver or franchisee to refuse a prospective fare: 
1.  Based on the distance of the route for which the service is requested, or the geographic location of either the origin or destination of the trip, except where that distance exceeds a total of fifty miles beyond the city limits of the city of Rohnert Park; 
2.  To take any action to actively discourage a prospective fare solely on the basis of race, creed, color, age, sex, sexual orientation, national origin, or disability, including the use of service animals. 
K.  A driver may inquire whether an animal is a service animal, but may not require a disabled person to show any documentation of disability or certification of the animal's status as a service animal. The driver may require service animals not in carrying containers to remain on the floor of the vehicle. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.320 - Taxicab stands. 
A.  The city may designate areas on public streets or in public parking lots as taxicab stands to be occupied by taxicabs immediately available for hire. All taxicab stands shall be indicated by curb painting or signs. 
B.  Taxicab stands shall be for the joint use of franchisees and drivers permitted to operate within the city, and the commercial loading and unloading of freight where so designated. No taxicab shall be parked in a space designated as a taxicab stand without properly displaying a valid permit issued by the city. 
C.  No taxicab shall be parked unattended in any taxicab stand for a period of time exceeding fifteen minutes. 
D.  Taxicab drivers are prohibited from standing or parking at a parking meter while awaiting passengers in blocks or lots where taxicab stands have been designated by the city. Taxicab drivers must comply with posted requirements to pay meters while parked in any authorized meter space. 
E.  The city may temporarily designate space for the exclusive use of taxicabs when conditions so warrant. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.330 - Insurance. 
A.  Before a franchise for the operation of any taxicab business may be awarded, there shall be filed with the city a certificate of insurance acceptable to the city, naming the franchisee against losses to persons or property arising out of the operation of the taxicab business in the following minimum amounts, or such minimum amounts as may hereafter be established by the city's risk manager or city council policy: 
B.  Workers' Compensation Insurance and Employers' Liability Insurance. 
1.  Workers' compensation insurance and employers' liability insurance with statutory limits as required by the Labor Code of the state of California. 
2.  Employers' liability with limits of one million dollars per accident; one million dollars disease per employee; one million dollars disease per policy. 
3.  If a franchisee has no employees at the time a franchise agreement is awarded, then he or she must obtain workers' compensation and employers' liability insurance should any employee be hired during the term of the franchise agreement. 
C.  Commercial Automobile Liability. 
1.  Minimum Limits. (a) Five hundred thousand dollars combined single limit per accident; or (b) two hundred thousand dollars bodily injury per person, five hundred thousand dollars bodily injury per accident and one million dollars property damage per accident—for each taxicab that is owned and/or operated by the franchisee in the city of Rohnert Park, or that is otherwise used in the city of Rohnert Park by the franchisee pursuant to a business relationship with a taxicab driver. 
2.  The franchisee shall disclose any deductible or self-insured retention. This deductible or self-insured retention must be approved in advance by the city. 
D.  Standards for Insurance Companies. Insurers shall have an A.M. Best's rating of at least A:VII. 
E.  Documentation Requirements. 
1.  The name and address for certificates of insurance shall be: City of Rohnert Park, 130 Avram Avenue, Rohnert Park, CA 94928. 
2.  Required evidence of coverage shall be submitted for any renewal or replacement of a policy that already exists, at least ten days before expiration or other termination of the existing policy. 
3.  The franchisee shall provide immediate written notice if: (a) any of the required insurance policies is terminated; (b) the limits of any of the required policies are reduced; or (c) the deductible or self-insured retention is increased. 
4.  Upon written request, certified copies of required insurance policies must be provided to the city within thirty days. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.340 - Alcohol/controlled substance testing. 
A.  No taxicab drivers permit may be issued or renewed unless the applicant at the time of permit application or renewal has submitted to the department of public safety valid certification that a mandatory controlled substance and alcohol testing certification program conforming to Parts 40 and 382 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations and California Government Code Section 53075.5 is maintained by the franchisee for all drivers of taxicabs operated under the franchise agreement. 
B.  No taxicab driver's permit may be issued or renewed unless the applicant at the time of the permit issuance or renewal, files with the city certification that the permit applicant has tested negatively, within the past thirty days prior to submitting the application, for controlled substances and alcohol under a mandatory controlled substance and alcohol testing certification program conforming to Parts 40 and 382 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations and California Government Code Section 53075.5. Driver's permit applicants who test positively shall be ineligible to apply again for a driver's permit during the five-year period following the positive test. Driver's permit renewal applicants who have tested positively pursuant to random alcohol/controlled substance testing shall not be eligible to apply for their driver's permit renewal until they have successfully completed an accredited substance abuse program in accordance with Government Code Section 53075.5. 
C.  The costs of taking an alcohol/controlled substance test of an employee shall be paid by the franchisee. 
D.  The test results shall be reported directly to the franchisee who shall be required to notify the city of all positive results. 
E.  A test meeting the requirements of this section that is taken to obtain a driver's permit in another jurisdiction shall be accepted as though conducted as part of the permit renewal process for the city for up to thirty days from the date the test was taken and the application was submitted. The prior test shall apply only for purposes of renewing a driver's permit, so long as the driver has not tested positive thereafter. However, a negative result from a test taken for another jurisdiction shall not satisfy the testing requirements to receive an initial (new) permit as imposed by this chapter. 
F.  All test results shall be confidential and shall not be released without the consent of the driver, except as provided herein or as authorized or required by law. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.350 - Franchisees not to employ unlicensed drivers. 
No franchisee shall permit any person to act as a driver who does not possess a valid California driver's license and a driver's permit issued under this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.360 - Taximeters. 
A.  All taxicabs operated in the city shall be equipped with a taximeter of a type and design approved by the state of California Division of Measurements Standards and: 
1.  The franchisee or owner of any taxicab shall keep the taximeter accurate at all times; 
2.  The taximeter shall be certified by the Sonoma County Weights and Measurements Department and sealed with a current county seal; 
3.  Testing and certification shall be conducted by the Sonoma County Weights and Measurements Department on an annual basis; 
4.  The city shall have the right to inspect any taximeter. Upon discovery of any inaccuracy in a taximeter, the city may remove, or cause to be removed, from service the taxicab so equipped until the taximeter has been properly repaired and accurately adjusted; 
5.  The lead wire seal on all taximeters shall be maintained at all times. 
B.  The taximeter shall not charge a fare greater than the posted rate. 
C.  It is unlawful for any driver or operator of any taxicab to set the taximeter in operation when the vehicle is not actually employed for hire or for carrying passengers. 
D.  It is unlawful for any driver or operator of any taxicab to fail to set the taximeter to a non-recording position at the termination of each and every service and to call the attention of the passenger to the amount registered. 
E.  It is unlawful for any driver or operator of a taxicab, while carrying passengers or under employment, to fail to activate the taximeter, or to activate the taximeter in such a position as to denote that the driver is employed at a rate of fare different than that authorized or registered. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.370 - Rates and information to be displayed. 
A.  Every taxicab shall at all times have displayed in a conspicuous place in the passenger compartment a sign stating in clearly legible characters the rates of fare charged for carrying passengers, and any additional fees that may apply such as a bridge toll. 
B.  Any proposed change in a rate schedule, unless it's a reduction from the currently established rate schedule, must be filed with the department of public safety. Changes to the rate schedule shall only be allowed once in a twelve-month period. No changes to the rate schedule shall take effect until approval is received from the director of public safety, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
C.  The charge for any service to taxicab patrons shall be calculated and shown by a taximeter. This meter shall be located and operated so that the reading dial showing the amount to be charged is well-lit and easily read by any passenger. 
D.  A valid taxi driver's permit issued under this chapter must be clearly displayed in view of the passenger at all times. 
E.  Within the interior of every taxicab permitted by this chapter, and in a location readily visible to the passenger, shall appear a sign, no smaller than six inches by four inches with lettering as large as the size of the sign will reasonably allow, containing all of the following information as outlined in Vehicle Code Section 27908: 
1.  The name, address, and telephone number of the taxicab company; 
2.  The name, address, and telephone number of the agency regulating the operation of the taxicab: 
Rohnert Park Department of Public Safety 
500 City Center Drive 
Rohnert Park, CA 94928 
(707) 584-2600 
F.  If requested every driver shall give a receipt upon a payment of the correct fare. The receipt shall contain the name of the taxicab business and the driver, taxi license number, date of transaction, the meter reading and the amount of fare. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.380 - Excessive charges. 
A.  No franchisee, operator or driver of any taxicab, operated under a city franchise, shall in connection with any fare or trip originating in the city charge, collect, demand or receive a rate or fee in excess of the amount authorized or approved by the city. 
B.  Any franchisee, operator or driver who overcharges a taxicab fare shall be liable to the person who hires the taxicab for the amount of the overcharge. 
C.  The remedies provided by this section shall be in addition to any other legal or equitable remedies that may be available, and are not intended to be exclusive. 
D.  In the event that a taxicab, while conveying for hire any passenger, becomes disabled or breaks down, the time stoppage shall be deducted from the time charged. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.390 - Refusal to convey. 
It is unlawful for the franchisee, owner, driver, or operator of any taxicab operating under a city franchise, to fail or refuse, or to permit the failure or refusal, when in service and not otherwise engaged for hire, to transport to his or her announced destination in the city, any person who presents him or herself for carriage in a sober and orderly manner and for a lawful purpose. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.400 - Direct route. 
Every taxicab driver employed to carry passengers to a definite point shall take the most direct route possible that will carry the passengers safely and expeditiously to their destination unless otherwise specifically requested by the passengers 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.410 - Taxicabs from other municipalities. 
The driver of a taxicab authorized to operate in any municipality other than the city may transport passengers from such municipality to a destination within or beyond the city limits, provided that the driver shall not seek nor accept passengers within the city of Rohnert Park. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.420 - Failure to pay unlawful. 
Except where credit is extended, any person who fails or refuses to pay at the end of the trip, or the termination or discharge of service, the legal fare for a taxicab that he or she has hired, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Drivers shall not accept any form of payment other than cash or credit/debit card. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.430 - Service provided. 
A.  The following taxicab services are authorized to be provided: 
1.  Exclusive ride, which shall mean exclusive use of a taxicab by one or more passengers at a time. Shared ride, which shall mean nonexclusive use of a taxicab by two or more unrelated passengers, traveling between different points of origin and/or destination and traveling in the same general direction; 
2.  No passengers shall be grouped together without the express consent of the first passenger who hires the taxi. If consent to a shared group ride is granted, the fare to be charged shall be determined upon mutual agreement by the driver and the prospective passengers prior to boarding the taxi. 
B.  Flag Loads Permitted. Flag loads, meaning passengers soliciting a taxicab for hire at random points on the street, may be picked up at any location within the city except when it is apparent that the prospective passenger has already arranged for a taxicab operated by another person or company and is waiting for it to arrive. 
C.  Solicitation of Fares Permitted. Solicitation of fares is permitted when located at an authorized taxicab stand. A taxicab driver shall not repeatedly drive a taxi back and forth in front of, or otherwise interfere with the orderly ingress and egress to, any theatre, hall, hotel, railway or bus station, or other public place or gathering. No taxicab driver shall leave a cab or approach and solicit any pedestrian upon a sidewalk adjacent to any theatre, hall, hotel, railway or bus station or other public place or gathering. 
D.  Passengers Not to Ride with Driver—Exceptions. All persons other than the driver shall ride in the rear passenger compartment of the taxicab, except passengers who are physically disabled, or are unable to get into the rear passenger compartment or have extreme difficulty in doing so, or where there are more passengers than can be accommodated in the rear compartment. 
E.  Light Baggage to be Transported in Taxicab without Charge. Persons engaging a taxicab shall be entitled to have such valises, small hand baggage, groceries and other similar purchases or wheel chairs as can be conveniently carried within the vehicle loaded, conveyed and unloaded at the point of deboarding without charge. If a driver carries or conveys these items to a point beyond the point of deboarding, the driver may leave the taximeter running and the passenger shall be obligated to pay for the time required to convey the items; provided that the driver first inform the passenger that the taximeter will be kept running. 
F.  Daily Operation Required. Every franchisee shall regularly and daily operate his or her business to the extent reasonably necessary to meet the public demand for service. Upon abandonment of a taxi business for a period of thirty consecutive days, the franchise agreement may be terminated and any permit issued in connection with the franchise revoked by the city. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.440 - Recordkeeping requirements. 
A.  Daily Manifest. 
1.  The driver of every taxi for hire shall keep a separate manifest of every service rendered and shall include the following information: 
a.  The time the vehicle went on and off duty; 
b.  The vehicle identification number and driver's full name; 
c.  Location where passengers entered vehicle; 
d.  Date and time of entry; 
e.  Number of passengers; 
f.  Location where passengers were discharged; 
g.  Amount of fare collected. 
2.  The franchisee shall keep all manifests in a safe place for a period of not less than three years after date of service rendered. Any and all manifests shall be made available upon demand for inspection by the city. 
3.  It is unlawful for any driver to fail to properly complete any required manifest. 
4.  The falsifying of any manifest by a franchisee or driver is unlawful and may be grounds for termination of the franchise agreement and/or revocation of driver's permit. 
B.  Taxicab and Employee Records. Each franchisee shall keep a record of all taxicabs operated and shall maintain at all times a complete and accurate record of all drivers employed. These records shall contain, at a minimum, the name, address, the dates of employment of all drivers, the identification of each vehicle driven by each driver, and the hours during each day and night worked by each driver. These records shall be produced to the city at any time upon reasonable demand, and shall not be destroyed without the written permission of the city. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.450 - Enforcement—Violation—Public nuisance—Penalty. 
A.  The city and authorized employees are empowered to investigate and conduct inspections to determine whether franchisees and other persons are complying with this chapter. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision, or to fail to comply with any of the requirements, of this chapter. Every person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
C.  In addition to the penalties provided in this section, any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be and is declared to be a public nuisance. Furthermore, any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be and is declared to be contrary to the public interest and shall at the discretion of the city create a cause of action for injunctive relief. 
D.  The remedies set forth in this chapter are cumulative. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.460 - Smoking in taxicabs prohibited. 
A.  Smoking in taxicabs is prohibited at all times whether or not the taxi is in operation. 
B.  A taxicab driver may refuse to transport any person who refuses to obey the prohibition against smoking in taxicabs. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.470 - Permit appeals. 
Permits may be denied, revoked, suspended, or appealed under the following procedures: 
A.  The director of public safety may deny any application for a permit authorized by this title or may revoke, suspend, condition or limit any such permit upon making a written finding of facts upon which the director of public safety may reasonably base one or more of the following causes for such action: 
1.  Where it appears that the permittee is not eligible for the holding of such permit in accordance either with this chapter or state law; 
2.  Where it appears that the applicant for the permit made one or more false, misleading or fraudulent statements in the permit application; 
3.  Where it appears that the activity allowed by the permit has not been conducted in accordance with statements in the permit application or as required by either this code or state law; 
4.  Where it appears that there have been violations of federal, state or local law committed at the location or in conjunction with the activity conducted pursuant to the permit; 
5.  Where it appears that the conduct of the activity allowed by the permit is, is likely to be, or has been, detrimental to the health, safety or morals of residents of the city. 
B.  Where the director of public safety has acted in accordance with this section, the director of public safety shall provide the permit applicant or permittee with notice of such findings and determination. Such notice shall state the grounds upon which such denial, revocation, suspension, limitation or conditioning of the permit is based. Within ten days after such notice, the applicant or permittee may request that a hearing be held. This request shall be in writing and shall state in general any facts upon which the applicant or permittee objects to the action of the director of public safety. 
C.  Hearing. 
1.  Upon receipt of such hearing request and after giving reasonable notice to the applicant or permittee, the director of public safety, or a person designated by the director of public safety as hearing officer, shall convene a hearing. 
2.  At the hearing, the applicant or permittee, or a representative appointed by him or her, may present evidence to rebut the findings and determination made in accordance with subsection A of this section. In addition, the hearing officer may receive and consider any other evidence which may bear upon said findings and determination, provided that the applicant or permittee shall be given a reasonable opportunity to respond to all such evidence. 
D.  Decision. 
1.  Within thirty days after the conclusion of the hearing, the director of public safety shall mail a notice of decision to the applicant or permittee and all other persons who participated in the hearing and requested such notice. The notice shall be in writing and shall state the decision as well as finding of fact which support the decision. Any decision to deny, revoke, suspend or limit or condition a permit must be based upon one or more of the causes specified in subsection A of this section. In addition, the notice of decision must inform the applicant or permittee of the right to appeal. 
2.  If the director of public safety determines that sufficient cause exists, the director of public safety may deny, revoke or suspend the permit or may place appropriate conditions and limitations upon activities conducted pursuant to the permit. 
3.  The determination contained in the notice of decision shall be final; provided that such determination may be appealed in accordance with Section 5.20.100. 
E.  Objection to Permit by Affected Party. 
1.  Any person adversely affected by the issuance of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may object in writing to such permit and demand a hearing on such objection. The written request for hearing shall state one or more of the grounds set forth in subsection A of this section as well as evidence supporting such grounds. In addition, such objecting party shall state whether he or she demands denial, revocation or suspension of the permit or the placing of appropriate limitations or conditions upon the permit. 
2.  Upon receipt of such written objections, the director of public safety shall review the written objections and conduct a hearing in accordance with subsections B through C of this section. 
3.  Upon conclusion of the hearing on objections, the director of public safety may issue a notice of decision in accordance with subsection D of this section. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
5.20.480 - Charges and costs. 
A charge may be imposed for the reasonable regulatory costs incurred by the city for issuing franchises and permits, performing investigations and inspections, and the administrative enforcement and adjudication of actions or proceedings under this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. D), 5-26-2015)  
Chapter 5.24 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
  Ordinance No. 470 grants consent and approval of the assignment and transfer of the cable television franchise issued to Storer Cable TV, Inc. to ML Media Partners, L.P. or its wholly owned subsidiary ML Media. Chapter 5.24, Community Antenna Television System, which was previously contained herein was replaced in entirety by Ord. 486. Prior ordinances contained herein were Ordinance Nos. 78, 89, 234, 255 and 293. 
 
5.24.010 - Intent. 
The City of Rohnert Park finds that the development of cable television and communications systems has the potential of having great benefit and impact upon the residents of Rohnert Park. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable television, the city further finds that the public convenience, safety and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers which should be vested in the city. It is the intent of this chapter and subsequent amendments to provide for and specify the means to attain the best possible public interest and public purpose in these matters and any franchise issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to include this finding as an integral part thereof. 
(Ord. 486 § 1, 1987)  
5.24.020 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Rohnert Park Cable Communications Franchise Ordinance". 
(Ord. 486 § 2, 1987)  
5.24.030 - Definitions. 
A.  For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
1.  "Agency subscriber" means a subscriber who receives a service in a government or public agency, school, or non-profit corporation. 
2.  "Basic cable service" means any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals. 
3.  "Basic radio service" means the provision to subscribers of audio programs provided to subscribers at a monthly rate. 
4.  "Broadcast signal" means a television or radio signal that is transmitted over the air to a wide geographic audience and is received by a cable communications system off-the-air or by microwave. 
5.  "Cable communications system" or "system", also referred to as "cable television system", "cable system", "CATV system", or "community antenna TV system", means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment, that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include: 
(a)  A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; 
(b)  A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple unit dwellings under common ownership, control, or management, unless such facility uses any public right-of-way; 
(c)  A facility of a common carrier, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; or 
(d)  Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system. 
6.  "Cablecast signal" means a nonbroadcast signal that originates within the facilities of the cable communications system. 
7.  "Cable-mile" means a linear mile of strand-bearing cable as measured on the street or easement from pole to pole or pedestal to pedestal. 
8.  "Cable service" means the total of the following: 
(a)  The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service; and 
(b)  Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or other programming service. 
9.  "Channel" or "cable channel" means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a television channel as defined by the Federal Communications Commission. 
10.  "Commence construction" means that time and date when construction of the cable communications system is considered to have commenced, which shall be when the first connection is physically made to a utility pole, or undergrounding of cables is initiated, after preliminary engineering (strand mapping) and after all necessary permits and authorizations have been obtained. 
11.  "Commence operation" means that time and date when operation of the cable communications system is considered to have commenced which shall be when sufficient distribution facilities have been installed so as to permit the offering of full services to a dwelling unit located within the franchise area and such services are actually subscribed to by a resident of the franchise area. 
12.  "Commercial subscriber" means a subscriber who receives a service in a place of business, where the service may be utilized in connection with a business, trade, or profession. 
13.  "Commercial use channel(s)" means the channel capacity designated for commercial use as defined and required by federal law. 
14.  "Completion of construction" means that point in time when all distribution facilities specified in the franchise agreement have been installed by the grantee so as to permit the offering of cable service to all of the potential subscribers in the franchise area, as well as the provision, in an operational state, of any facilities required by the franchise agreement. 
15.  "Converter" means an electronic device which converts signal carriers from one form to another. 
16.  "Council" means the governing body of the city of Rohnert Park. 
17.  "FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed or elected successor. 
18.  "Franchise" means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof issued by a franchising authority, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, which authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system. 
19.  "Franchise agreement" means a franchise award ordinance, or a contractual agreement, containing the specific provisions of the franchise granted, including referenced specifications, franchise applications, franchise requirements ordinances and other related materials. 
20.  "Franchise fees" means any tax, fee or assessment of any kind imposed by a franchising authority or other governmental entity on a grantee or cable subscriber, or both, solely because of their status as such. The term "franchise fee" does not include: 
(a)  Any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their services but not including a tax, fee, or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against grantee or cable subscribers); 
(b)  Capital costs which are required by the franchise to be incurred by grantee for public, educational, or governmental access facilities; 
(c)  Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or 
(d)  Any fee imposed under Title 17, United States Code. 
21.  "Grantee" means any "person" receiving a franchise pursuant to this chapter and under the granting franchise ordinance or agreement, and its lawful successor, transferee or assignee. 
22.  "Grantor" or "city" means the city of Rohnert Park as represented by the city council or any delegate acting within the scope of its jurisdiction. 
23.  "Gross annual receipts" means the annual gross receipts received by the grantee from all sources of operations of the cable communications system, excluding refundable deposits, except that any sales, excise or other taxes collected for direct pass-through to local, state or federal government shall not be included. 
24.  "Initial service area" means the area of the city which will receive service initially, as set forth in the franchise agreement. 
25.  "Installation" means the connection of the system from feeder cable to subscribers' terminals, and the provision of service. 
26.  "Local origination channel" means any channel where the grantee or its designated agent is the primary programmer, and provides video programs to subscribers. 
27.  "Nonbroadcast signal" means a signal that is transmitted by a cable communications system and that is not involved in an over-the-air broadcast transmission path. 
28.  "Open channel" means any channel that can be received by all subscribers, without the necessity for special equipment. 
29.  "Pay-cable", "pay-television" or "pay-per-view" means the delivery to subscribers, over the cable communications system, of television signals for a fee or charge to subscribers over and above the charge for Basic Cable Service, on a per program, per channel, or other subscription basis. 
30.  "Penetration" means the result expressed in the percentage obtained by dividing the total number of potential subscribers in the franchise area into the number of subscribers receiving service. 
31.  "Person" means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation, or organizational entity. 
32.  "Private channel", or "closed-circuit channel" means any channel which is available only to subscribers who are provided with special converter or terminal equipment to receive signals on that channel. 
33.  "Programmer" means a person or entity who or which produces or otherwise provides program material or information for transmission by video, audio, digital, or other signals, either live or from recorded tapes or other storage media, to subscribers, by means of the cable communications system. 
34.  "Public, educational or government access facilities" or "PEG access facilities" means the total of the following: 
(a)  Channel capacity designated for public, educational, or governmental use; and 
(b)  Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity. 
35.  "Resident" means any person residing in the city as otherwise defined by applicable law. 
36.  "Residential subscriber" means a subscriber who receives a service in an individual dwelling unit, where the service is not to be utilized in connection with a business, trade, or profession. 
37.  "Sale" means any sale, exchange, barter or offer for sale. 
38.  "School" means any accredited nonprofit educational institution including primary and secondary schools, colleges and universities, both public and private. 
39.  "Section" means any section, subsection, or provision of this franchise chapter. 
40.  "Service area" or "franchise area" means the entire geographic area within the city designated in a franchise agreement to receive cable service. 
41.  "Service tier" means a category of cable service or other services provided by a grantee and for which a separate rate is charged by the grantee. 
42.  "State" means the State of California. 
43.  "Street" means each of the following which have been dedicated to the public or hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority or by others and located within the city limits: streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way and similar public property and areas that the grantor shall permit to be included within the definition of street from time to time. 
44.  "Subscriber" means any person, firm, corporation, or other entity who or which elects to subscribe to, for any purpose, a service provided by the grantee by means of or in connection with the cable communications system. 
(Ord. 486 § 3, 1987)  
5.24.040 - Grant of franchise. 
A.  Grant. In the event that grantor shall grant to a grantee a nonexclusive, revocable franchise to construct, operate, maintain, and reconstruct, a cable communications system within the franchise area, or a renewal of an existing franchise, said franchise shall constitute both a right and an obligation to provide the services of a cable communications system as required by the provisions of this chapter and the franchise agreement. The franchise agreement shall include those provisions of the grantee's "Application for Franchise" or "Franchise Proposal" that are finally negotiated and accepted by the grantor and grantee. 
Any franchise granted under the terms and conditions contained herein shall be consistent with federal laws and regulations and state general laws and regulations. In the event of conflict between the terms and conditions of the franchise and the terms and conditions on which the grantor can grant a franchise, the general law and/or statutory requirements shall, without exception, control. 
Any franchise granted is hereby made subject to the general ordinance provisions now in effect or hereafter made effective. Nothing in the franchise shall be deemed to waive the requirements of the other codes and ordinances of the grantor regarding permits, fees to be paid or manner of construction. 
B.  Franchise required. No cable communications system shall be allowed to occupy or use the streets in the franchise area or be allowed to operate without a franchise in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Establishment of franchise requirements. The grantor may establish appropriate requirements for new franchises or franchise renewals, and may modify these requirements from time to time to reflect changing conditions and state of art in the cable industry. Such requirements shall not be retroactive to franchises then in effect, except as set forth in paragraph L, but shall become applicable when the franchise is renewed. 
D.  Authority to grant franchise. The grantor may grant a franchise for all or any defined portion of the city. The service area shall be the entire area defined in the franchise agreement. The initial service area shall be that portion of the franchise area scheduled to receive initial service, as stated in the franchise agreement. 
E.  Use of public streets and ways. For the purpose of operating and maintaining a cable communications system in the franchise area, and subject to the provisions of Section 5.24.070 J. herein, the grantee may erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across, and along the public streets and ways within the franchise area such wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, pedestals, attachments, towers, antennas and other property and equipment as are necessary and appurtenant to the operation of the cable communications system. Prior to construction or alteration, however, the grantee shall in each case file plans with the appropriate grantor agencies and local utility companies, and receive written approval before proceeding. Grantee shall in any event comply with all applicable grantor construction codes and procedures. 
F.  Duration. The term of any new franchise and all rights, privileges, obligations and restrictions pertaining thereto shall be as established in the franchise agreement, unless terminated sooner as hereinafter provided. 
G.  Franchise nonexclusive. Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The grantor specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises for a cable communications system as it deems appropriate, provided however, that such additional grants shall not operate to the material, detriment or to materially modify any rights previously granted to any grantee. 
H.  Franchise applications. Applicants for a franchise shall submit to the grantor written applications utilizing the standardized format provided by the grantor, at the time and place designated by the grantor for accepting applications, and including the application fees designated by grantor. 
I.  Grant procedure. All franchise applications when filed shall be available for public inspection at places designated by the grantor. No later than ninety days after the final date for filing applications, one or more public hearings shall be held on the applications. A decision shall be made by the grantor not later than ninety days after the conclusion of all such public hearings based upon an evaluation of the application(s), the hearings, and other information that the grantor may deem relevant. Grantor may grant one or more franchises, or may decline to grant any franchise. 
J.  Transfer of ownership or control. 
1.  Transfer of franchise. Any franchise granted hereunder shall be a privilege to be held for the benefit of the public. Said franchise cannot in any event be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, including but not limited to, by forced or voluntary sale, merger, consolidation, receivership, or other means without the prior written consent of the grantor, and then only under such reasonable conditions as the grantor may establish. Such consent as required by the grantor shall be given or denied no later than one hundred twenty days following any request, and shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
2.  Hypothecation. Notwithstanding paragraph J.1., the issue and outstanding shares of stock of the grantee may be hypothecated and the system assets may be hypothecated, without the prior approval of the grantor, where such shares and assets are hypothecated in connection with securing an indebtedness of the company which includes, but may not be limited to, indebtedness for this system. 
In the instance of a hypothecation of the shares or assets of the grantee, the sale or transfer of the stock or assets by the lenders shall be subject to the prior approval by the grantor expressed by ordinance. 
3.  Ownership or control. The grantee shall promptly notify in writing the grantor of any proposed change in, or transfer of, or acquisition by any other part of, control of the grantee or its parent. The word "control" as used herein is not limited to major stockholders but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. A rebuttable presumption that a transfer of control has occurred shall arise upon the acquisition or transfer by any person or group of persons of twenty-five percent or more of the beneficial ownership interest of the grantee or its parent. Every change, transfer, or acquisition of control of the grantee shall make the franchise subject to cancellation unless and until the grantor shall have consented in writing thereto, which consent shall be given or denied no later than one hundred twenty days following any request, and shall not be unreasonably withheld. For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer or acquisition of control, the grantor may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective controlling party, and the grantee shall assist the grantor in any such inquiry. 
In seeking the grantor's consent to any change in ownership or control, the grantee shall have the responsibility: 
(a)  To show to the satisfaction of the grantor whether the proposed purchaser, transferee, or assignee (the "proposed transferee"), which in the case of a corporation, shall include all directors and all persons having a legal or equitable interest in five percent or more of its voting stock: 
(1)  Has ever been convicted or held liable for acts involving moral turpitude including, but not limited to any violation of federal, state or local law or regulations, or is presently under an indictment, investigation or complaint charging such acts; 
(2)  Has ever had a judgment in an action for fraud, deceit or misrepresentation entered against it, her, him, or them by any court of competent jurisdiction; or 
(3)  Has pending any legal claim, lawsuit or administrative proceeding arising out of or involving a cable system. 
(b)  To establish, to the satisfaction of the grantor, the financial solvency of the proposed transferee by submitting all current financial data for the proposed transferee which the grantee was required to submit in its franchise application, and such other data as the grantor may request. Financial statements shall be audited, certified and qualified by a Certified Public Accountant. 
(c)  To establish to the satisfaction of the grantor that the financial and technical capability of the proposed transferee is such as shall enable it to maintain and operate the cable system for the remaining term of the franchise under the existing franchise terms. 
The grantor agrees that any financial institution having a pledge of the franchise or its assets for the advancement of money for the construction and/or operation of the franchise shall have the right to notify the grantor that it or its designee satisfactory to the grantor shall take control and operate the cable communications system, in the event of a grantee default in its financial obligations. Further, said financial institution shall also submit a plan for such operation that will insure continued service and compliance with all franchise requirements during the term the financial institution exercises control over the system. The financial institution shall not exercise control over the system for a period exceeding one year unless extended by the grantor in its discretion and during said period of time it shall have the right to petition the grantor to transfer the franchise to another grantee. If the grantor finds that such transfer after considering the legal, financial, character, technical and other public interest qualities of the applicant are satisfactory, the grantor shall transfer and assign the rights and obligations of such franchise as in the public interest. The consent of the grantor to such transfer shall be given or denied no less than ninety days after any request, and shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
4.  The consent or approval of the grantor to any transfer by the grantee shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the grantor in and to the streets, and any transfer shall by its terms, be expressly subject to the terms and conditions of any franchise. 
5.  In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the grantor shall not approve any transfer or assignment of the franchise prior to completion of initial construction of the cable system. 
6.  In no event shall a transfer of ownership or control be approved without the successor in interest becoming a signatory to the franchise agreement. 
K.  Franchise renewal. Franchise renewal shall be as prescribed by applicable law. 
L.  Police powers. In accepting a franchise, the grantee acknowledges that its rights hereunder are subject to the police powers of the grantor to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public; and it agrees to comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the grantor pursuant to such power. 
Any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and any other present or future lawful exercise of the grantor's police powers shall be resolved in favor of the latter, except that any such exercise that is not of general application in the jurisdiction or applies exclusively to any cable communications system franchise which contains provisions inconsistent with this chapter shall prevail only if upon such exercise the grantor finds any emergency exists constituting a danger to health, safety, property or general welfare or such exercise is mandated by law. 
M.  Franchise fee. 
1.  Annual franchise payment. A grantee of a franchise hereunder shall pay to the grantor an annual fee in an amount as designated in the franchise agreement. Such payment shall commence as of the effective date of the franchise or any renewal date. The grantor, on an annual basis, shall be furnished a statement within sixty days of the close of the calendar year, audited and certified by an independent certified public accountant, reflecting the total amounts of gross receipts and all payments, deductions and computations for the period covered by the payment. Upon ten days prior written notice, grantor shall have the right to conduct an independent audit of grantee's records, in accordance with generally accepted accounting procedures, and if such audit indicates an underpayment of two percent or more of the franchise fee due, the grantee shall assume all reasonable costs of such an audit. 
2.  Acceptance by grantor. No acceptance of any payment by the grantor shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the grantor may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this chapter or for the performance of any other obligation of the grantee. 
3.  Failure to make required payment. In the event that any franchise payment or recomputed amount is not made on or before the dates specified herein, grantee shall pay as additional compensation: 
(a)  An interest charge, computed from such due date, at an annual rate equal to the average rate of return on invested funds of the city during the period for which payment was due. 
(b)  If the payment is late by thirty days or more, a sum of money equal to five percent of the amount due in order to defray those additional expenses and costs incurred by the grantor by reason of delinquent payment. 
4.  Franchise fee payments shall be made in accordance with the schedule indicated in the franchise agreement. 
5.  Any grantee "pass through" or itemization of franchise fee costs on subscribers' bills shall be in accordance with federal law. 
N.  Forfeiture or revocation. 
1.  Grounds for revocation. If the grantee has been given due notice and a reasonable opportunity to cure, the grantor reserves the right to revoke any franchise granted hereunder and rescind all rights and privileges associated with the franchise in the following circumstances, each of which shall represent a default under this chapter and a material breach of the franchise: 
(a)  If the grantee shall default in the performance of any of its material obligations under this chapter or under such documents, agreements and other terms and provisions entered into by and between the grantor and the grantee, subject to the provisions of Section 5.24.130 D. 
(b)  If the grantee should fail to provide or maintain in full force and effect, the liability and indemnification coverages or the security fund or bonds as required herein. 
(c)  If any court of competent jurisdiction, or any federal or state regulatory body by rules, decisions or other action determines that any material provision of the franchise documents, including this chapter, the franchise agreement and grantee's proposal is invalid or unenforceable prior to the commencement of initial system construction. 
(d)  If the grantee ceases to provide all services for any reason within the control of the grantee over the cable communications system. 
(e)  If the grantee willfully violates any of the material provisions of this chapter or the franchise agreement or attempts to practice any fraud or deceit upon the grantor. 
(f)  If the grantee becomes insolvent, or upon listing of an order for relief in favor of grantee in a bankruptcy proceeding. 
2.  Procedure prior to revocation. 
(a)  Upon a finding pursuant to Section 5.24.130 B. that a violation has occurred, the grantor may make written demand that the grantee comply with any such requirement, limitation, term, condition, rule or regulation or correct any action deemed cause for revocation. In the event the stated violation is not reasonably curable within ninety days, the franchise shall not be terminated or revoked, or damages assessed, if the grantee provides within the said ninety days a plan, satisfactory to the grantor, to remedy the violation. If the failure, refusal or neglect of the grantee continues for a period exceeding ninety days following receipt of such written demand by the grantor, the grantor may place its request for termination of the franchise upon a regular council meeting agenda. The grantor shall cause notice to be served upon such grantee, at least twenty days prior to the date of such meeting, a written notice of this intent to request such termination, and the time and place of the meeting, notice of which shall be published at least once, ten days before such meeting in a newspaper of general circulation within the franchise area. 
(b)  The grantor shall hear any persons interested therein, and shall determine, within ninety days, based upon the preponderance of the evidence, whether the grantee has committed a material breach of this chapter or the franchise agreement, and, if so, whether such breach was willful. 
(c)  If the grantor determines that the grantee has willfully committed a material breach, then the grantor may, by resolution, declare that the franchise of such grantee shall be terminated and security fund and bonds forfeited, or the grantor may, at its option and if the material breach is capable of being cured by the grantee, direct the grantee to take appropriate remedial action within such time and manner and upon such terms and conditions as the grantor shall determine are reasonable under the circumstances. 
O.  Procedures in the event of termination or expiration. 
1.  Disposition of facilities. In the event a franchise expires, is revoked, or otherwise terminated, the grantor may order the removal of the aboveground system facilities from the franchise area within a reasonable period of time as determined by the grantor or require the original grantee to maintain and operate its cable system for a period not to exceed twenty-four months as indicated in paragraph O,4. below. 
2.  Restoration of property. In removing its plant, structures, and equipment, the grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it and shall leave all public ways and places in as good condition as that prevailing prior to the grantee's removal of its equipment without affecting the electrical or telephone cable wires, or attachments. The liability, indemnity and insurance, and the security fund and bonds provided shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by the grantee with the terms and conditions of this section. 
3.  Restoration by grantor, reimbursement of costs. In the event of a failure by the grantee to complete any work required by paragraph O,1. above and/or paragraph O,2. above, or any other work required by grantor by law or ordinance, within ninety days after receipt of written notice, and to the satisfaction of the grantor, the grantor may cause such work to be done and the grantee shall reimburse the grantor the cost thereof within thirty days after receipt of an itemized list of such costs or the grantor may recover such costs through the security fund or bonds provided by grantee. The grantor shall be permitted to seek legal and equitable relief to enforce the provisions of this section. 
4.  Extended operation. Upon either the expiration or revocation of a franchise, the grantor may require the grantee to continue to operate the cable communications system for a defined period of time not to exceed twenty-four months from the date of such expiration or revocation. The grantee shall, as trustee for its successor in interest, continue to operate the cable communications system under the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise agreement and to provide the regular cable service and any of the other services that may be provided at that time. The grantor shall be permitted to seek legal and equitable relief to enforce the provisions of this section. 
5.  Grantor's right not affected. The termination and forfeiture of any franchise shall in no way affect any of the rights of the grantor under any provision of law. 
P.  Receivership and foreclosure. 
1.  Any franchise granted shall, at the option of the grantor, cease and terminate sixty days after the appointment of a receiver or receivers or trustee or trustees to take over and conduct the business of the grantee whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of said sixty days, or unless: 
(a)  Such receivers or trustees shall have, within sixty days after their election or appointment, fully complied with all the terms and provisions of this chapter and the franchise granted pursuant hereto, and the receivers or trustees within said sixty days shall have remedied all defaults under the franchise; and, 
(b)  Such receivers or trustees shall, within said sixty days, execute an agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction on the premises, whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and every term, provision and limitation of the franchise agreement. 
2.  In the case of a foreclosure or other involuntary sale of the plant, property and equipment of the grantee, or any part thereof, the grantor may serve notice of termination upon the grantee and to the purchaser at such sale, in which event the franchise and rights and privileges of the grantee hereunder shall cease and terminate thirty days after service of such notice, unless: 
(a)  The grantor shall have approved the transfer of the franchise, as and in the manner in this chapter provided; and, 
(b)  Such successful purchaser shall have covenanted and agreed with the grantor to assume and be bound by all the terns and conditions of the franchise agreement. 
Q.  Franchise processing costs. For either a new franchise award, a franchise renewal or a franchise transfer, the costs to be borne by the grantee or grantees shall include, but shall not be limited to, all costs of publications of notices prior to any public meeting provided for pursuant to a franchise, development and publication of relevant ordinances and franchise agreement, fees, and any cost not covered by the applications fees, incurred by the grantor in its study, preparation of proposal solicitation documents, evaluation of all applications, including, but not limited to consultant and attorney fees. 
These franchise processing costs are over and above the construction inspection and permit fees specified in Section 5.24.070, paragraph K,1(a) and the franchise fee specified in Section 5.24.040M. herein. 
(Ord. 601 §§ 1, 2, 1995: Ord. 486 § 4, 1987)  
5.24.050 - Regulation of franchise. 
A.  Regulatory authority. The grantor shall exercise regulatory authority under the provisions of this chapter and applicable law. If the franchise area served by the cable communications system also serves other contiguous or neighboring communities, grantor may, at its sole option, participate in a joint regulatory agency, with delegated responsibility in the area of cable and related communications. 
B.  Regulatory responsibility. The grantor, acting alone or acting jointly with other grantors, may exercise or delegate the following regulatory responsibility: 
1.  Administering and enforcing the provisions of the cable communications system franchise(s). 
2.  Coordination of the operation of public, educational and government (PEG) access channel and facilities. 
3.  Providing technical, programming and operational support to public agency users, such as government departments, schools and health care institutions. 
4.  Establishing jointly with the grantee, or as otherwise specified in the franchise agreement, procedures and standards for use of channels dedicated to public use and sharing of public facilities, if provided for in any franchise agreement. 
5.  Planning expansion and growth of public benefit cable services. 
6.  Analyzing the possibility of integrating cable communications with other local, state or national telecommunications networks. 
7.  Formulating and recommending long-range telecommunications policy. 
C.  Public usage of the system. If so specified in the franchise agreement, the grantor may require the grantee to designate a portion of the cable communications system capacity, and associated facilities and equipment, for public, educational or governmental use, to develop and provide noncommercial cable services that will be in the public interest. In furtherance of this purpose, the grantor may establish a commission, public corporation, or other entity to receive and allocate facilities, support funds and other considerations provided by the grantor, the grantee, and/or others. Such an entity, if established, may be delegated the following responsibilities: 
1.  Receive and utilize or reallocate for utilization, channel capacity, facilities, funding and other support provided specifically for public usage of the cable communications system. 
(a)  Review the status and progress of each service developed for public benefit. 
(b)  Reallocate resources jointly with the grantee on a periodic basis to conform with changing priorities and public needs. 
(c)  Report to the grantor and the grantee annually on the utilization of resources, the new public services developed and the benefits achieved for the grantor and its residents. 
D.  PEG access facility management. 
1.  Intent. It is the intent of the grantor to insure that PEG access facilities provided for in any franchise agreement shall be managed in the best public interest so that programming using such facilities will be open to all residents, and available for all forms of public expression, community information and debate of public issues. Pursuant to these objectives, the grantor may delegate the responsibility for PEG access facility management to a nonprofit entity which may include, but not be limited to, any of the following: 
(a)  A nonprofit public corporation. 
(b)  A PEG access facility management commission or committee, appointed by grantor, and representing a broad spectrum of the community. 
(c)  An established nonprofit entity with special cablecasting capability, such as a local or regional community college. 
2.  Functions. The entity designated to manage the PEG access facilities shall have the following functions: 
(a)  Responsibility for program production for and management of the public access facilities as may in the franchise agreement be designated for community-based programming. Community channels may include public, educational and government access channels, as designated in the franchise agreement. 
(b)  To assure that the PEG access facilities are made available to all residents of the franchise area on a nondiscriminatory, first-come, first-served basis. 
(c)  To assure that no censorship or control over program content of the PEG access facilities exists except as necessary to comply with federal prohibition of material that is illegal. 
(d)  To devise, establish, and administer all rules, regulations, and procedures pertaining to the use and scheduling of the PEG access facilities. 
(e)  To prepare, in conjunction with the grantee, such regular or special reports as may be required or desirable. 
(f)  To hire and supervise staff. 
(g)  To make all purchases of materials and equipment that may be required. 
(h)  To develop sources of funding, such as foundation or federal or state grants, to further community programming. 
(i)  To perform such other functions relevant to the PEG access facilities as may be appropriate. 
(j)  Establishment of budgets on an annual basis, and utilization of funds and resources received from the grantor or the public usage entity designated in Section 5.24.050C., for the purpose of PEG access programming. 
3.  Access rules. The PEG access facility management entity shall complete a set of rules for the use of the PEG access facilities which shall be promptly forwarded to the grantor. The rules shall be prepared in cooperation with the grantee, and confirmed by agreement between the PEG access facility management entity and the grantee. The rules shall, at a minimum, provide for: 
(a)  Access on a first-come, first-served, nondiscriminatory basis for all residents of the franchise area. 
(b)  Prohibition of commercial use by public access programming producers. 
(c)  Prohibition of any presentation of obscene material. 
(d)  Public inspection of the log of producers, which shall be retained by the PEG access facility management entity for a period of four years. 
(e)  Procedures by which individuals or groups who violate any rule may be prevented from further access to the facilities. 
(f)  Free use of such reasonable amounts of channel time, cablecasting facilities, and technical support as are provided for in the agreement between the PEG access facility management entity and the grantee. 
4.  PEG access facility management entity reports to grantor. The PEG access facility management entity shall provide a report to the grantor and the grantee, at least annually, indicating achievements in community-based programming and services. 
E.  Reservation by grantor. The grantor reserves the right, at its discretion, from time to time, to determine if the entities described in Sections 5.24.050C. and 5.24.050D. above are performing their purposes in a manner satisfactory to the grantor, and if they are not, the grantor may receive and reallocate all or a portion of the channel capacity, operations appropriation, and capital appropriation, including any facilities and equipment purchased previously with such appropriation, to another entity. A new entity shall be required to comply in all respects with the legal responsibilities described in Sections 5.24.050C. and 5.24.050D. 
F.  Rates. The grantee shall establish rates for its services that must be applied fairly and uniformly to all subscribers in the franchise area. The grantor retains the right to institute rate regulation to the extent permitted by applicable law. 
G.  Annual review of performance and quality of service. At grantor's sole option, within ninety days of the first anniversary of the effective date of each franchise, and each year thereafter throughout the term of the franchise, the grantor may hold a public hearing at which the grantee shall be present and shall participate, to review the performance and quality of service of the cable communications system. The reports required in Section 5.24.140 regarding subscriber complaints, the records of performance tests and the opinion survey report shall be utilized as the basis for review. In addition, any subscriber may submit comments or complaints during the review meetings, either orally or in writing, and these shall be considered. 
1.  Within thirty days after the conclusion of the public hearing, grantor shall issue a report with respect to the adequacy of system performance and quality of service. If inadequacies are found, grantor may direct grantee to correct the inadequacies within a reasonable period of time. 
2.  Failure of grantee, after due notice, to correct the inadequacies shall be considered a breach of the franchise, and grantor may, at its sole discretion, exercise any remedy within the scope of this chapter considered appropriate. 
H.  System and services review. To provide for technological, economic, and regulatory changes in the state of the art of cable communications, to facilitate renewal procedures, to promote the maximum degree of flexibility in the cable system, and to achieve a continuing, advanced modern system, the following system and services review procedures are hereby established: 
1.  At grantor's sole option, the grantor may hold a public hearing on or about the third anniversary date of the franchise agreement at which the grantee shall be present and shall participate, to review the cable communications system and services. Subsequent system and services review hearings may be scheduled by the grantor each three years thereafter. 
2.  Sixty days prior to the scheduled system and services review hearing, grantee shall submit a report to grantor indicating the following: 
(a)  All cable system services reported in cable industry trade journals that are being commonly provided on an operational basis, excluding tests and demonstrations, to communities in the United States with comparable populations, that are not provided to the grantor. 
(b)  Any specific plans for provision of such new services by the grantee, or a justification indicating why grantee believes that such services are not feasible for the franchise area. 
3.  Topics for discussion and review at the system and services review hearing shall include but shall not be limited to, services provided, feasibility of providing new services, application of new technologies, system performance, programming, subscriber complaints, user complaints, rights of privacy, amendments to the franchise, undergrounding processes, developments in the law, and regulatory constraints. 
4.  Either the grantor or the grantee may select additional topics for discussion at any review hearing. 
5.  Not later than sixty days after the conclusion of each system and service review hearing, grantor shall issue a report, including specifically a listing of any cable services not then being provided to the grantor that are considered technically and economically feasible. Grantor may request grantee to provide such services within a reasonable time, under reasonable rates and conditions. 
(Ord. 486 § 5, 1987)  
5.24.060 - General financial and insurance provisions. 
A.  Construction bond. 
1.  Within thirty days after the granting of a new franchise, or a renewal which requires significant system construction, and prior to the commencement of any construction work by the grantee, the grantee shall file with the grantor a construction bond in the amount specified in the franchise agreement in favor of the grantor as a result of the breach of any duty by the grantee assured by such bond. 
2.  Such bond as contemplated herein shall be in the form approved by the city attorney. 
3.  In no event shall the amount of said bond be construed to limit the liability of the grantee for damages. 
4.  Grantor, at its sole option, may waive this requirement, or permit consolidation of the construction bond with the performance bond and security specified, respectively in Sections 5.24.060B. and 5.24.060C. 
5.  Upon completion of construction, any construction bonds then in force shall be released. 
B.  Performance bond. 
1.  In addition to the construction bond set forth above, the grantee may be required, at least thirty days prior to the commencement of operation, to file with the grantor a performance bond in the amount specified in the franchise agreement in favor of the grantor as a result of any occurrence in the operation or termination of the cable communications system operated under the franchise agreement and including the payments required to be made to the grantor hereunder. 
2.  Such bond as contemplated herein shall be in the form approved by the city attorney. 
3.  In no event shall the amount of said bond be construed to limit the liability of the grantee for damages. 
C.  Security. 
1.  Within thirty days after the effective date of the franchise, the grantee shall deposit into a bank account, in the name of the grantor and maintain on deposit through the term of this franchise, the sum specified in the franchise agreement, as security for the faithful performance by it of all the provisions of the franchise, and compliance with all orders, permits and directions of any agency of the grantor having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults under this chapter, and the payment by the grantee of any claims, liens and taxes due the grantor which arise by reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of the system. 
Subject to the provisions of paragraph C,4. below, the security fund may be assessed by the grantor for purposes including, but not limited to, the following: 
(a)  Failure of grantee to pay grantor sums due under the terms of the franchise. 
(b)  Reimbursement of costs borne by the grantor to correct franchise violations not corrected by grantee, after due notice. 
(c)  Monetary remedies or damages assessed against grantee due to default or violation of franchise requirements. 
2.  At grantor's sole option, some portion of the security fund may be provided in the acceptable form of an irrevocable letter of credit, in lieu of a cash deposit. 
3.  Within thirty days after notice to it that any amount has been withdrawn by the grantor from the security fund pursuant to paragraph C,1. of this section, the grantee shall deposit a sum of money sufficient to restore such security fund to the amount required by the franchise agreement. 
4.  If the grantee fails, after thirty days written notice to pay to the grantor any franchise fee or taxes due and unpaid; or, fails to pay to the grantor within such thirty days, any damages, costs or expenses which the grantor shall be compelled to pay by reason of any act or default of the grantee in connection with the franchise; or fails, after thirty days notice of such failure by the grantor to comply with any material provision of the franchise which the grantor reasonably determines can be remedied by an expenditure of the security fund, the grantor may thereafter withdraw the amount thereof, with interest and any penalties, from the security fund. Upon such withdrawal, the grantor shall notify the grantee of the amount and date thereof. 
5.  The security fund deposited pursuant to this section shall become the property of the grantor in the event that the franchise is revoked for cause by reason of the default of the grantee in accordance with the procedures of Section 5.24.040N, above. The grantee, however, shall be entitled to the return of such security fund, or portion thereof, as remains on deposit no later than ninety days after the expiration of the term of the franchise, provided that there is then no outstanding default on the part of the grantee. The grantee shall be entitled to any interest accrued on the cash portion of the security fund. 
6.  The rights reserved to the grantor with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the grantor whether reserved by this chapter or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such security fund shall constitute an election of remedies or a waiver of any other right the grantor may have. 
D.  Indemnification. 
1.  The grantee shall by acceptance of any franchise granted indemnify, defend and hold harmless the grantor, its officers, boards, commissions, and employees from any and all claims, suits, judgments for damages or other relief, costs and reasonable attorneys' fees in any way arising out of or through or alleged to arise out of or through: 
(a)  The act of the grantor in granting the franchise; and 
(b)  The acts or omissions of grantee, its servants, employees, or agents including, but not limited to, any failure or refusal by grantee, its servants, employees or agents to comply with any obligation or duty imposed on grantee by this chapter or the franchise agreement. 
(c)  The exercise of any right or privilege granted or permitted by this chapter or the franchise agreement. 
Such indemnification shall include, but not be limited to, all claims arising in tort, contracts, infringements of copyright, violations of statutes, ordinances or regulations or otherwise. 
2.  In the event any such claims shall arise, the grantor or any other indemnified party shall tender the defense thereof to the grantee. Provided, however, that the grantor in its sole discretion may participate in the defense of such claims at its expense, and in such event, grantee shall not agree to any settlement of claims without grantor approval. 
3.  The grantee shall not be required to indemnify the grantor for negligence or willful misconduct on the part of grantor's officials, boards, commissions, agents or employees. 
E.  Insurance. 
1.  The grantee shall maintain throughout the term of the franchise insurance in amounts at least as follows: 
(a)  Worker's compensation insurance. In such coverage as may be required by the worker's compensation insurance and safety laws of the State of California and amendments thereto. 
(b)  Comprehensive general liability. Comprehensive general liability insurance, including, but not limited to, coverage for bodily injury and property damage shall be maintained at the sum(s) specified in the franchise agreement. 
(c)  Comprehensive automobile liability. Comprehensive automobile liability including, but not limited to, nonownership and hired car coverage as well as owned vehicles with coverage for bodily injury and property damage shall be maintained at the sum(s) specified in the franchise agreement. 
2.  The grantee shall furnish the grantor with copies of such insurance policies or certificates of insurance. 
3.  Such insurance policies provided for herein shall name the grantor, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, and employees as additional insured, and shall be primary to any insurance carried by grantor, and shall contain the following endorsement: 
 "It is hereby understood and agreed that this insurance policy may not be cancelled by the surety or the intention not to renew be stated by the surety until thirty days after receipt by the city by registered mail or written notice of such intention to cancel or not renew." 
4.  The minimum amounts set forth in the franchise agreement for such insurance shall not be construed to limit the liability of the grantee to the grantor under the franchise issued hereunder to the amounts of such insurance. 
5.  All insurance carriers providing coverage under subsection (E)(1) of this section shall be duly licensed to operate in the state of California. 
(Ord. 773 § 1, 2007; Ord. 486 § 6, 1987) 
(Ord. No. 853, § 1, 2-12-2013)  
5.24.070 - Design and construction provisions. 
A.  System design. The cable communications system shall be constructed in accordance with the design requirements contained in the franchise agreement. 
B.  Geographical coverage. The grantee shall design and construct the cable system in such a manner as to have the capability to pass by every single-family dwelling unit, multiple-family dwelling unit, school and public agency within the franchise area. Service shall be provided to subscribers in accordance with the schedules and line extension policies specified in the franchise agreement. Cable system construction and provision of service shall be nondiscriminatory, and grantee shall not delay or defer service to any section of the franchise area on the grounds of economic preference. 
C.  Cablecasting facilities. The grantee shall provide cablecasting facilities in accordance with the requirements of the franchise agreement. 
D.  System construction schedule. 
1.  The grantee shall comply with the requirements of the system construction schedule contained in the franchise agreement. 
2.  The grantee shall provide a detailed construction plan indicating progress schedule, area construction maps, test plan, and projected dates for offering service. In addition, the grantee shall update this information on a monthly basis, by submitting a copy of its normal internal progress reports, showing specifically whether schedules are being met and the reasons for any delay. 
E.  Remedies for delay in construction. The grantor may at its sole option, apply any or all of the remedies in connection with delays in system construction as specified in Section 5.24.120 herein. 
F.  Provision of service. After service has been established by activating trunk and distribution cables for any area, the grantee shall provide service to any requesting subscriber within that area within thirty days from the date of request, provided, however, that the grantee has been able to obtain any easement, right of entry agreement, or other permission required for the grantee to lawfully and reasonably provide service. 
G.  Undergrounding of cable. The undergrounding of cable is encouraged. In any event, cables shall be installed underground at grantee's cost where utilities are already underground, or where required by law. Previously installed aerial cable shall be undergrounded and relocated in concert with other utilities, when such other utilities may convert from aerial to underground construction. 
H.  New development undergrounding. In cases of new construction or property development where utilities are to be placed underground, the developer or property owner shall give grantee at least five working days notice of the particular date on which open trenching will be available for grantee's installation of conduit, pedestals and/or vaults to be provided at grantee's expense. Grantee shall also provide specifications as needed for trenching. Whether or not grantee receives timely notice, as provided above, it shall be grantee's responsibility to underground its cables and to provide service in new developments. 
Costs of trenching and easements required to bring service to the development shall be borne by the developer or property owner; except that if grantee fails to install its conduit, pedestals and/or vaults within five working days of the date of the trenches are available, as designated in the notice given by the developer or property owner, then should the trenches be closed after the five day period, the cost of new trenching is to be borne by grantee. 
I.  Underground at multiple-dwelling units. In cases of multiple dwelling units serviced by aerial utilities, grantee shall make every effort to minimize the number of individual aerial drop cables giving preference to undergrounding of multiple drop cables between the pole and the dwelling unit. 
J.  Street occupancy. 
1.  Grantee shall utilize existing poles, conduits and other facilities whenever possible and economically feasible, and shall not construct or install any new, different, or additional poles, conduits, or other facilities on public property until the written approval of the grantor is obtained. 
2.  Grantee shall notify the grantor at least ten days prior to the intention of the grantee to commence any construction in any streets. The grantor shall cooperate with the grantee in granting any permits required, providing such grant and subsequent construction by the grantee shall not unduly interfere with the use of such streets and that proposed construction shall be done in accordance with the pertinent provisions of the ordinances of the grantor. 
3.  All transmission lines, equipment and structure shall be so installed and located as to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners and at all times, shall be kept and maintained in a safe, adequate and substantial condition, and in good order and repair. The grantee shall, at all times, employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public. Suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares or other devices shall be used at such times and places as are reasonably required for the safety of all members of the public. Any poles or other fixtures placed in any public way by the grantee shall be placed in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on such public way. 
4.  Grantee shall, at its own expense, and in a manner approved by the grantor, restore to grantor's reasonable standards and specifications any damage or disturbance caused to the public way as a result of its operations or construction on its behalf. 
5.  Whenever, in case of fire or other disaster, it becomes necessary in the judgment of the grantor to remove any of the grantee's facilities, no charge shall be made by the grantee against the grantor for restoration and repair, except for any damage caused by the negligence of the grantor in such removal. 
6.  Grantee shall have the authority to trim trees on public property at its own expense as may be necessary to protect its wires and facilities, subject to the supervision and direction of the grantor. 
7.  Upon receipt of thirty days written notice, the grantee at its expense shall protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove any property of grantee when, in the opinion of the grantor the same is required by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway or street grade, separation or realignment, installation of sewers, drains, waterpipes, power line, signal line, transportation facilities, tracks, or any other types of structure or improvements by governmental agencies whether acting in a governmental or a proprietary capacity, or any other structure or public improvement, including but not limited to movement of buildings, redevelopment, or any general program under which the grantor shall undertake to cause any such properties to be located beneath the surface of the ground. Nothing hereunder shall be deemed a taking of the property of grantee. 
8.  After receipt of thirty days written notice, upon failure of grantee to commence, pursue or complete any work required by law or by the provisions of this chapter to be done in any street, within the time prescribed and to the satisfaction of the grantor, the grantor may, at its option, cause such work to be done and the grantee shall pay to the grantor the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the grantor to grantee within thirty days after receipt of such itemized report. 
9.  The grantee shall make no paving cuts without receiving written permission from the grantor. 
10.  Grantor reserves the right to require conduit for underground cabling in special areas. 
K.  Construction and technical standards. 
1.  Construction standards. 
(a)  Grantor codes and permits. Grantee shall comply with all applicable grantor construction codes and permits procedures, which may include payment of applicable permit and inspection fees. 
(b)  Compliance with safety codes. All construction practices shall be in accordance with all applicable sections of Federal and State Occupational Safety and Health Acts and any amendments thereto as well as all state and local codes where applicable. 
(c)  Compliance with electrical codes. All installation of electronic equipment shall be of a permanent nature, durable and installed in accordance with the provisions of all applicable state and local codes. 
(d)  Antennas and towers. Antenna supporting structures (towers) shall be designed for the proper loading as specified in Electronics Industry Association's R.S.222-A specifications, and provisions of the Uniform Building Code, as modified. 
(e)  Compliance with aviation requirements. Antenna supporting structures (towers) shall be painted, lighted, erected and maintained in accordance with all applicable rules and regulations of the federal Aviation Administration and all other applicable state or local codes and regulations. 
(f)  Construction standards and requirements. All of the grantee's plant and equipment, including but not limited to, the antenna site, headend and distribution system towers, house connections, structures, poles, wire, cable, coaxial cable, fixtures and appurtenances shall be installed, located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, replaced, removed, repaired, maintained and operated in accordance with good engineering practices, performed by experienced maintenance and construction personnel so as not to endanger or interfere in any manner with the rights of any property owner, or to hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(g)  Safety, nuisance, requirements. The grantee shall at all times employ professional care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injury or nuisance to the public. 
2.  Technical standards. The cable communications system shall meet all technical and performance standards contained in the franchise agreement. 
3.  Test and compliance procedure. The grantee shall submit, within sixty days after the effective date of the franchise agreement, a detailed test plan describing the methods and schedules for testing the cable communications system on an ongoing basis to determine compliance with the FCC requirements and/or guidelines, and provisions of the franchise agreement. System tests shall be performed at intervals no greater than twelve months. 
4.  Special tests. At any time after commencement of service to subscribers the grantor may require additional tests, full or partial repeat tests, different test procedures, or tests involving a specific subscriber's terminal. Requests for such additional tests will be made on the basis of complaints received or other evidence indicating an unresolved controversy or significant noncompliance, and such tests shall be limited to the particular matter in controversy. The grantor shall endeavor to so arrange its requests for such special tests so as to minimize hardship or inconvenience to grantee or to the subscriber. 
5.  Cost of tests. The cost of all tests required by paragraphs K,3. and K,4. above, and retesting as necessary, shall be borne by the grantee. 
L.  Areawide interconnection. 
1.  Interconnection. The grantor may request grantee to interconnect public usage channels of the cable communications system with any or all other cable systems in adjacent areas. Interconnection of systems shall permit interactive transmission and reception of program material, and may be done by direct cable connection, microwave link, satellite, or other appropriate method. 
2.  Interconnection procedure. Upon receiving the request of the grantor to interconnect, the grantee shall immediately initiate negotiations with the other affected system or systems, and shall report to the grantor the results of such negotiation no later than sixty days after initiation. 
3.  Relief. The grantee may be granted reasonable extensions of time to interconnect or the grantor may rescind its request to interconnect upon petition by the grantee to the grantor, if the grantor finds that the grantee has negotiated in good faith and has failed to obtain an approval from the system or systems of the proposed interconnection; or that the cost of the interconnection would cause an unreasonable or unacceptable increase in subscriber rates. 
4.  Cooperation required. The grantee shall cooperate with any interconnection corporation, regional interconnection authority or city, county, state or federal regulatory agency which may be hereafter established for the purpose of regulating, financing, or otherwise providing for the interconnection of cable systems beyond the boundaries of the franchise area. 
5.  Initial technical requirements to assure future interconnection capability. 
(a)  Every grantee receiving a franchise to operate a cable communications system within the franchise area shall use the same frequency allocations for commonly provided television signals so far as is technically and economically feasible. 
(b)  Grantee shall make a reasonable effort to provide local origination and access equipment that is compatible throughout the area served by the cable system. 
(Ord. 486 § 7, 1987)  
5.24.080 - Service provisions. 
A.  Services to be provided. The grantee shall provide the broad categories of video programming services listed in the franchise agreement. These categories shall not be reduced without prior notification to grantor. 
B.  Basic cable service. The "basic cable service" shall include any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television signals. This service shall be provided to all subscribers at the established monthly subscription rates. 
C.  Local origination channel(s). If local origination programming is provided, the grantee shall operate any cablecasting studios on a high-quality, professional basis for the purpose of providing cablecast programming responsive to local needs and interests. 
D.  Public, educational and government (PEG) access facilities. The grantee shall provide the PEG access facilities including channel capacity, necessary interface equipment and cabling to permit operation as specified in the franchise agreement. 
E.  Cable channels for commercial use. The grantee shall designate channel capacity for commercial use as required by applicable law. 
(Ord. 486 § 8, 1987)  
5.24.090 - Consumer protection. 
A.  Consumer service standards. The grantee shall maintain a local office to provide the necessary facilities, equipment and personnel to comply with the following consumer standards under normal conditions of operation: 
1.  Sufficient toll-free telephone line capacity during normal business hours to assure that a minimum of ninety percent of all callers for service will not be required to wait more than three minutes before being connected to a service representative. 
2.  Emergency toll-free telephone line capacity on a twenty-four hour basis, including weekends and holidays. 
3.  A business and service office, within the city, open during normal business hours a minimum of forty-eight hours per week, and adequately staffed to accept subscriber payments and respond to service requests and complaints. 
4.  An emergency system maintenance and repair staff, capable of responding to and repairing major system malfunction on a twenty-four hour basis. 
5.  An installation staff, capable of installing service to any subscriber within ten days after receipt of a request, in all areas where trunk and feeder cable have been activated, and where lawful access has been obtained. 
6.  Grantee shall schedule, within a specified four hour time period, all appointments with subscribers for installation or service. 
B.  Requests for cable service and repairs. 
1.  The grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Scheduled interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during period of minimum use of the system, preferably between midnight and six a.m. A written log or an equivalent stored in computer memory and capable of access and reproduction, shall be maintained for all service interruptions and requests for cable service as required by Section 5.24.140E. herein. 
2.  The grantee shall maintain a repair force of technicians normally capable of responding to subscriber requests for service within the following time frames: 
(a)  System outage: Within two hours, including weekends, of receiving subscriber calls which by number identify a system outage of sound or picture of one or more channels, affecting all the subscribers of the system or a considerable number thereof. 
(b)  Isolated outage: Within twenty four hours, including weekends, of receiving requests for service identifying an isolated outage of sound or picture for one or more channels. 
(c)  Inferior reception quality: Within forty-eight hours, including weekends, of receiving a request for service identifying a problem concerning picture or sound quality. 
Grantee shall be deemed to have responded to a request for service under the provisions of this section when a technician arrives at the service location and begins work on the problem. In the case of a subscriber not being home when the technician arrives, response shall be deemed to have taken place if the technician leaves written notification of arrival. 
No charge shall be made to the subscriber for any service call unless the service request can be demonstrated to be repeated and non-cable system in origin, or to involve subscriber negligence. 
C.  Verification of standards. Upon reasonable notice, the grantee shall demonstrate compliance with any or all of the standards required in Sections 5.24.090A. and 5.24.090B. above. The grantee shall provide sufficient detail to permit the grantor to verify the extent of compliance. 
D.  Noncompliance with standards. A repeated and verifiable pattern of noncompliance with the consumer protection standards of Sections 5.24.090A. and 5.24.090B., after grantee receipt of due notice and an opportunity to cure, may be termed a breach of the franchise, subject to any and all remedies as prescribed in Section 5.24.130 herein and applicable law. 
E.  Complaint procedure. 
1.  Complaints to grantee. Grantee shall establish written procedures for receiving, acting upon and resolving subscriber complaints in good faith without intervention by the grantor. The written procedures shall prescribe the manner in which a subscriber may submit a complaint either orally or in writing. At the conclusion of grantee's investigation of a subscriber complaint, but in no event more than ten days after receiving the complaint, grantee shall notify the subscriber in writing of the results of its proposed action or resolution of the complaint, if any. The grantee shall also notify the subscriber of the subscriber's right to file a complaint with the grantor in the event the subscriber is dissatisfied with the grantee's decision. Grantee's procedures shall be filed with the grantor. No other proceedings to resolve subscriber complaints shall be undertaken until the procedure established by this section has been exhausted. 
2.  Complaints to grantor. A subscriber who is dissatisfied with grantee's proposed response or who was not sent a written decision within the ten day period shall be entitled to have the complaint reviewed by the grantor. The subscriber shall initiate the review by filing a written complaint together with the grantee's written response, if any, with the grantor and by the grantor notifying the grantee of the filing. The subscriber shall make such filing and notification within twenty days of receipt of grantee's decision or, if no grantee decision has been provided, within thirty days after filing the original complaint with grantee. The grantor may extend these time limits for reasonable cause. 
F.  Review of unresolved disputes by the grantor. The grantor shall determine, based upon a review of an unresolved subscriber complaint and the grantee's response, whether further action is warranted. If the grantor decides to initiate further investigation, the grantor may require the grantee and the subscriber to submit a statement of position, or establish a hearing to be conducted by the grantor. The hearing shall be conducted informally, and the parties may offer any evidence pertinent to the dispute. The grantor shall attempt to mediate between the parties. If no common agreement is reached, the grantor may determine an appropriate resolution to the dispute, and issue findings to that effect, setting forth the basis of the findings and resolution. The decision may be appealed to the city council. 
G.  Notices. 
1.  Operating policies. As subscribers are connected or reconnected to the cable system, and at least once annually thereafter, the grantee shall provide each subscriber with written information concerning the procedures for making inquiries or complaints, including the name, address and local telephone number of the employee or employees or agent to whom such inquiries or complaints are to be addressed, and also furnish information concerning the grantor office responsible for administration of the franchise with the name and telephone number of the office. The notice shall also indicate grantee's business hours, legal holidays and procedures for responding to inquiries after normal business hours. 
The grantee shall provide all subscribers and the grantor written notice no less than thirty days prior to any proposed change in these policies. 
2.  Rates and services. The grantee shall provide all subscribers and the grantor with at least sixty days written notice prior to the implementation of any change in rates or a material change in programming services, excluding temporary marketing and sales promotional discounts or offers. 
3.  Copies to grantor. Copies of all notices provided to subscribers shall be filed concurrently with the grantor. 
H.  Quality of service. The overall quality of service provided by grantee to subscribers may be subject to evaluation by grantor in conjunction with the annual review set forth in Section 5.24.050G. In addition, grantor may evaluate the quality of service at any time, based upon the number of subscriber complaints received by the grantee and the grantor, and grantee's response to those complaints. Grantor's evaluation that service quality is inadequate may lead to direction to grantee to cure the inadequacies. Grantee shall commence corrective action within thirty days after receipt of written notice. Failure to do so shall be deemed to be a breach of the franchise and subject to the remedies prescribed in Section 5.24.130. Grantor, after due process, may utilize the performance bond and/or security of Sections 5.24.060B. and 5.24.060C., respectively, to remedy any such franchise breach. 
I.  Tenant Rights. It is grantor's intent that tenants not be discriminated against in the ability to subscribe to cable services. Grantee shall be required to provide service to tenants in individual units of a multiple housing facility with all services offered to other dwelling units within the franchise area, so long as the owner of the facility consents in writing, if requested by grantee, to the following: 
1.  To grantee's providing the service to units of the facility; 
2.  To reasonable conditions and time for installation, maintenance, and inspection of the system on the facility premises; 
3.  To reasonable conditions promulgated by grantee to protect grantee's equipment and to encourage widespread use of the system; and 
4.  To accept reasonable compensation from the grantee, not in excess of any amount which may be mandated by statute; and 
5.  To not discriminate in rental charges, or otherwise, between tenants who receive cable service and those who do not. 
J.  Grantee rules and regulations. The grantee shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable the grantee to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under the franchise, and to assure an uninterrupted service to each and all of its customers. Provided, however, that such rules, regulations terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions hereof or applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
K.  Rights of individuals. 
1.  Grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, PEG access channel users, or general citizens on the basis of income, race, color, religion, national origin, age or sex. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the grantee from establishing reasonable policies regarding credit risks, subscriber deposits, or advance payment policies, or from refusing to provide service to any household which has a history of non-payment, damage to grantee's equipment, or has threatened or assaulted grantee's employees. Grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, and all executive and administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination which are hereby incorporated and made part of this chapter by reference. 
2.  Grantee shall strictly adhere to the equal employment opportunity requirements of federal, state and local law and regulations in effect on the date of the franchise grant, and as amended from time to time. 
3.  The grantee's policy with regard to personally identifiable information shall be consistent with federal law. 
4.  Fairness of accessibility. The entire system of the grantee shall be operated in a manner consistent with the principle of fairness and equal accessibility of its facilities, equipment, channels, studios and other services to all citizens, businesses, public agencies and other entities having a legitimate use for the system, and no one shall be arbitrarily excluded from its use. 
L.  Continuity of service mandatory. 
1.  It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving service insofar as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored. In the event that the grantee elects to overbuild, rebuild, modify, or sell the system, or the grantor give notice of intent to terminate or fails to renew this franchise, the grantee shall act so as to ensure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted service. 
In the event of a change of grantee, or the event a new operator acquires the system, the original grantee shall cooperate with the grantor, new grantee or operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. During such period, grantee shall be entitled to the revenues for any period during which it operates the system, and shall be entitled to reasonable costs for its services when it no longer operates the system. 
2.  In the event grantee fails to operate the system for seven consecutive days without prior approval of the grantor or without just cause, the grantor may, at its option, and without further process impose liquidated damages not to exceed five hundred dollars per day for each succeeding day that service remains unavailable. 
M.  Identification of employees. Every employee of the grantee or its contractors or subcontractors shall be clearly identified on sight to the public as a representative of the grantee. Every vehicle of the grantee or its contractors or subcontractors shall be similarly identified. The grantee's telephone number shall also be clearly marked on all such vehicles. 
(Ord. 486 § 9, 1987)  
5.24.100 - Operation and maintenance. 
A.  Open books and records. The grantee shall manage all of its operations in accordance with a policy of totally open books and records. The grantor, upon reasonable notice, at reasonable intervals and for reasons related to the enforcement and administrative of this chapter or the franchise, and to obtain information which has not otherwise been provided the grantor or which grantor has reasonable basis to believe has not been reported fairly and accurately, shall have the right to inspect at any time during normal business hours, all books, records, maps, plans, service complaint logs, performance test results and other like materials of the grantee which relate to the operation of the franchise and are maintained at the local office required by Section 5.24.090A., provided that the grantor shall maintain the confidentiality of any trade secrets or other proprietary information in the possession of the grantee and provided further, that records shall be exempt from inspection pursuant to this section to the extent required by applicable law regarding subscriber privacy and to the extent such records are protected by law regarding subscriber privacy and to the extent such records are protected by law against discovery in civil litigation. 
If any of such books or records are not kept in the local office, or upon reasonable request made available to the grantor, and if the grantor shall determine that an examination of such records is necessary or appropriate to the performance of any of grantor's duties, then all travel and maintenance expense necessarily incurred in making such examination shall be paid by grantee. 
B.  Records required. 
1.  In any event the grantee shall at all times maintain: 
(a)  The complaint file required by Section 5.24.140E. herein. 
(b)  A full and complete set of plans, records and "as-built" maps showing the exact location of all cable communications system equipment installed or in use in the franchise area, exclusive of subscriber service drops. 
(Ord. 486 § 10, 1987)  
5.24.110 - Rights reserved to the grantor. 
A.  Right of inspection of construction. The grantor shall have the right to inspect all construction or installation work performed subject to the provisions of the franchise and to make such tests as it shall find necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this franchise and other pertinent provisions of law. 
B.  Right of intervention. The grantor shall have the right of intervention in any suit or proceeding involving the cable system franchise to which the grantee is party, and the grantee shall not oppose such intervention by the grantor. 
(Ord. 486 § 11, 1987)  
5.24.120 - Rights reserved to the grantee. 
A.  Right of grantee. In the event of any dispute between grantee and grantor over this chapter or the franchise agreement, or with respect to any rights or obligations arising therefrom, grantee shall first pursue and exhaust all available administrative remedies. Thereafter grantee may pursue any appropriate legal action. 
(Ord. 486 § 12, 1987)  
5.24.130 - Franchise violations. 
A.  Remedies for franchise violations. If the grantee fails to perform any material obligation under the franchise, or fails to do so in a timely manner, the grantor may at its option, and in its sole discretion: 
1.  Assess against the grantee monetary damages up to the limits established in the franchise agreement for material franchise violations, said assessment to be levied against the security fund, hereinabove provided, and collected by grantor after completion of the procedures specified in Section 5.24.130B. The amount of such assessment shall be deemed to represent liquidation of damages actually sustained by grantor by reason of grantee's failure to perform. Such assessment shall not constitute a waiver by the grantor of any other right or remedy it may have under the franchise or under applicable law, including without limitation, its right to recover from grantee such additional damages, losses, costs and expenses, including actual attorney fees, as may have been suffered or incurred by grantor by reason of or arising out of such breach of the franchise. This provision for assessment of damages is intended by the parties to be separate and apart from grantor's right to enforce the provisions of the construction and performance bonds provided for in Section 5.24.060, and is intended to provide compensation to grantor for actual damages. 
2.  Terminate the franchise, for any of the causes stated in Section 5.24.040, above. 
3.  Impose any lesser penalty consistent with this chapter, the franchise and applicable law, as the grantor may deem appropriate. 
4.  No remedy shall be imposed by grantor against grantee for any violation of the franchise without grantee being afforded due process of law, as provided for in Section 5.24.13GB. below. 
Grantor may impose any or all of the above enumerated measures against grantee, which shall be in addition to any and all other legal or equitable remedies it has under the franchise or under any applicable law. 
B.  Procedure for remedying franchise violations. In the event that the grantor determines that the grantee has violated any material provision of the franchise, the grantor may make a written demand on the grantee that it remedy such violation. If the violation is not remedied, or in the process of being remedied, to the satisfaction of the grantor within thirty days following such demand, the grantor shall determine whether or not such violation by the grantee was excusable or inexcusable, in accordance with the following procedure: 
1.  An administrative hearing shall be held to review the alleged violation. If this hearing does not result in a satisfactory resolution, and/or the grantee requests a public hearing, then a public hearing shall be held, and the grantee shall be provided with an opportunity to be heard upon thirty days written notice to the grantee of the time and the place of the hearing provided and the allegations of franchise violations. 
2.  If, after notice is given and, at the grantee's option, a full public proceeding is held, the grantor determines that such violation by the grantee was excusable as provided in Section 5.24.130C. below, the grantor shall direct the grantee to correct or remedy the same within such additional time, in such manner and upon such terms and conditions as the grantor may reasonably direct. 
3.  If, after notice is given and, at the grantee's option, a full public proceeding is held, the grantor determines that such violation was inexcusable, then the grantor may impose a remedy in accordance with Section 5.24.130A. above. 
C.  Force majeure; grantee's inability to perform. In the event grantee's performance of any of the terms, conditions, obligations, or requirements of the franchise is prevented or impaired due to any cause beyond its reasonable control or not reasonably foreseeable, such inability to perform shall be deemed to be excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof, provided grantee has notified grantor in writing within thirty days of its discovery of the occurrence of such an event. Such causes beyond grantee's reasonable control or not reasonably foreseeable shall include, but shall not be limited to, Acts of God and civil emergencies. 
Grantor and grantee, in the franchise agreement, may mutually define those conditions deemed subject to force majeure application. 
(Ord. 486 § 13, 1987)  
5.24.140 - Reports. 
A.  Annual reports. Within one hundred twenty days after the close of grantee's fiscal year, the grantee shall be required to submit a written annual report, in a form requested by the grantor, including, but not limited to, the following information: 
1.  A summary of the previous year's (or, in the case of the initial report year, the initial year's) activities in development of the cable system, including, but not limited to, services begun or discontinued during the reporting year, and the number of subscribers for each class of service. 
2.  A revenue statement, audited by an independent certified public accountant, or certified by an officer of the grantee. 
3.  A statement of projected construction, if any, for the next two years; 
4.  A list of grantee's officers, members of its boards of directors, and other principals of grantee; 
5.  A list of stockholders or other equity investors holding five percent or more of the voting interest in the grantee and its parent, subsidiary and affiliated corporations and other entities, if any, unless the parent is a public corporation whose annual reports are publicly available. 
6.  To the extent that money, other than profits, is paid to a parent, subsidiary, or other person affiliated with the grantee, the amounts of such payments and the basis for computation of such amounts (e.g., the basis for computing any management fees or share of "home office" overhead). 
B.  Plant survey and system performance report. At the grantor's request, grantee shall submit to the grantor an annual plant survey and system performance report. Said report shall include a description and "as-built" maps of the portions of the franchise area that have been cabled and have all services available, and the results of system performance tests conducted in conformity with all applicable FCC and franchise technical requirements. 
C.  Copies of federal and state reports. The grantee shall submit to the grantor copies of all pleadings, applications, notifications, communications and documents of any kind, submitted by the grantee to, as well as copies of all decisions, correspondence and actions by, any federal, state and local courts, regulatory agencies and other government bodies relating to its cable television operations within the franchise area. Grantee shall submit such documents to the grantor no later than thirty days after receipt of a grantor request. If any requested report is determined to be confidential by law or by the practices of federal or state agencies, such confidential data shall be submitted to the city attorney on a confidential basis, and shall be exempt from public disclosure. 
D.  Public reports. A copy of each of grantee's annual and other periodic public financial reports and those of its parent, as the grantor requests, shall be submitted to the grantor within thirty days after receipt of a request. 
E.  Complaint file and reports. An accurate and comprehensive file shall be kept by the grantee of any and all complaints regarding the cable system. A procedure shall be established by the grantee by the time of installation of the cable system to remedy complaints quickly and reasonably to the satisfaction of the grantor. Complete records of grantee's actions in response to all complaints shall be kept in accordance with paragraphs 1. through 3. below. These files and records shall remain open to the public during normal business hours, so that individuals are able to inspect their own files. 
1.  A summary of service complaints, identifying the number and nature of the complaints and their disposition, upon grantor request, shall be completed for each month and submitted to the grantor by the tenth day of the succeeding month. 
2.  A log and summary of all service interruptions shall be maintained and available for inspection. 
3.  If requested by the grantor, the results of an annual opinion survey report which identifies satisfaction or dissatisfaction among subscribers with cable communications services offered by the grantee, and subject to grantor regulation, shall be submitted to the grantor no later than two months after the end of grantee's fiscal year. The surveys required to make said report shall be in a form that can be transmitted to subscribers with one or more bills for service, such as postage-paid self-addressed post cards. At the grantor's option, the grantor may prepare the survey form and request its inclusion with a monthly bill to subscribers. 
F.  Miscellaneous reports. Grantee shall submit to the grantor such other information or reports in such forms and at such times as the grantor may reasonably request or require, at reasonable intervals and for reasons related to the enforcement and administration of this chapter or the franchise, and to obtain information which has not otherwise been provided the grantor or which grantor has reasonable basis to believe has not been reported fairly and accurately. 
G.  Inspection of facilities. The grantee shall allow the grantor to make inspections of any of the grantee's facilities and equipment, at reasonable intervals and for reasons related to the enforcement and administration of this chapter or the franchise, and to obtain information which has not otherwise been provided the grantor or which grantor has reasonable basis to believe has not been reported fairly and accurately upon at least ten days notice, or, in case of emergency, upon demand without prior notice, to allow grantor to verify the accuracy of any submitted report. 
H.  Public inspection. All reports subject to public disclosure, shall be available for public inspection at a designated grantor office during normal business hours. 
I.  Failure to report. The willful refusal, failure, or neglect of the grantee to file any material reports reasonably required, or such other reports as the grantor reasonably may request, may be deemed a material breach of the franchise, and may subject the grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to the grantor under the franchise or otherwise. 
J.  False statements. Any materially false or misleading statement or representation made knowingly and willfully by the grantee in any report required under the franchise may be deemed a material breach of the franchise and may subject the grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to the grantor under the franchise or otherwise. 
K.  Cost of Reports. One copy of all reports and records required under this or any other section shall be furnished at the sole expense of the grantee. 
(Ord. 486 § 14, 1987)  
5.24.150 - Miscellaneous provisions. 
A.  Compliance with state and federal laws. Notwithstanding any other provisions of the franchise to the contrary, the grantee shall at all times comply with all laws and regulations of the state and federal government or any administrative agencies thereof. Provided, however, if any such state or federal law or regulation shall require the grantee to perform any service, or shall permit the grantee to perform any service, or shall prohibit the grantee from performing any service, in conflict with the terms of the franchise or any law or regulation of the grantor, then as soon as possible following knowledge thereof, the grantee shall notify the grantor of the point of conflict believed to exist between such regulation or law and the laws or regulations of the grantor or the franchise. 
B.  Severability—Non-material provisions. If any provision of this chapter or any related agreements is held by any court or by any federal, state, or local agency of competent jurisdiction to be invalid as conflicting with any federal, state or local law, rule or regulation now or hereafter in effect, or is held by such court or agency to be modified in any way in order to conform to the requirements of any such law, rule or regulation, and if said provision is considered non-material by the grantor, said provision shall be considered a separate, distinct and independent part of this chapter, and such holding shall not affect the validity and enforceability of all other provisions hereof. In the event that such law, rule or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed, so that the provision hereof or thereof which has been held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with the law, rules and regulations then in effect, said provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect, and shall thereafter be binding on the parties hereto, provided that the grantor shall give the grantee thirty days written notice of such change before requiring compliance with said provision. 
C.  Severability—Material provisions. If any material section of this chapter, as determined by the grantor and the grantee, is held to be invalid or preempted by federal, state or county regulations or laws, resulting in a material adverse consequence to either party, the grantor and grantee shall attempt to negotiate appropriate modifications to the franchise to provide reasonable relief to the grantor or grantee from such invalidity or preemption, including the payment of damages. If the parties are unable to reach agreement on such modifications, then the dispute shall be submitted to a mutually agreeable arbitrator, in accordance with state law, who shall determine what modifications and/or liquidated damages are appropriate. The arbitrator's decision shall be binding on the parties, provided, that no decision of the arbitrator shall require the grantor or grantee to be in violation of any federal or state law or regulation. 
D.  Notices. Grantee shall maintain throughout the term of the franchise, a local address for service of notices by mail. 
E.  Captions. The captions to sections throughout this chapter are intended solely to facilitate reading and reference. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this chapter. 
F.  No recourse against the grantor. The grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the grantor or its officials, boards, commissions, agents, or employees for any loss, costs, expenses, or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of the franchise or because of the enforcement of the franchise or because of the enforcement of the franchise unless such loss, costs, expenses, or damage result from the negligence, misconduct, or malfeasance of the grantor or any of its officials, boards, commissions, agents, or employees. 
G.  Nonenforcement by the grantor. The grantee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter by reason of any failure of the grantor to enforce prompt compliance. 
(Ord. 486 § 15, 1987)  
5.24.160 - Repeal of existing code. 
Chapter 5.24, Community Antennae Television System, of the Rohnert Park Municipal Code and Ordinance Nos. 78, 89, 91, 110, 145, 226 and 234 are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. 486 § 16, 1987)  
5.24.170 - Certifying, publishing or posting. 
The city clerk is directed to certify the adoption of this chapter and shall cause the same to be published or posted in the manner prescribed by law. 
(Ord. 486 § 17, 1987)  
5.24.180 - State video service franchises—General provisions. 
A.  Purpose. This section is intended to be applicable to entities who have been awarded a state video franchise under the California Public Utilities Code section 5800 et seq. (the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006, "DIVCA"), to serve any location(s) within the incorporated boundaries of the city of Rohnert Park. It is the purpose of this section to implement within the incorporated boundaries of the city the provisions of DIVCA and the rules of the California Public Utilities Commission ("Commission") promulgated thereunder that are applicable to a "local franchising entity" or a "local entity" as defined in DIVCA. 
B.  Rights Reserved. 
1.  The rights reserved to the city under this section are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether reserved by this section or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right shall affect any other rights which may be held by the city. 
2.  Except as otherwise provided by DIVCA, a state franchise shall not include, or be a substitute for: 
a.  Compliance with generally applicable requirements for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the city, including, but not limited to, compliance with the conditions that the city may establish before facilities may be constructed for, or providing, non-video services; 
b.  Any permit or authorization required in connection with operations on or in public rights-of-way or public property, including, but not limited to, encroachment permits, street work permits, pole attachment permits and street cut permits; and 
c.  Any permit, agreement or authorization for occupying any other property of the city or any private person to which access is not specifically granted by the state franchise; and 
d.  Compliance with applicable state and federal environmental protection laws. 
3.  Except as otherwise provided in DIVCA, a state franchise shall not relieve a state franchise holder of its duty to comply with all laws, including the ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations, and other laws of the city, and every state franchise holder shall comply with the same. 
4.  No permit issued by the city to a state franchise holder is itself a franchise, nor shall any permit create a vested right that would prohibit the city from revoking or amending the permit. 
C.  Compliance with this chapter. Nothing contained in this chapter shall ever be construed so as to exempt a state franchise holder from compliance with all ordinances, rules or regulations of the city now in effect or which may be hereafter adopted which are consistent with this chapter or California Public Utilities Code Section 5800, et seq. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 2, 2-12-2013)  
5.24.190 - State video service franchises—Definitions. 
A.  Definitions Generally—Interpretation of Language. For purposes of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this chapter. Unless otherwise expressly stated, words not defined in this chapter shall be given the meaning set forth in City of Rohnert Park Municipal Code Chapter 1.04.010 as may be amended from time to time, unless the context indicates otherwise. Words not defined in this chapter or Section 1.04.010 shall have the same meaning as established in (1) DIVCA, and if not defined therein, (2) Commission rules implementing DIVCA, and if not defined therein, (3) Title VI of Title 41 of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, 47 USC § 521 et. seq., and if not defined therein, (4) their common and ordinary meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, words in the singular number include the plural number, and "including" and "include" are not limiting. The word "shall" and "will" are always mandatory. References to governmental entities (whether persons or entities) refer to those entities or their successors in authority. If specific provisions of law referred to herein are renumbered, then the reference shall be read to refer to the renumbered provision. References to laws, ordinances or regulations shall be interpreted broadly to cover government actions, however nominated, and include laws, ordinances and regulations now in force or hereinafter enacted or amended. 
1.  "Access," "PEG access," "PEG use," or "PEG" means the availability of a cable or state franchise holder's system for public, educational, or governmental use by various agencies, institutions, organizations, groups, and individuals, including the city and its designated access providers, to acquire, create, and distribute programming not under a state franchise holder's editorial control. 
a.  "Public access" or "Public use" means access where organizations, groups, or individual members of the general public, on a non-discriminatory basis, are the primary or designated programmers or users having editorial control over their communications; 
b.  "Education access" or "Education use" means access where accredited educational institutions are the primary or designated programmers or users having editorial control over their communications; 
c.  "Government access" or "Government use" means access where government institutions or their designees are the primary or designated programmers or users having editorial control over their communications. 
2.  "Gross revenues" means all revenues actually received by the holder of a state franchise that are derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the incorporated areas of the city, subject to the specifications of California Public Utilities Code section 5860. 
3.  "State franchise holder" means a cable operator or video service provider that has been issued a franchise by the California Public Utilities Commission to provide cable service or video service, as those terms are defined in California Public Utilities Code section 5830, within any portion of the incorporated limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 2, 2-12-2013)  
5.24.200 - State video service franchises—Franchise fees. 
A.  State Franchise Fees. Any state franchise holder operating within the incorporated areas of the city shall pay to the city a franchise fee equal to the applicable rate as set forth in the California Public Utilities Code Sections 5800-5970, as may be amended from time to time. 
B.  Payment of Franchise Fees. The state franchise fees required pursuant to this section shall be paid quarterly, in a manner consistent with California Public Utilities Code Section 5860. The state franchise holder shall deliver to the city, by check or other means agreed to by the city, a separate payment for the state franchise fee not later than forty-five days after the end of each calendar quarter. Each payment made shall be accompanied by a report detailing how the payment was calculated, and shall include such additional information on the appropriate form as designated by the city. 
C.  Examination of Business Records. The city may examine the business records of the holder of a state franchise in a manner consistent with California Public Utilities Code Section 5860(i). 
1.  All state franchise holders shall keep and maintain all business records reflecting any gross revenues, regardless of change in ownership, for at least four years after those gross revenues are recognized by the state franchise holder on its books and records pursuant to California Public Utilities Code Section 5860. 
2.  If the examination by the city discloses the state franchise holder has underpaid the franchise fee established by this section by more than five percent, the state franchise holder shall pay the reasonable and actual costs of the examination. If the state franchise holder has not underpaid the franchise fee established in this section, the city shall pay the reasonable and actual costs of the examination. If the state franchise holder, however, has underpaid the franchise fee established by this section by five percent or less, the state franchise holder and the city shall each bear its own costs of the examination. 
D.  Late Payments. In the event a state franchise holder fails to make payments required by this section on or before the due dates specified in this section, the city shall impose a late charge at the rate set forth in the California Public Utilities Code Sections 5800-5970, as may be amended from time to time. 
E.  Lease of City-Owned Network. In the event a state franchise holder leases access to a network owned by the city, the city may set a franchise fee for access to the city-owned network separate and apart from the franchise fee charged to state franchise holders pursuant to this section; which fee shall otherwise be payable in accordance with the procedures established by this section. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 2, 2-12-2013; Ord. No. 916 , § 2, 1-23-2018)  
5.24.210 - State video service franchises—Customer service. 
A.  Customer Service Standards. A state franchise holder shall comply with the following statutes and regulations, as they may be amended from time to time: Sections 53055, 53055.1, 53055.2 and 53088.2 of the California Government Code; the FCC customer service and notice standards set forth in sections 76.309, 76.1602, 76.1603, and 76.1619 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations; section 637.5 of the California Penal Code; the privacy standards of section 551 of Title 47 of the United States Code; and all other applicable state and federal customer service and consumer protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service, include any such standards hereafter adopted. In case of a conflict, the stricter standard shall apply. All customer service and consumer protection standards under this paragraph shall be interpreted and applied to accommodate newer or different technologies while meeting or exceeding the goals of the standards. 
B.  Penalties for Violations of Standards. The city shall enforce the compliance of state franchise holders with respect to the state and federal customer service and consumer protection standards set forth in subsection (A) above. The city will provide a state franchise holder with a written notice of any material breaches of applicable customer service or consumer protection standards, and will allow the state franchise holder thirty days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. Material breaches not remedied within the thirty-day time period will be subject to penalties to be imposed by the city: 
1.  For the first occurrence of a material breach, a fine of five hundred dollars may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars for each violation. 
2.  For a second material breach of the same nature within twelve months, a fine of one thousand dollars may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed three thousand dollars for each violation. 
3.  For a third material breach of the same nature within twelve months, a fine of two thousand five hundred dollars may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars for each violation. 
C.  Any penalties imposed by the city shall be imposed in a manner consistent with California Public Utilities Code Section 5900. 
D.  Any state franchise holder may appeal any customer service penalty assessed pursuant to this section, according to the following procedure. 
1.  The state franchise holder may file a request for hearing form from the city clerk within thirty days from receipt of the written notice specified in this section with an advance deposit of the penalty amount. 
2.  A request for hearing form may be obtained from the city clerk. 
3.  The state franchise holder requesting the hearing shall be notified by the city clerk of the time and place set for the hearing at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. 
4.  The hearing shall be set by the city clerk for a date that is not less than fifteen days and not more than sixty days from the date that the request for hearing form is filed with the city clerk. 
5.  At the hearing, the city shall bear the burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence that the material breach occurred as charged. The city may be represented by counsel. 
6.  At the hearing, the state franchise holder may cross examine any witness against the state franchise holder, may present evidence, and may be represented by counsel. 
7.  The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at the hearing. The hearing officer may rely upon such evidence as he or she believes reasonable persons would rely upon in the conduct of their affairs. Any witnesses shall testify under oath. 
8.  After hearing and reviewing all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision to uphold or cancel the penalty and shall list in the decision the reasons for that decision. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. 
9.  lf the hearing officer determines the penalty should be cancelled, the city shall promptly refund the amount of the deposited penalty, together with interest at the average rate earned on the city's investment portfolio for the period of time that the penalty amount was held by the city. 
10.  The hearing officer shall be the city manager or his or her designee. 
11.  Any interested person may obtain review of the hearing officer's decision by filing an appeal in a court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to California Public Utilities Code Section 5900. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 2, 2-12-2013)  
5.24.220 - State video service franchises—Permits and construction. 
A.  Except as expressly provided in this chapter, provisions of Rohnert Park Municipal Code Title 12 "Streets and Sidewalks" and Title 15 "Building and Construction" shall apply to all work performed by or on behalf of a state franchise holder on any city public rights-of-way, public property, or city easement. 
B.  Permits. Prior to commencing any work for which a permit is required by subsection (A) above, a state franchise holder shall apply for and obtain a permit in accordance with the provisions of Titles 12 and 15 and shall comply with all other applicable laws and regulations. 
C.  The city shall either approve or deny a state franchise holder's application for any permit required under subsection (A) within sixty days of receiving a completed permit application from the state franchise holder. An application is complete when the applicant has complied with all statutory requirements, including compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act. 
D.  If the city denies a state franchise holder's application for a permit, the city shall, at the time of notifying the applicant of denial, furnish to the applicant a detailed explanation of the reason or reasons for the denial. 
E.  A state franchise holder that has been denied a permit by final decision of the city may appeal the denial to the city council. Upon receiving a notice of appeal, the city council shall take one of the following actions: 
1.  Affirm the action of the city without any further hearing; or 
2.  Refer the matter back to the city for further review with or without instructions; or 
3.  Set the matter for a de novo hearing before the city council. 
F.  In rendering its decision on the appeal, the city council shall not hear or consider any argument or evidence of any kind other than the record of the matter received from the city unless the city council is itself conducting a public hearing on the matter. 
G.  Notification to Residents Regarding Construction or Maintenance. 
1.  Prior to any construction, rebuild, or upgrade of a cable or video system, a state franchise holder shall notify any and all city residents whose service is disrupted, affected and/or impacted by the schedule and manner of construction activities. Such notices must be provided in at least two of the predominant languages spoken by those persons who work and/or reside in the impacted area. The notices shall be provided to the city for review and approval no later than twenty days before commencement of construction, rebuild, or upgrade activities. 
2.  At a minimum, the notice required in this subsection shall be provided by the state franchise holder to impacted residents and occupants in the impacted area not less than forty-eight hours prior to the planned construction. The state franchise holder shall provide additional notice to the impacted area on the day of construction. The notice shall be in the form of door hangers or similar materials that indicate, at a minimum, the dates and times of construction and the name and telephone number of a state franchise holder contact. 
3.  As used in this subsection, "impacted area" means an area where cable or video service is disrupted, affected and/or impacted by the schedule and manner of construction activities. 
H.  Notification to Property Owners Prior to Entry on Public Easements. At least twenty days prior to entering public ways or public easements adjacent to or on private property, the state franchise holder shall provide notice to the private property owners. A second notice shall be given to the private property owners three days prior to entering such property. 
1.  Should there be above ground or underground installations (excluding aerial cable lines utilizing existing poles and cable paths) that require access, and/or create any physical impacts or changes to property, such notice shall be in writing and shall contain specific information regarding any aboveground or underground installations (excluding aerial cable lines utilizing existing poles and existing cable paths) which shall affect the private property. 
2.  To the extent practicable, aboveground or underground equipment placed within a city easement on private property shall be placed at the location requested by the private property owner. A state franchise holder shall provide the private property owner with at least twenty days advance written notice of its plans to install such equipment, and shall obtain express written consent, in the form of a recorded easement agreement, from the private property owner before installing its facilities if the installation is not within the scope of the city's existing easement. 
3.  In addition to any other notice of proposed entry required under this subsection, a state franchise holder's personnel shall make a reasonable attempt to give personal notice to residents immediately preceding entry on public ways or public easements adjacent to or on such private property. 
I.  Notification Prior to Entry on Private Property. If a state franchise holder desires to enter onto privately-owned property not within the city's right-of-way to install above ground or underground installations (excluding aerial cable lines utilizing existing poles and cable paths), the state franchise holder shall provide notice to the private property owner at least twenty days prior to the date the state franchise holder desires to enter the property. The notice shall be in writing and state that the property owner is not obligated to agree to the placement of the installations on their property or to enter into an easement agreement with the state franchise holder. Should property owner not agree to the placement of any such aboveground or underground installations (excluding aerial cable lines utilizing existing poles and existing cable paths), the state franchise holder shall confer with the city public works department regarding appropriate alternative location and placement of such appurtenances within the public right-of-way. 
K.  Identification Required. A state franchise holder, its employees, agents, contractors, and subcontractors shall be properly identified as agents of the state franchise holder prior to and during entry on private and public property. Identification shall include the name and telephone number of the state franchise holder on all trucks and vehicles used by installation personnel. 
L.  Restoration of Private and Public Property. After performance of work, the state franchise holder shall restore such private and public property to a condition equal to or better than its condition prior to construction. Any disturbance of landscaping, fencing, or other improvements upon private or public property shall, at the sole expense of the state franchise holder, be promptly repaired or restored (including replacement of such valuables as shrubbery and fencing) to the reasonable satisfaction of the property owner, in addition to the furnishing of any required camouflage plants on public property. 
M.  Reports to the City. Each state franchise holder, within sixty days after the expiration of each calendar year, shall make available for review with the city a street and highway map or maps of any convenient scale on which shall be plotted the location of the entire transmission and distribution system or systems covered by the report as of the last day of the calendar year, with the system or systems located in city highways indicated by distinctive coloration or symbols. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 2, 2-12-2013)  
5.24.230 - State video service franchises—Emergency alert systems. 
Each state franchise holder shall comply with the emergency alert system requirements of the Federal Communications Commission in order that emergency messages may be distributed over the state franchise holder's network. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 2, 2-12-2013)  
5.24.240 - State video service franchises—Public, educational and government access channel capacity, support, interconnection, and signal carriage. 
A.  PEG Channel Capacity. 
1.  A state franchise holder shall designate a sufficient amount of capacity on its network to allow the provision of at least three PEG channels to satisfy the requirement of state law, within the time limits specified by state law. This section shall serve as the request for PEG channels required by California Public Utilities Code Section 5870(a). 
2.  A state franchise holder shall provide an additional PEG channel when the standards set forth in Section 5870(d) of the California Public Utilities Code are satisfied by the city or any entity designated by the city to manage one or more of the PEG channels. 
B.  PEG Support. 
1.  Amount of PEG Support Fee. Any state franchise holder shall pay to the city, or if directed by the city, pay to the city's designated PEG provider a PEG fee equal to one percent of gross revenues. 
2.  A state franchise holder shall remit the PEG support fee to the city quarterly, within forty-five days after the end of each calendar quarter. Each payment made shall be accompanied by a summary, detailing how the PEG support fee was calculated. 
3.  If a state franchise holder fails to pay the PEG support fee when due, or underpays the proper amount due, the state franchise holder shall pay interest at the rate set forth in the California Public Utilities Code Sections 5800-5970, as may be amended from time to time. 
4.  The fee required by this section is the fee permitted under California Public Utility Code section 5870(n), and is not in lieu of the obligation of a state franchise holder under any other provision of law. 
5.  Notwithstanding Public Utilities Code Section 5870(n), upon the expiration of any state franchise, without any further action of the city council, the PEG support fee set forth in this subsection shall be deemed to have been automatically reauthorized unless the state franchise holder has given the city manager and the city council written notice at least sixty days prior to the expiration of its state franchise that the PEG support fee will expire pursuant to the terms of Section 5780(n) of the Public Utilities Code. 
C.  PEG Carriage and Interconnection. 
1.  As set forth in sections 5870(b) and 5870(9)(3) of the California Public Utilities Code, state franchise holders shall ensure that all PEG channels are receivable by all subscribers, whether they receive digital or analog service, or a combination thereof, without the need for any equipment other than that needed to receive the lowest cost tier of service. PEG access capacity provided by a state franchise holder shall be of similar quality and functionality to that offered by commercial channels (unless the PEG signal is provided to the state franchise holder at a lower quality or with less functionality), shall be capable of carrying a National Television System Committee (NTSC) television signal, and shall be carried on the state franchise holder's lowest cost tier of service. To the extent feasible, the PEG channels shall not be separated numerically from other channels carried on the lowest cost tier of service and the channel numbers for the PEG channels shall be the same channel numbers used by any incumbent cable operator, unless prohibited by federal law. After the initial designation of the PEG channel numbers, the channel numbers shall not be changed without the agreement of the city unless federal law requires the change. 
2.  As set forth in section 5870(h) of the California Public Utilities Code, the holder of a state franchise and an incumbent cable operator shall negotiate in good faith to interconnect their networks for the purpose of providing PEG programming. If a state franchise holder and an incumbent cable operator cannot reach a mutually acceptable interconnection agreement for PEG carriage, the city shall require the incumbent cable operator to allow the state franchise holder to interconnect its network with the incumbent cable operator's network at a technically feasible point on the state franchise holder's network as identified by the state franchise holder. If no technically feasible point of interconnection is available, the state franchise holder shall make interconnection available to each PEG channel originator programming a channel in the city and shall provide the facilities necessary for the interconnection. The cost of any interconnection shall be borne by the state franchise holder requesting the interconnection unless otherwise agreed to by the parties. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 2, 2-12-2013; Ord. No. 916 , § 3, 1-23-2018)  
5.24.250 - State video service franchises—Notices. 
A.  Each state franchise holder or applicant for a state franchise shall file with the city a copy of all applications or notices that the state franchise holder or applicant is required to file with the California Public Utilities Commission. 
B.  Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, all notices or other documentation that a state franchise holder is required to provide to the city under this chapter or the California Public Utilities Code shall be provided to both the city manager and the city staff person in charge of cable and telecommunications, or their successors or designees. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 2, 2-12-2013)  
Chapter 5.28 - TOWING SERVICES 
 
5.28.010 - Operator defined. 
"Operator" means any person, firm, corporation, or association engaged in the business of towing motor vehicles. 
(Ord. 515 § 1, 1989)  
5.28.020 - Tow truck defined. 
"Tow truck" means a motor vehicle which has been so altered, designed, and equipped for the business of towing vehicles by means of a crane, tow bar, tow line, or dolly and is otherwise exclusively used to render towing services and assistance to other vehicles. 
(Ord. 515 § 2, 1989)  
5.28.030 - Towing operation defined. 
"Towing operation" means the activity of towing vehicles for compensation within the city of Rohnert Park including the storing of vehicles and all other services performed, incident to towing. 
(Ord. 515 § 3, 1989)  
5.28.040 - Selection and designation of towing operators. 
Any towing service operator who meets the requirements provided for herein and who enters into a signed agreement with the city to provide towing services shall provide said services at the request of the department of public safety. The name of each such operator shall be placed on a list from which the department of public safety shall select, on a rotational basis, the operator whose services are required at any given time. Towing operators who meet the minimum requirements may apply to be placed on the rotation list. The open window period to add new towing operators to the rotation list shall be during the month of January, each year. 
The director of public safety shall have the authority to enter into and sign a written agreement, on behalf of the city, with any operator that meets the minimum standards identified in both this chapter and in the written agreement. 
(Ord. 515 § 4, 1989)  
5.28.050 - Minimum equipment standards for tow trucks. 
Minimum equipment standards for tow trucks shall be as follows: 
A.  Truck chassis. A truck chassis shall have at least one-ton capacity with rear dual wheels or equivalent. 
B.  Operator name. The operator name, address and telephone number shall be on both sides of the tow truck. 
C.  Lights. Tow trucks must, at all times, be equipped with such headlights, tail lights, red reflectors, stop lights, warning lights, etc., as required by California law, plus one white utility light (adjustable or portable), and may be equipped with such other lights as the operator may desire which are not forbidden by law. 
D.  Winch. Each tow truck shall have one power-driven winch. 
E.  Additional equipment. Tow trucks must be equipped with red flares, lanterns or reflectors, portable warning signs, hand tools, a crowbar, a rope, a broom, a shovel, a dustpan, a fire extinguisher of the dry chemical type, a portable red light and stop light for towed vehicles, equipment for opening locked vehicles, and a safety snubber chain. The operator shall have at least one set of dollies readily available at all times. 
F.  Attendants. Attendants of the tow operator must have and display a reasonable knowledge of their work. 
G.  Inspections. Tow trucks must pass inspection by the city department of public safety and the California Highway Patrol. 
(Ord. 515 § 5, 1989)  
5.28.060 - Storage lots and space. 
The storage lot must be within five miles of the intersection of U.S. 101 Freeway and the Rohnert Park Expressway and must have adequate storage space to accommodate not less than ten vehicles in a secure storage area. One covered space shall be provided. Such storage area and any fences surrounding the same must be approved, in writing, by the director of public safety. Such buildings and fences must reasonably screen the stored vehicles from public view. Stored vehicles and the contents must be safe from pilfering or tampering. Storage lots in the city of Rohnert Park shall be in compliance with city zoning and safety regulations. 
(Ord. 515 § 6, 1989)  
5.28.070 - Hours for attendant on call. 
There shall be an attendant on call, capable of responding within thirty minutes to a department of public safety request for towing, twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week. There shall be an attendant on call capable of responding for the release of vehicles Monday through Friday, between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. A regular service fee may be charged for releasing vehicles on Saturday, Sunday or holidays and after regular working hours. 
(Ord. 515 § 7, 1989)  
5.28.080 - Insurance—Filing. 
Adequate public liability, property damage, fire and theft insurance must be maintained by the operator, as defined in the agreement. Certificate(s) of insurance, in a form approved by the city manager, shall be provided to the city by the operator. 
(Ord. 515 § 8, 1989)  
5.28.090 - Records. 
The operator shall keep a record of each towed vehicle, its license number, the date and time it was towed, the location from which it was towed, the name of the department of public safety employee(s) ordering the towing, and whether the vehicle was impounded or towed at the owner's request. Said records shall be subject to inspection by employees of the city. 
(Ord. 515 § 9, 1989)  
5.28.100 - Communications. 
The operator shall maintain two-way radio communications capability between the tow truck and the operator's dispatcher. 
(Ord. 515 § 10, 1989)  
5.28.110 - Removal of hazards. 
After being dispatched by the department of public safety to the scene, the operator shall cooperate with department of public safety employees in removing hazards and illegally parked vehicles, as requested. 
(Ord. 515 § 11, 1989)  
5.28.120 - Only tow trucks with markings to be dispatched—Exception. 
Only tow trucks bearing the name of the operator's firm, corporation or association name shall be dispatched to the scene of need unless a department of public safety employee at the scene approves the use of a tow truck which is unmarked or showing a name other than the contracting operator's name. 
(Ord. 515 § 12, 1989)  
5.28.130 - Collecting fees—Lien sale. 
Pursuant to California law, the operator shall be responsible for collecting all fees and charges and shall handle and process all lien sales involving vehicles towed and stored by the operator under this chapter; provided, however, that the department of public safety shall handle and process the disposition of low valued vehicles as set forth in Section 22851.2 of the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 515 § 13, 1989)  
5.28.140 - Vehicle release—Removal of vehicle contents on hold. 
Vehicles impounded by the department of public safety for special investigations (i.e. fingerprints, etc.) shall be held in a place of maximum security by the operator until released in writing by the department of public safety. Written release by the department of public safety shall be made within twenty-four hours after first having been impounded, unless there are specific reasons the department of public safety cannot provide for a release within twenty-four hours. Contents of the vehicles with a department of public safety "Hold" shall not be removed without the prior written approval of the department of public safety. 
(Ord. 515 § 14, 1989)  
5.28.150 - Responsibility. 
The operator shall be responsible for the acts of its employees or agents while on duty. The operator shall assume and be responsible for damage or loss to vehicles while in its possession. 
(Ord. 515 § 15, 1989)  
5.28.160 - Supervision checks. 
The records, equipment and storage facilities of the operator shall be subject to periodic checks by the department of public safety. 
(Ord. 515 § 16, 1989)  
5.28.170 - Damage appraisals—Generally. 
All vehicles, except vehicles with a department of public safety "Hold," stored or impounded as a result of a tow ordered by the department of public safety shall be made available for the purpose of estimating or appraising damages by the owner of the vehicle or his representative, any insurance agent, any insurance adjuster, any body shop, and/or any car dealer. 
(Ord. 515 § 17, 1989)  
5.28.180 - Damage appraisals—Access to vehicles. 
Vehicles to be appraised shall be accessible to department of public safety personnel. An employee of the operator may be required to assist upon request of the department of public safety. 
(Ord. 515 § 18, 1989)  
5.28.190 - Unauthorized towing prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person, not a designated tow operator, as provided herein, to remove from the public streets and tow away any vehicles as described herein. However, the owner or driver of any vehicle may designate any towing service for the removal and towing of his own vehicle. 
(Ord. 515 § 19, 1989)  
5.28.200 - Performance failure by operator—Service cancellation—Appeal. 
Any tow operator that refuses to respond to any call, or refuses to remove an abated or abandoned vehicle may be removed by the director of public safety from the rotation list maintained by the department of public safety. 
Any violation of a term or condition outlined in this chapter and/or the signed agreement shall be deemed sufficient cause for cancellation and termination of the agreement by the director of public safety. However, the operator may exercise his/her right to appeal such cancellation and termination to the city manager. 
Any appeal shall be by written notice of appeal delivered to the director of public safety within five days of the operator being notified of the action from which the appeal is taken. The director of public safety shall deliver a copy of the notice of appeal to the city manager who shall schedule a hearing on the appeal within fifteen days. 
(Ord. 515 § 20, 1989)  
5.28.210 - Unlawful solicitation. 
It is unlawful for any tow operator, his/her agent or employee, to solicit any tow job under this chapter at the scene of an accident without having first been called by the owner or operator of the disabled vehicle, or by the department of public safety. Any violation of this section will be an infraction. 
(Ord. 515 § 21, 1989)  
5.28.220 - Nonliability of the department of public safety. 
Should a towing operator, under contract with the city, perform any services or act in a manner not in accordance with the provisions contained in this chapter, the department of public safety shall be held harmless from any and all liability or damage arising therefrom and shall not be accountable. All complaints received concerning the quality and standards of service performed by a tow operator shall be investigated and if substantiated, shall be deemed sufficient cause for cancellation and termination of any contract or operating agreement entered into for the performance of such service between the city and the operator. 
(Ord. 515 § 22, 1989)  
5.28.230 - Existing agreements. 
Existing agreements between the city and towing service operators executed prior to adoption of this chapter shall remain in effect until such agreements either expire or are terminated at which time the provisions of this chapter shall apply. 
(Ord. 515 § 23, 1989)  
Chapter 5.30 - ABANDONMENT OF SHOPPING CARTS 
 
5.30.010 - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter: 
A.  "Shopping cart" means a basket which is mounted on wheels or a similar device generally used in retail establishments by a customer for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind. 
B.  "Public property" means and includes, but is not limited to, all areas dedicated to public use for public street purposes, roadways, alleys, sidewalks, flood control channels and any public right-of-way. 
C.  "Parkway" means that area between the sidewalk and the curb of any street where there is no sidewalk and/or that area between the edge of the roadway and the property line adjacent thereto. Parkway shall also include any area within a roadway which is not open to vehicular travel. 
D.  "Occurrence" means all shopping carts impounded in accordance with this section in a one-day period. 
(Ord. 625 § 2, 1996: Ord. 595 § 3, 1995)  
5.30.020 - Abandoned cart. 
When a shopping cart is left standing on any public or private property, the shopping cart shall be deemed to be abandoned and therefore a public nuisance pursuant to this chapter. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to shopping carts left standing on private property (including the common areas of shopping centers adjacent thereto) of the owner of the shopping cart according to the name of the owner affixed thereto as required by Section 5.30.070 of this chapter. In the event that a shopping cart is left standing on any public or private property or, in the event the cart violates Section 5.30.070 of this chapter, the owner thereof shall be responsible and liable for the removal and disposition of the abandoned shopping cart as provided in this chapter. 
The owner of the shopping cart will be noticed to pick up each abandoned cart. The notice will state the location of the cart. If the shopping cart is not retrieved within three business days from the date the owner of the shopping cart, or his or her agent, receives actual notice from the city, then the city may retrieve the cart and charge an applicable fee. A cart may be removed immediately by the city if abandoned in a location which impedes emergency services. The owner may reclaim the cart during regular business hours of the city after payment of the applicable fee. 
The city manager may exempt a shopping cart owner from the provisions of this section if the cart owner has implemented a plan whereby shopping cart employees effectively and actually retrieve the carts or whereby the cart owner has entered into a contract with a cart retrieval service and has provided the city with proof of such contract, provided the frequency of cart retrieval service meets the city manager's approval. 
No liability or responsibility shall accrue to the owner of a shopping cart for the first three occurrences of shopping cart retrieval in a six-month period per calendar year pursuant to this ordinance. This provision shall apply equally to exempt and nonexempt shopping cart owners. 
(Ord. 625 § 3, 1996: Ord. 595 § 4, 1995)  
5.30.030 - Administration and enforcement. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the city manager or his authorized representative. In the enforcement of this chapter, the city manager or his authorized representative may enter onto public or private property to examine a shopping cart or parts thereof, or to obtain information as to the identity of a shopping cart and to remove, or cause the removal of, a shopping cart, or parts thereof, declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 595 § 5, 1995)  
5.30.040 - Shopping cart abatement. 
Upon discovering the existence of a wrecked, dismantled or abandoned shopping cart, or parts thereof, on public or private property within the city, the city manager, or his authorized representative shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure described in this chapter. 
(Ord. 595 § 6, 1995)  
5.30.050 - Removal of wrecked shopping cart. 
The city manager, or his authorized designee, may determine that a wrecked shopping cart abated according to the provisions of this chapter is in such poor condition that it may be disposed of immediately. This action will be a discretionary decision of the city manager or his authorized designee. 
(Ord. 595 § 7, 1995)  
5.30.060 - Assessments for shopping cart removal—Hearings. 
A.  Within thirty days of the abatement and removal of any shopping cart located on public or private property within the city, the city manager or his authorized representative shall give notice to the owner thereof (if the same can be ascertained) by mailing a notice of abatement to the last known address of the owner. Such notice shall state the date the shopping cart was removed from public or private property, the location and procedure for retrieval of the shopping cart, and a statement that in order to receive a hearing with regard to the removal of the shopping cart, the owner or its agent shall submit a request for such hearing either in person or in writing within ten days of the date appearing on the notice. Any such shopping cart removed and stored pursuant to these provisions shall be released to the owner thereof if claimed within thirty days after such removal and upon the payment of reasonable administrative fees. Such administrative fees may be waived if, after a hearing has been requested, a determination is made at such hearing that good cause exists for the waiver of such fees. 
B.  Administrative fees for the removal and storage of shopping carts shall be established or modified by resolution of the city council and shall include the actual cost of removal and storage of any shopping cart, or parts thereof, plus the proportional share of the administrative costs in connection therewith. 
C.  Any hearing which is requested shall be conducted within ten business days of the receipt of the request for such hearing, excluding weekends and holidays, by the city manager, or his/her designee, who shall be designated as the hearing officer. The failure of either the owner or its agent to request a hearing shall constitute a waiver and a voluntary relinquishment and abandonment of the hearing requirement. If it is determined at the hearing that reasonable grounds for the abatement and removal of a shopping cart are not established, no fee for removal and storage of such shopping cart shall be imposed. At the close of the hearing, the hearing officer shall determine whether good cause was shown for the abatement or removal of the shopping cart from public or private property. The decision of the hearing officer shall be deemed the final administrative determination. If good cause is shown for the abatement and removal of the shopping cart, the owner or its agent shall have fifteen days from the date of the hearing to retrieve its shopping cart upon payment of the administrative fee. No shopping carts shall be released until the authorized administrative fee is paid to the city. If good cause is not shown for the abatement and removal of the shopping cart from public or private property, the administrative fee shall be waived and the owner or its agent shall have fifteen days to retrieve its shopping cart from the storage area. 
D.  Any shopping carts which are not retrieved by the owner of such shopping cart within thirty days after the mailing of written notice of abatement when such owner has not requested a hearing in accordance with this section, or within thirty days of the decision of the hearing officer, or within ninety days of storage of the cart by the city in all other cases, shall be deemed to be permanently abandoned and may be sold at public auction or otherwise disposed of at the end of thirty day period following mailing written notice of abatement. 
E.  At such time as shall be convenient to the city, the city shall advertise for the sale of permanently abandoned (as provided in subsection D. of this section) shopping carts. Notice of such sale shall be posted in three conspicuous places located within the city. Ten days after the posting of such notice and the time and place fixed in the notice for said sale (or at such time and places to which the sale shall be reasonably continued) such shopping cart may be sold along with other shopping carts, and delivered to the highest bidder free and clear of the claims for the owner thereof. 
F.  The proceeds of such sale shall be disbursed to the city. 
(Ord. 595 § 8, 1995)  
5.30.070 - Identification of shopping carts. 
All shopping carts used in the city shall be properly identified by the owner thereof, including the name of the local store in which such shopping cart is to be used. All persons owning shopping carts within the city for use by their customers to take outside of the buildings shall have firmly affixed thereto the owner's identification. 
(Ord. 595 § 9, 1995)  
5.30.080 - Removal from premises prohibited—Exceptions. 
No person shall remove from the immediate store or parking premises of any food store, market or other mercantile establishment in the city, any shopping cart, wagon or similar device, bearing a notification affixed thereto in a conspicuous place thereon to the effect that such cart, wagon or device is not to be removed from the owner's premises, unless such person is the owner or owner's employee or agent. 
(Ord. 595 § 10, 1995)  
5.30.090 - Abandonment prohibited. 
No persons shall abandon or leave any such cart, wagon or device which has been removed from the owner's premises upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, parkway or other public place, or upon any private property, except that of the owner of the cart, wagon or device not under the control of such person abandoning or leaving such cart, wagon or device. 
(Ord. 595 § 11, 1995)  
5.30.100 - Owner's responsibility to prevent littering. 
The action of an owner or owner's agent or employee to permit any such cart, wagon or device to be removed from the owner's premises shall be considered littering. 
(Ord. 595 § 12, 1995)  
5.30.110 - Unlawful possession. 
No person shall have in his/her possession any such cart, wagon or device which has been removed from the owner's premises without authorization or which has been abandoned or left on private property under circumstances as described in Section 5.30.020 of this chapter unless such person so having possession has notified Rohnert Park police department of the presence and location of such cart, wagon or device. 
(Ord. 595 § 13, 1995)  
5.30.120 - Supplementation of codes, statutes, ordinances, etc. 
This chapter is not to be construed as the exclusive regulation of wrecked, dismantled or abandoned shopping carts within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, state or other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 595 § 14, 1995)  
Chapter 5.32 - TELEPHONE AND COMMUNICATIONS AND VIDEO SERVICES TAX 
 
5.32.010 - Title. 
This chapter imposes a tax on the use of telephone communications and video services in the city of Rohnert Park and shall be known as the Rohnert Park Telephone Communications and Video Services Tax.  
5.32.020 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases whenever used in this chapter shall be construed as defined in this section. 
A.  "Billing address" shall mean the mailing address of the service user where the service supplier submits invoices or bills for payment by the customer. 
B.  "City" shall mean the city of Rohnert Park. 
C.  "Intrastate Telecommunication" shall mean all telecommunications regardless of routing that either (1) originate in the city and terminate in the State, or (2) originate in the State and terminate in the city, where, in either instance, the service or billing address of the service user is in the city. 
D.  "Interstate Telecommunications" shall mean all telecommunications that either (1) originate in the city and terminate in another state, or (2) originate in another state and terminate in the city, where, in either instance, the service or billing of the service user is in the city. 
E.  "Month" shall mean a calendar month. 
F.  "Person" shall mean, without limitation, any domestic, non-profit, or foreign corporation; firm; trust; estate; association; syndicate; joint stock company; limited liability company; partnership of any kind; joint venture; club; cooperative; receiver, trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court; or any natural individual. 
G.  "Service address" shall mean the residential street address or the business street address of the service user's primary place of telephone communication service usage. 
H.  "Service supplier" shall mean any entity or person that provides telephone communications or video services to a user of such services within the city. The term shall include any entity or person required to collect, or self-collect under Section 5.32.090 of this chapter, and remit a tax imposed by this chapter, including its billing agent in the case of video services suppliers. 
I.  "Service user" shall mean a person required to pay a tax imposed by this chapter. In general, a service user is the person in whose name a service supplier delivers the services and other compensation activities provided by a service supplier and who is responsible to the service supplier for paying for the cost of such services. 
J.  "Tax administrator" shall mean the finance director of the city. 
K.  "Telecommunication services" shall mean, in addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly ascribed to it, without limitation, the transmission of messages or information (including but not limited to voice, data, facsimile, video, text) through the use of the local, toll and wide area telephone service; telegraph, teletypewriter and computer services; cellular telephone services; or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means through "interconnected service" with the "public switched network" (as those terms are commonly used in the Federal Communications Act and the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission) by wire, cable, fiber-optics, light waves, laser, microwaves, radio waves, switching facilities, satellite or similar facilities, whether such service is provided by a telephone corporation, competitive access provider, private communication service provider, or any other person. "Telecommunication services" shall include access services, and any other services that are an adjunct to the transmission of messages or information described above. "Telecommunication services shall not include land mobile services or maritime mobile services [as defined in Part 20 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations], which are not interconnected with the public switched network. 
L.  "Telephone corporation," shall mean a corporation or person as defined in California Public Utilities Section 234. 
M.  "Video services" shall mean any and all services related to the providing of video programming (including origination programming), including any communications that are ancillary, necessary or common to the use and enjoyment of the video programming, regardless of the content of such video programming or communications. "Video services" shall not include services for which a tax is paid under 5.32.030 of this chapter. 
N.  "Video service supplier" shall mean any person, company, or service which provides one or more channels of video programming, including any communications that are ancillary, necessary or common to the use and enjoyment of the video programming (including the leasing of channel access to provide such video programming or communications), to or from an address in the city, including to or from a business, home, condominium, or apartment, where some fee is paid, whether directly or included in dues or rental charges for that service, whether or not public rights-of-way are utilized in the delivery of the video programming or communications. A "video service supplier" includes, but is not limited to, multi-channel video programming distributors [as defined in 47 U.S.C.A. Section 522(13)], providers of cable television, open video systems (OVS) suppliers, suppliers of cable television, master antenna television, satellite master antenna television, multichannel multipoint distribution services, direct broadcast satellite (to the extent allowed by federal law), and other suppliers of video programming or communications (including two-way communications), whatever their technology. 
(Ord. 684 § 1, 2002)  
5.32.030 - Video services tax. 
A.  There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person using video services in the City from a video service supplier. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of four percent (4.0%) of the charges made for such video services to residential customers and six percent (6.0%) of the charges made for commercial customers. For purposes of this section, "commercial customers" shall include all those customers that are not residential customers and that are not a non-profit corporation (as defined by Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c)). The tax shall be collected from the service user by the video service supplier or its billing agent. 
B.  The tax administrator, from time to time, may survey the video service suppliers in the city to identify the various components of video service that are being offered to customers within the city, and the charges therefore. The tax administrator may, thereafter, issue and disseminate to such video service suppliers an administrative ruling identifying those components that are: i) necessary or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of video service; or, ii) which currently are, or historically have been, included in a bundled rate for video service by a local distribution company. Charges for such components shall be subject to the tax of subsection (A) above. 
C.  As used in this section, the term "charges" shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the video services. If a non-taxable service and a taxable service are billed together under a single charge, the entire charge shall be deemed taxable unless the service supplier can reasonably identify the non-taxable services based upon its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business, which shall be consistent with generally accepted accounting principles. 
D.  The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the video service supplier, its billing agent, or a reseller of such services. In the case of video service, the service user shall be deemed to be the purchaser of the bulk video service (e.g., an apartment owner), unless such service is resold to individual users, in which case the service user shall be the ultimate purchaser of the video service. The amount collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the last day of the following month and must be received by the tax administrator on or before the last day of the following month. 
(Ord. 684 § 1, 2002)  
5.32.040 - Telephone Communications Services Tax 
A.  There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person using any international, interstate and/or intrastate telephone communications services in the City, other than a telephone corporation. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of four percent (4.0%) of the charges made for such telephone communications services to residential customers and six percent (6.0%) of the charges made for commercial customers. For purposes of this section, "commercial customers" shall include all those customers that are not residential customers and that are not a non-profit corporation (as defined by Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c)). The tax shall be collected from the service user by the video service supplier or its billing agent. To the extent allowed by law, the tax on telephone communications services shall apply to a service user if the billing or service address of the service user is within the City's boundaries, irrespective of whether a particular telephone communication service originates and/or terminates within the City. If the billing address of the service user is different from the service address, the service address of the service user shall be used. 
B.  The tax imposed under subsection (A) shall not be imposed upon any person for using telephone communication services to the extent that, pursuant to Sections 4252 and 2453 of the Internal Revenue Code, the amounts paid for such communication services are exempt from or are not subject to tax imposed under Section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code. In the event that the federal excise tax on "communication services" as provided in Sections 4251, 4252 and 4253 of the Internal Revenue Code is subsequently repealed, any reference in this section to such law, including any related federal regulations, private letter rulings, case law, and other opinions interpreting these sections, shall refer to that body of law that existed immediately prior to the date of repeal, as well as to any judicial or administrative decision interpreting such federal excise tax law, which is published or rendered after the date of the appeal. 
C.  The tax administrator may, from time to time, issue and disseminate to telecommunication service suppliers, which are subject to the tax collection requirements of this ordinance, an administrative ruling identifying those telecommunication services that are subject to the tax of subsection (A) above. This administrative ruling shall be consistent with legal nexus and the federal excise tax rules, regulations, and laws pertaining to "communications services," and shall not impose a new tax, revise an existing tax methodology, or increase an existing tax. 
D.  As used in this section, the term "charges" shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the telephone communication services. If a non-taxable service and a taxable service are billed together under a single charge, the entire charge shall be deemed taxable unless the service supplier can reasonably identify charges not subject to the tax based upon its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business, which shall be consistent with generally accepted accounting principles. 
E.  As used in this section, the term "charges" shall not include: 
1.  Charges for services paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated telephones except that where such coin-operated service is furnished for a guaranteed amount, the amounts paid under such guarantee plus any fixed monthly or other periodic charge shall be included in the base for computing the amount of tax due. 
2.  Charges for any type of service or equipment furnished by a service supplier subject to public utility regulation during any period in which the same or similar services or equipment are also available for sale or lease from persons other than a service supplier subject to public utility regulation. 
F.  To prevent actual multi-jurisdictional taxation of telephone communication services subject to tax under this section, any service user, upon proof to the tax administrator that the service user has previously paid the same tax in another state or city on such telephone communication services, shall be allowed a credit against the tax imposed to the extent of the amount of such tax legally imposed in such other state or city; provided, however, the amount of credit shall not exceed the tax owed to the City under this section. For purposes of establishing, sufficient legal nexus for the imposition and collection of utility users' tax on charges for telephone communication services pursuant to this chapter, "minimum contacts" shall be construed broadly in favor of the imposition and collection of the utility users' tax to the fullest extent permitted by California and federal law, and as it may change from time to time. 
G.  The tax on telephone communication services imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier. The amount of tax collected in one (1) month shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the last day of the following month; and must be received by the tax administrator on or before the last day of the following month. 
(Ord. 684 § 1, 2002)  
5.32.050 - Exemptions for residential customers 
A.  The taxes imposed by this chapter shall not apply to any person sixty-five (65) years of age or over, or to any person whose total personal income, from all sources, for the previous calendar year, does not exceed that level which shall constitute "very low income" as established annually on January 31st by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban development defines very low income as 50% of the Sonoma County Median Income with income adjustments made for family size. For the purpose of determining income, the income of the entire household from all sources will be evaluated. Very low income applicants must be able to prove financial independence according the most recent U.S. Internal Revenue Service regulations and standards. Any taxpayer claiming the exemption under this section shall be required to demonstrate their entitlement thereto annually by submitting an application, on a form approved by the Tax Administrator, that shall state those facts and provide the supporting documentation that qualify the applicant for this exemption. Such supporting information may include, but is limited to, federal income tax returns and W-2 forms. The Tax Administrator shall publish a written policy explaining the procedure to apply for an exemption and describing the information that must be submitted by the service user. 
B.  Once annually (July), the city manager, or his or her designee shall receive all applications and certify as exempt those subscribers who are sixty-five years of age or older or whose gross annual income constitutes "very low income" as defined in subparagraph A. Upon completion of the verification process, the city manager, or his or her designee shall process within thirty days refunds to qualified applicants. The refund is limited to taxes paid over a period of the previous six months prior to the refund application. All exemptions given to individuals sixty-five (65) years or older shall continue and be renewed automatically by the city manager or his or her designee. Very low income exemptions will expire each year. The very low income applicant will be required to submit an exemption application on an annual basis to continue their exemption. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to knowingly receive the benefits of the exemption provided by this section when the basis for such exemption either does not exist or ceases. 
C.  If deemed exempt by the tax administrator, such service user shall give the tax administrator timely written notice of any change in service suppliers so that the tax administrator can properly notify the new service supplier of the service user's tax exempt status. A service user that fails to comply with this section shall not be entitled to a refund of taxes collected and remitted to the tax administrator from such service user as a result of such non-compliance. Upon request of the tax administrator, a service supplier or non-utility service supplier, or its billing agent, shall provide a list of the names and addresses of those customers which, according to its billing records, are deemed exempt from the utility users' tax. With respect to a service user of telephone communication services, a service supplier of such telephone communication services doing business in the city shall, upon request of the tax administrator, provide a copy of the federal exemption certificate for each exempt customer within the city that is served by such service supplier. 
D.  The exemptions in Section 5.32.50 do not apply to commercial customers. 
(Ord. 684 § 1, 2002)  
5.32.060 - Other refunds. 
A.  Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid, or paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in this section. 
B.  The tax administrator may refund any tax that has been overpaid, paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator under this chapter, provided that no refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant or his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator has submitted a written claim to the tax administrator within one year of the overpayment or erroneous or illegal collection of said tax. Such claim must clearly establish claimant's right to the refund by written records showing entitlement thereto. Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a claim on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers. 
C.  The submission of a written claim as set forth in Chapter 2.44 shall be a prerequisite to a suit thereon. 
D.  Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, whenever a service supplier, pursuant to an order of the California Public Utilities Commission or a court of competent jurisdiction, makes a refund to service users of charges for past services, the taxes paid pursuant to the ordinance on the amount of such refunded service charges shall also be refunded to service users, and the service supplier shall be entitled to claim a credit for such refunded taxes against the amount of tax which is due upon the next monthly return. 
(Ord. 684 § 1, 2002)  
5.32.070 - Interest and penalty. 
A.  Taxes collected from a service user, or owed by a service user subject to the taxes imposed by this chapter are delinquent if not received by the tax administrator on or before the due dates provided in this chapter. Should the due date occur on a weekend or legal holiday, the return must be received by the tax administrator on or before the first regular working day following the weekend or legal holiday. A direct deposit, including electronic fund transfers and other similar methods of electronically exchanging monies between financial accounts, made by a service supplier in satisfaction of its obligations under this subsection shall be considered timely if the transfer is initiated on or before the due date, and the transfer settles into the City's account on the following business day. 
B.  1.  Original Delinquency. If the person required to collect and/or remit the tax fails to collect the tax (by failing to properly assess the tax on one or more services or charges on the customer's billing) or fails to remit the tax collected, or, in the case of a service user that fails to properly self-collect and remit the tax under Section 5.32.110 of this chapter, the tax administrator shall attach a penalty for such delinquencies or deficiencies at the rate of ten percent (10%) of the total tax that is delinquent or deficient in the remittance. 
2.  Continued Delinquency. Any person who fails to remit any delinquent remittance within a period of thirty days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten percent penalty first imposed. 
3.  The tax administrator shall have the power to impose additional penalties upon persons required to collect and/or remit taxes pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for fraud or gross negligence in reporting or remitting at the rate of fifteen percent (15%) of the amount of the tax collected and/or required to be remitted, or as recomputed by the tax administrator. 
4.  Each penalty amount imposed pursuant to the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax amount required to be remitted to the tax administrator. 
C.  Interest. In addition to any other penalties imposed by this chapter, any person required to collect and/or remit any tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter who fails to collect the tax (by failing to properly assess the tax on one or more services or charges on the customer's billing) or fails to remit the tax collected, or, in the case of a service user that fails to properly self-collect and remit the tax under this chapter, shall pay interest at the rate of three-quarters of one percent (¾%) per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent, until paid. 
(Ord. 684 § 1, 2002)  
5.32.080 - Actions to collect. 
Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the city. Any such tax collected from a service user which has not been remitted to the tax administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the city by the person required to collect and remit. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount, along with any collection costs incurred by the city as a result of the person's noncompliance with this chapter, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorneys' fees, plus interest and penalties as herein provided. 
(Ord. 684 § 1, 2002)  
5.32.090 - Duty to collect and remit-Procedures. 
The duty of service suppliers to collect and remit the taxes imposed by this chapter shall be performed as follows: 
A.  The tax shall be collected insofar as practicable at the same time as and along with the charges made in accordance with the regular billing practices of the service supplier. Where the amount paid by a service user to a service supplier is less than the full amount of the charge and tax which was accrued for the billing period, a proportionate share of both the charge and the tax shall be deemed to have been paid except in those cases where a service user pays the full amount of the charges but notifies the service supplier of his refusal to pay the tax imposed on said charges. In those cases where a service user has notified the service supplier of refusal to pay the tax imposed on said charges, Section 5.32.110 of this chapter shall apply. 
B.  The duty of a service supplier to collect tax from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first full regular billing period applicable to the service user, which starts on or after the operative date of this chapter. Where a person receives more than one billing, one or more being for different periods than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing period. 
C.  Each person required by this chapter to collect and remit a tax shall file a return with the tax administrator on forms approved by the tax administrator on or before the due date. The full amount of the tax owed shall be included with the return and filed with the tax administrator. The tax administrator is authorized to require such additional information, as he or she deems necessary to determine if the tax is being levied, collected and remitted in accordance with this chapter. Returns are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. Pursuant to Revenue and Tax Code § 7284.6, the tax administrator, and its agents, shall maintain such filing returns as confidential information, and not subject to the Public Records Act. If the person subject to this section unreasonable denies the tax administrator, or the tax administrator's designated representative, access to such records, then the tax administrator may impose a penalty of $500 on such person for each day following the initial date that the person refuses to provide such access. 
(Ord. 684 § 1, 2002)  
5.32.100 - Additional powers and duties of tax administrator. 
A.  The tax administrator shall have the power and duty, and is hereby directed to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The tax administrator shall have power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with provisions of this chapter for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the taxes herein imposed. A copy of such rules and regulations shall be on file in the office of the tax administrator. 
C.  Upon a proper showing of good cause, the tax administrator may make administrative agreements to vary the strict requirements of this chapter and thereby: i) conform to the billing procedures of a particular service supplier or service user so long as said agreements result in collections of the tax in conformance with the general purpose and scope of this chapter; or, ii) to avoid a hardship where the administrative costs of collection and remittance greatly outweigh the tax benefit. A copy of each such agreement shall be on file in the office of the tax administrator, and such agreements are voidable by the tax administrator or the city at any time. 
D.  The tax administrator alone shall be authorized to determine the eligibility of any person who asserts a right to exemption from or a refund of, the tax imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. 684 § 1, 2002)  
5.32.110 - Assessment-Administrative remedy. 
A.  Whenever the tax administrator determines that a service user has deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by the service user from the amounts remitted to a service supplier required to collect the tax, that a service user has failed to pay the amount of the tax for a period of two or more billing periods, or whenever the tax administrator deems it in the best interest of the city, the tax administrator may relieve said service supplier of the obligation to collect the taxes due under this chapter from certain named service users for specific billing periods. The service supplier shall provide the city with the names and addresses of such service users and the amounts of taxes owed under the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The tax administrator shall notify the non-paying service user that he or she has assumed the responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes. The notice shall be served on the service user by personal delivery or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was made by the person required to collect the tax; or, should the service user have changed his or her address, to his or her last known address. If the service user fails to remit the tax to the tax administrator within fifteen (15) days from the date of the service of the notice upon him or her, which shall be the date of mailing if service was not accomplished in person, a penalty of twenty-five (25%) percent of the amount of the tax set forth in the notice shall be imposed, along with interest at the rate of three-quarters of one percent (¾%) per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent, until paid, but not less than five dollars ($5.00). 
C.  The tax administrator may make an assessment for taxes not paid or remitted by a person required to pay or remit. A notice of the assessment shall refer briefly to the amount of the taxes and penalties imposed and the time and place when such assessment shall be submitted to the city manager for confirmation or modification, who shall appoint a hearing officer. The hearing officer shall mail a copy of such notice to the service supplier and to the service user at least-ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing and shall post such notice for at least five (5) continuous days prior to the date of the hearing. Any interested party having any objections may appear and be heard at the hearing provided his or her objection is filed in writing with the hearing officer prior to the time of the hearing. At the time fixed for considering such assessment, the hearing officer shall hear the same, together with any objections filed as provided in this subsection, and thereupon may confirm or modify such assessment. Upon confirmation or modification of the assessment, the city may seek to recover the amount of the assessment by any lawful means, including but not limited to the bringing of an action against the person responsible for payment of the amount. 
(Ord. 684 § 1, 2002)  
5.32.120 - Appeals. 
If a service user or service supplier is aggrieved by any assessment, decision or administrative ruling of the tax administrator, or with the failure to grant a refund or exemption as provided for under this chapter, he or she may appeal to the city manager. 
(Ord. 684 § 1, 2002)  
5.32.130 - Temporary Reduction in the Rate of Tax. 
Each of the taxes approved, imposed and levied by this chapter on the operative date of this ordinance may be temporarily reduced and levied at a lesser rate by resolution of the city council. Each such temporary reduction of the tax rate shall be in effect and may be levied at a reduced rate only for the period of time authorized in the city council resolution. At the conclusion of that period of time, the tax shall be levied at the full amount of the rate in effect on the operative date of this chapter. Voter approval shall not be required at the conclusion of the temporary reduction when the tax rate is again levied at the rate provided for on the operative date of this chapter. 
(Ord. 684 § 1, 2002)  
5.32.140 - Records. 
A.  It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and/or remit to the city any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of at least three (3) years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and/or remittance to the tax administrator, which records the tax administrator or his/her authorized representative shall have the right to inspect at a reasonable time. 
B.  The city may issue an administrative subpoena to compel a person to deliver, to the tax administrator, copies of all records deemed necessary by the tax administrator to establish compliance with this chapter, including the delivery of records in a common electronic format on readily available media if such records are kept electronically by the person in the usual and ordinary course of business. As an alternative to delivering the subpoenaed records to the tax administrator on or before the due date provided in the administrative subpoena, such person may provide access to such records outside the city on or before the due date, provided that such person shall reimburse the city for all reasonable travel expenses incurred by the city to inspect those records, including travel, lodging, meals, and other similar expenses, but excluding the normal salary or hourly wages of those persons designated by the city to conduct the inspection. 
C.  The tax administrator, or the tax administrator's designated representative, is authorized to execute a non-disclosure agreement approved by the city attorney to protect the confidentiality of customer information pursuant to California Revenue and Tax Code Sections 7284.6 and 7284.7. 
D.  If a service supplier uses a billing agent or billing aggregator to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax, the service supplier shall: i) provide to the tax administrator the name, address and telephone number of each billing agent and billing aggregator currently authorized by the service supplier to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax to the city; and, ii) upon request of the tax administrator, deliver, or effect the delivery of, any information or records in the possession of such billing agent or billing aggregator that, in the opinion of the tax administrator, is necessary to verify the proper application, calculation, collection and/or remittance of such tax to the city. 
E.  If any person subject to record-keeping under this section unreasonably denies the tax administrator, or the tax administrator's designated representative, access to such records, or fails to produce the information requested in an administrative subpoena within the time specified, the tax administrator or the tax administrator's designated representative may impose a penalty of five hundred dollars ($500) on such person for each day following: i) the initial date that the person refuses to provide such access; or, ii) the due date for production of records as set forth in the administrative subpoena. This penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed under this chapter. 
(Ord. 684 § 1, 2002)  
5.32.150 - Notice of changes to ordinance. 
If a tax under this chapter is repealed or reduced, or the tax base is changed, the tax administrator shall follow the notice requirements of Public Utilities Code Section 799. Prior to the effective date of the ordinance change, the service supplier shall provide the tax administrator with a copy of any written procedures describing the information that the service supplier needs to implement the ordinance change. If the service supplier fails to provide such written instructions, the tax administrator, or its agent, shall send, by first class mail, a copy of the ordinance change to all collectors and remitters of the city's taxes according to the latest payment records of the tax administrator. 
(Ord. 684 § 1, 2002)  
5.32.160 - Construction. 
This chapter shall be construed and interpreted, at all times, in a manner that is consistent with state and federal law. 
(Ord. 684 § 1, 2002)  
5.32.170 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this chapter or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrases thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional. 
(Ord. 684 § 1, 2002)  
Chapter 5.34 - PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
 
5.34.010 - Findings. 
A.  The public rights-of-way and other public property are a substantial asset managed by the city in trust for its citizens. It is the city's obligation, and has been the historical role of the city, to manage the rights-of-way in a manner which best promotes the health, safety and welfare of its citizens, and results in fair compensation for occupancy and use of the rights-of-way. 
B.  The city maintains and strives to keep in good repair the rights-of-way, at substantial and ongoing cost, Although the general taxpayers bear the financial burden of these costs, a primary cause for the early and excessive deterioration of the rights-of-way is their frequent excavation, construction and reconstruction by telecommunications providers who receive revenue and profit from their use of public property. 
C.  The Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Section 256(c)) confirms the authority of local governments "to manage the public rights-of-way" and "to require fair and reasonable compensation from telecommunications providers, on a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory basis, for use of public rights-of-way," 
D.  The Telecommunications Act of 1996 requires that actions taken by the city be "competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory." This requirement obligates the city to establish a regulatory structure that treats all rights-of-way occupants and applicants on a nondiscriminatory basis, 
E.  This chapter is intended to conform to the provisions of federal and state law relating to the regulation of providers of public and private utilities, including but not limited to, telecommunications providers (including telephone companies), natural gas providers, and electricity providers. 
F.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the ability of any entity to provide any interstate or intrastate telecommunications service. 
(Ord. 660 § 1 (part), 2000)  
5.34.020 - Intent. 
It is the intent of this chapter to: 
A.  Establish a regulatory and management structure and procedures for the occupancy and use of the public rights-of-way by all telecommunications providers as lawfully allowed by federal and state law; 
B.  Encourage the entry of new telecommunications providers, on a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory basis; 
C.  Establish nondiscriminatory procedures by which the city receives fair compensation for the occupancy and use of its public rights-of-way; 
D.  Establish nondiscriminatory procedures by which the adverse effects of the use of the rights-of-way by a multiplicity of telecommunications providers, such as congestion, damage, inconvenience to the public and visual blight, can be minimized. 
(Ord. 660 § 1 (part), 2000)  
5.34.030 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words, phrases, and terms shall have the meanings set forth herein. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
A.  "Cable service" means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service; and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. 
B.  "Facility" means any fiber optic, coaxial or copper cable; telephone, telecommunications, electric, or other wire or line; oil, gas or other pipeline; duct conduit, cabinet, tunnel, vault, equipment drain, manhole, splice, box, surface location marker, pole, structure, utility or other appurtenance, structure, property or tangible thing owned, leased, operated or licensed by a person and located or proposed to be located in, upon, above, beneath or across any public right-of-way or other public property. 
C.  "Licensee" means any person with whom the city has executed a right-of-way agreement under this chapter or any lawful successor, transferee or assignee of such person. 
D.  "Person" means an individual, partnership, association, joint-stock company, trust, corporation or governmental entity, and any lawful successor, transferee or assignee, 
E.  "Public property" means any property owned, controlled or managed by the city. 
F.  "Public right-of-way" means each of the following which have been dedicated to the public or are hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under city authority and located within the city limits: streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, public rights-of-way and similar public property and areas that the city shall permit to be included within the definition of public right-of-way from time to time. 
G.  "Right-of-way agreement" means the authorization granted by the city to a person under this chapter giving the person a nonexclusive right to occupy certain space in, upon, above, beneath or across any public right-of-way for the purpose of providing a specified service. 
H.  "Telecommunications service" means any service defined as telecommunications service in the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, as it may be amended and as it is interpreted by a court of final jurisdiction, including but not limited to telephone services, cellular telephone services, personal communications services, internet services, open video system services and other similar services but excluding cable service. 
(Ord. 702 § 1, 2003; Ord. 660 § 1 (part), 2000)  
5.34.040 - Agreement required. 
No person shall place, construct, own, control, operate, manage or use any facility in, upon, above, beneath or across any public right-of-way or on public property without first obtaining a right-of-way agreement from the city for such purpose in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The execution of a right-of-way agreement pursuant to this chapter shall not diminish, abrogate or otherwise affect a licensee's obligation to comply with any other applicable provision of this Code or state or federal law, including but not limited to, the following: 
A.  Any permit or authorization required for the privilege of transacting business within the city as required by the code or ordinances of general applicability of the city; 
B.  Any permit, agreement or authorization required in connection with activities in, upon, above, beneath or across the public rights-of-way, including by way of example but not limitation, street work, street excavation, use, removal and relocation of property within a street, and other street work; 
C.  Any permits or agreements for occupying any other property of the city to which access is not specifically granted by the right-of-way agreement including, without limitation, permits and licenses for placing devices on or in poles, conduits, or other structures or facilities or property owned by the city or other governmental entity; 
D.  Any and all provisions of Title 17 of this Code. 
This section shall apply to any person that owns, leases, operates or licenses any facility on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or that thereafter proposes to own, lease, operate or license any facility. 
(Ord. 660 § 1 (part), 2000)  
5.34.050 - Exemptions—Existing agreements. 
A.  Any person who is a party to an existing agreement or franchise with the city that authorizes the use of the public rights-of-way, and which agreement or franchise is in full force and effect on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall not be subject to Section 5.32.040 until such time as the existing agreement or franchise expires or is terminated. If an existing agreement or franchise for use of the public right-of-way contains within it a provision for the renewal or extension of the agreement or franchise, then renewal or extension shall be negotiated and executed pursuant to the terms of this chapter. 
B.  Facilities temporarily placed in the public rights-of-way for a period not to exceed three months, when such facilities have been otherwise approved by the city engineer. 
C.  Any person providing cable service pursuant to a franchise granted under Chapter 5.24 of this Code; provided however, that if a person using the public right-of-way to provide cable service also uses the public right-of-way to provide a telecommunications service, such person shall be required to comply with Section 5.32.040 in order to use facilities to provide the telecommunications service. "Use" of the public right-of-way shall be interpreted consistently with the Telecommunications Act of 1996. 
D.  Any person that leases or otherwise uses any facility that is the subject of an agreement required by Section 5.32.040 between the city and the owner, operator, controller or manager of that facility (the "existing agreement"), shall not be subject to Section 5.32.040 until such time as either (1) there is a transfer of the facility to such person as defined by Section 5.34.150; or (2) the existing agreement limits the use of the facility to telephone service governed by Section 7901 of the Public Utilities Code, and such person proposes to use the facility to provide a telecommunications service other than telephone service governed by Section 7901 of the Public Utilities Code. 
(Ord. 660 § 1 (part), 2000)  
5.34.055 - Registration required. 
Any person using a facility that is not required to enter into a right-of-way agreement pursuant to Section 5.34.040 shall register its use with the city on a form provided by the city manager. "Use" of the public right-of-way shall be interpreted consistently with the Telecommunications Act of 1996. 
(Ord. 660 § 1 (part), 2000)  
5.34.060 - Application. 
Application for a right-of-way agreement required by Section 5.32.040 shall be in writing on a form provided by the city, shall be filed with the city engineer, and shall contain the following information: 
A.  The name and address of the applicant including any affiliates; 
B.  The name, address and telephone number of an officer, agent or employee who will serve as the contact point for the applicant; 
C.  A statement and description of the facilities to be placed, constructed, owned, controlled, operated, managed or used by the applicant; the proposed location of such facilities; the manner in which the applicant proposes to place, construct, own, control, operate, manage or use the same; the extent and manner in which existing or future poles or other facilities of other persons will be used; and the time period of the proposed construction, if any; 
D.  A detailed description and location map of the public rights-of-way or other public property within which the applicant proposes or seeks authority to place, construct, own, control, operate, manage or use any facilities; a detailed description and location map of the facilities to be installed in public rights-of-way and any adjacent public and private facilities, equipment or property; and a detailed description of the proposed traffic control plans and street repairs; 
E.  A description of any surplus conduit that the applicant intends to install, if any, and the capacity of the facilities being installed or previously installed. If the applicant is proposing to install facilities without utilizing existing surplus conduit, the applicant shall submit a description of all existing surplus conduits along the proposed route together with an explanation of why that existing surplus conduit is not being utilized; 
F.  Evidence that the applicant has contacted all other potential licensees, known to the applicant, who have, or who are reasonably likely to be installing facilities along all or part of the same route, have informed the applicant of such plans, and have offered to participate in a joint installation project on reasonable terms; 
G.  Copies of all license, permits, franchises or other written authorizations received by the applicant from the Federal Communications Commission, the California Public Utilities Commission, or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction concerning any matters affecting the applicant's activities or facilities under the proposed right-of-way agreement; 
H.  The city may at any time demand, and the applicant shall provide, such supplementary, additional or other information as the council or city staff may deem reasonably necessary to determine whether the requested right-of-way agreement should be granted so long as such information is used to manage the public right-of-way in a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory basis; 
The city engineer shall refer the application to any city council subcommittee on telecommunications matters and other interested city departments for review and comment. 
(Ord. 660 § 1 (part), 2000)  
5.34.070 - Application—Fee. 
Each application for a right-of-way agreement shall be accompanied by payment to the city of an application fee in an amount determined by resolution of the city council, necessary to pay all estimated expenses incurred by the city in connection with the processing of such application and the execution of a right-of-way agreement, including any expense incurred by the city for outside technical or legal services to review any such application or agreement and submit a recommendation thereon. Any application fee adopted pursuant to this section shall be fair and reasonable and shall be applied in a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory basis. No portion of the fee shall be considered a tax or any portion of compensation or revenue due to the city under this chapter or code, or any other local, state or federal law for use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. 660 § 1 (part), 2000)  
5.34.080 - Approval and execution of agreement. 
A.  Upon receipt of a completed application for a right-of-way agreement and consideration thereof, the city council may, by resolution or ordinance, grant or deny the requested right-of-way agreement. If the right-of-way agreement is granted, the application submitted shall constitute and form part of the right-of-way agreement as executed. If the application is denied, the resolution shall include the reason(s) for denial, 
B.  In considering whether to grant or deny a requested right-of-way agreement, the city council shall apply the following criteria; 
1.  The applicant's ability to install and maintain the facilities described in the application; 
2.  The capacity of the public rights-of-way identified in the application to accommodate the applicant's proposed facilities and any foreseeable additional facilities of the applicant or other licensees which may need to be accommodated; 
3.  The city's future plans for the affected public right-of-way or public property; 
4.  The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities, improvements, service, travel, or landscaping by the proposed use; 
5.  The availability of existing or future alternate routes or locations for the applicant's proposed facilities; 
6.  Any licenses, permits, or franchises received by the applicant from the Federal Communications Commission, the California Public Utilities Commission, or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction concerning any matters affecting the applicant's proposed activities or facilities; 
7.  Any other consideration deemed pertinent for safeguarding the health, welfare and safety of the city and the public. 
C.  If a right-of-way agreement is approved, the right-of-way agreement shall not be effective unless and until the city and licensee have executed a written document that memorializes the right-of-way agreement and contains, at a minimum, the following: 
1.  The purpose(s) and uses(s) of the public rights-of-way authorized by the right-of-way agreement; 
2.  The right of the city to audit licensee to ensure such purposes and uses have not been violated; 
3.  The terms and conditions for licensee's use of the public rights-of-way, including all conditions imposed by the city council in its approval of the agreement; 
4.  The right-of-way usage fee, if any, or the methodology for determining the fee to be paid to the city by licensee pursuant to Section 5.32.100; 
5.  Incorporation of the provisions of this chapter and licensee's right-of-way agreement application; 
6.  Any other material determined to be necessary or prudent by the city. 
(Ord. 660 § 1 (part), 2000)  
5.32.090 - Term of agreement. 
Unless otherwise specified in the right-of-way agreement, a right-of-way agreement executed under this chapter shall be valid for a period of ten years. 
(Ord. 660 § 1 (part), 2000)  
5.34.100 - Amendment—Application and determination. 
A licensee may apply to amend its right-of-way agreement to revise the rights-of-way within which the licensee proposes to place, construct, own, control, operate, manage or use its facilities, as long as the type of facilities and the use of such facilities is already authorized by the licensee's existing rights-of-way agreement. The amendment application shall contain the information required under Section 5.32.060, and shall be accompanied by the application fee specified in Section 5.32.070. The city council shall, by resolution or ordinance, approve or deny the amendment application in whole, in part, or with additional conditions, applying the following criteria: 
A.  The considerations set forth in Section 5.32.080; 
B.  The applicant's history and current compliance with any applicable right-of-way agreement, this chapter, or any other applicable local, state or federal law, regulation or policy; 
C.  The capacity of the streets, alleys, or other public rights-of-way identified in the amendment application to accommodate the applicant's facilities and use(s) of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. 660 § 1 (part), 2000)  
5.34.110 - Renewal—Application and determination. 
A licensee that desires to renew its right-of-way agreement may file an application with the city for renewal not more than one year nor less than one hundred and eighty days before expiration of its current right-of-way agreement. The renewal application shall contain the information required under Section 5.32.060, and shall be accompanied by the application fee specified in Section 5.32.070. Within one hundred and eighty days after receipt of a completed renewal application, the city council shall, by resolution or ordinance, grant or deny the renewal application in whole, in part or with additional conditions, applying the following criteria: 
A.  The considerations set forth in Section 5.32.080; 
B.  The applicant's history and current compliance with any applicable right-of-way agreement, this chapter or any other applicable local, state or federal law, regulation or policy; 
C.  The continuing capacity of the streets, alleys or other public rights-of-way identified in the renewal application to accommodate the applicant's facilities and use(s) of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. 660 § 1 (part), 2000)  
5.34.120 - Right-of-way usage fee. 
Each right-of-way agreement granted under this chapter is subject to the city's right, which is expressly reserved, to annually fix a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid by licensee for the property rights granted in the right-of-way agreement; provided that nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city and licensees from agreeing and fixing in the right-of-way agreements the compensation to be paid for the privileges granted therein. This section shall not apply to right-of-way agreements approved and executed for right-of-way uses governed by Chapter 5.12 of this Code, the Broughton Act (Cal, Pub. Util. Code §§ 6001 et seq.), the Franchise Act of 1937 (Cal. Pub. Util. Code §§ 6201 et seq.), Section 7901 of the Public Utilities Code, or Section 10101 of the Public Utilities Code. 
(Ord. 660 § 1 (part), 2000)  
5.34.130 - Bond—Forfeiture. 
A.  Licensee shall, prior to the issuance of any permit for construction in the public rights-of-way, deliver to the city a performance bond in the amount of one hundred percent of the total estimated cost of all work relating to the public right-of-way to be performed under such permit, as determined by the city engineer at the time of application. The bond shall be provided in a form acceptable to the city and maintained in full force and effect until the permitted work in the public rights-of-way is completed to the satisfaction of the city engineer, whereupon the amount of the bond shall be reduced to ten percent of the actual cost of the work and shall be maintained by licensee for a period of one year as a guarantee the work is of good quality and free from any defective or faulty material or workmanship. The surety supplying the bond must be an "admitted surety insurer," as defined in Section 995.120 of the Code of Civil Procedure, authorized to do business in the state of California. Return of the bond shall be conditioned upon licensee's faithful performance of all work in the public rights-of-way specified in the applicable permit. In the event licensee fails to comply with any provision of this chapter related to such work, or any provision of any applicable right-of-way agreement, permit or other approval related to such work, there shall be recoverable from the bond any damages or loss suffered by the city as a result thereof, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, cost of removal, or abandonment of any property of licensee, plus a reasonable allowance for attorneys' fees and costs up to the full amount of the bond. 
B.  Neither the provisions of this section nor any damage recovered by the city hereunder shall be construed to excuse licensee's faithful performance of any right-of-way agreement or limit the liability or damages of licensee under this chapter, either to the full amount of the bond or otherwise. 
(Ord. 660 § 1 (part), 2000)  
5.34.140 - Use of facilities—Changes in use. 
Licensee's facilities shall be placed, constructed, owned, controlled, operated, managed and used solely and exclusively for the purpose(s) and use(s) expressly set forth in licensee's right-of-way agreement. Licensee shall not in any way use, or authorize or allow another person to use, any facility subject to licensee's right-of-way agreement for any purpose or use other than the purpose(s) and use(s) expressly set forth in the right-of-way agreement. 
(Ord. 660 § 1 (part), 2000)  
5.34.150 - Transfer of agreement or facilities. 
The execution of a right-of-way agreement is a privilege to be held in personal trust by licensee. Subject to applicable law, no right-of-way agreement or any facility permitted thereunder shall be sold, leased, licensed, assigned, disposed of or otherwise transferred ("transfer"), in whole or in part, either by involuntary or voluntary sale, merger, consolidation, stock transfer, transfer in trust or otherwise, if such transfer results in a nonrevocable transfer of control, without the prior written notification of the city. A sale or transfer of stock, assets or other equitable interests of licensee, or of any parent, subsidiary or other affiliate or licensee, which effects a material change in licensee's ownership or control, as determined by the city, shall be deemed to be a transfer for purposes of this section. A rebuttable presumption that a transfer has occurred shall arise upon the acquisition or transfer by any person or group of persons of fifty percent or more of the beneficial ownership interest of the grantee or its parent. Any proposed transferee must agree to comply with all provisions of the right-of-way agreement and this chapter. 
(Ord. 660 § 1 (part), 2000)  
5.34.160 - Nonexclusive use—Limitations. 
A.  Any right-of-way agreement executed under this chapter shall be for the nonexclusive use of the public rights-of-way. By executing a right-of-way agreement, the city does not agree to restrict the number of right-of-way agreements to be executed that cover all or any part of the city for any person in the same business, a competing business or a related business as the licensee. 
B.  A right-of-way agreement only authorizes licensee to use the public rights-of-way, and the use of any other public property, whether located within or outside a public right-of-way, is strictly prohibited unless authorized by a separate agreement with the city. 
C.  No reference herein, nor in any right-of-way agreement shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the city that its interest or other right to control the use of the property that is the subject of a right-of-way agreement is sufficient to permit its use for the purposes specified in the agreement. Any right-of-way agreement executed under this chapter shall be deemed to grant no more than the rights which the city may have the authority to grant. 
D.  Any privilege claimed by licensee in any public right-of-way shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of the public right-of-way. 
E.  Licensee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city for any loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of this chapter or of any right-of-way agreement executed under this chapter or because of its enforcement except for the sole negligence or wilful misconduct of the city. 
(Ord. 660 § 1 (part), 2000)  
5.34.170 - Facilities—Installation. 
A.  Conformance with Applicable Law. No person shall place, construct, own, control, operate, manage or use any facility in, upon, above, beneath or across any public right-of-way without first obtaining all necessary or required permits, agreements or approvals from the city and all other governmental entities with jurisdiction over the facility or public right-of-way. All facilities shall be maintained in compliance with such permits, agreements or approvals, and all applicable statutes, ordinances, rules, regulations, orders and decisions issued by an federal, state or local governmental body, agency or court. 
B.  Time, Place and Manner. All facilities shall be located, constructed, operated and maintained in the time, place and manner that causes the least interference with the public's use of the public rights-of-way, and the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin the public rights-of-ways, in conformance with Chapter 17.64 of this Code. 
C.  Key Map and Facilities Plan. Every person subject to this chapter shall cause a key map and detailed facilities plan showing all facilities to be located in the public rights-of-way, including the material of construction and horizontal and vertical locations with respect to property lines and grade lines, to be prepared by a registered professional civil engineer and filed in the office of the city engineer prior to the issuance of any permit or approval for installation. Prior to requesting the issuance of a permit for installation of any facility, the key map and detailed improvement plan shall be filed with any other entity that owns, operates or manages facilities in the affected rights-of-way, so that such entities may advise the city engineer as to any location, operation or compatibility problems created by licensee's proposed use of the rights-of-way. The final version of these documents shall be submitted to the city engineer in hard copy and in digital format as approved by the city engineer. 
D.  Disclosure. Upon the request of any person who has contracted to perform work on a public right-of-way, persons subject to this chapter shall provide accurate detailed information regarding the location of their existing and proposed facilities in the public rights-of-way. 
E.  Undergrounding. In those areas and portions of the city where the transmission or distribution facilities of any person providing telephone service, cable service or electric service are underground or hereafter may be placed underground, all other facilities shall be constructed, operated and maintained underground. 
F.  Pole Attachments. Where existing poles or other wire-holding structures are available for use, the city council may require such poles and structures to be used if it determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby, and the terms of the use are just and reasonable. 
(Ord. 660 § 1 (part), 2000)  
5.34.180 - Facilities—Relocation—Removal. 
Every person subject to this chapter shall, in accordance with state law, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove from any public right-of-way, any facility of such person when required by the city engineer by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway or street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines and tracks, or any other public use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. 660 § 1 (part), 2000)  
5.34.190 - Facilities—Abandonment—Removal. 
A.  Notice of Removal. In the event the use of any facility is discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of six months, or in the event any facility has been installed in any public right-of-way without complying with the requirements of this chapter, or in the event the required right-of-way agreement is terminated, canceled or expired, the owner of such facility shall promptly, upon being given thirty days' prior notice, remove from the public rights-of-way all such facilities, other than any which the city engineer may permit to be abandoned in place. In the event of such removal, the area from which such facility has been removed shall be promptly restored to a condition satisfactory to the city engineer. 
B.  Abandonment. Any facility remaining in place one hundred and twenty days after the delivery of the notice set forth in this section shall be considered permanently abandoned. The city engineer may extend such time as may be necessary under the circumstances. 
C.  "In Place" Abandonment. Any facility abandoned in place in the public rights-of-way shall be abandoned in such manner as the city engineer shall prescribe. Upon permanent abandonment, the facility shall become that of the city and the owner of such facility shall submit to the city engineer an instrument in writing, to be approved by the city attorney, transferring ownership of the facility to the city. 
(Ord. 660 § 1 (part), 2000)  
5.34.200 - Damage to facilities and public property. 
A.  The city, its elected officials, officers, employees and agents shall not be liable for any damage to or loss of any facility placed in, upon, above, beneath or across a public right-of-way unless such damage or loss is caused by the negligence or wilful misconduct of the city. 
B.  Any damage done directly or indirectly to any public right-of-way or other public property or improvement, by any person subject to this chapter, shall be promptly repaired, at the person's sole cost and expense, to the complete satisfaction of the city. Alternatively, the city may, in its sole discretion, choose to perform the repair work itself, in which case the responsible person shall reimburse the city for the full costs of the repair work within thirty days after receiving a statement detailing such costs. 
(Ord. 660 § 1 (part), 2000)  
5.34.210 - Indemnification. 
Every person subject to this chapter shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its elected officials, officers, employees and agents from any and all actual or alleged claims, demands, causes of action, liability, loss, damage or injury to property or persons, including wrongful death, whether imposed by a court of law or by administrative action of any federal, state, or local governmental body or agency, arising out of or incident to any acts, omissions, negligence or wilful misconduct of licensee, its personnel, employees, agents or subcontractors in connection with the performance of a right-of-way agreement or the use of any public right-of-way. This indemnification excludes only such portion of any claim, demand, cause of action, liability, loss, damage, penalty, fine or injury to property or persons, including wrongful death, which is caused by the negligence or wilful misconduct of the city as determined by a court or administrative body of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 660 § 1 (part), 2000)  
5.34.220 - Insurance. 
Every person subject to this chapter shall procure and maintain a policy of general liability insurance as required to insure such person and the city against all liability for personal injury, including accidental death, as well as claims for property damage which may arise from or which concern the activities of the person or the existence of the person's facilities in the public rights-of-way. The amount and terms under which the insurance is provided shall be determined by the city engineer and included in the right-of-way agreement. 
(Ord. 660 § 1 (part), 2000)  
5.34.230 - Violations—Penalties—Remedies. 
A.  Criminal Penalties, Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor or an infraction. 
B.  Civil Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or who breaches a right-of-way agreement executed under this chapter, shall be liable to the city for a civil penalty of one thousand dollars. For continuing violations or breaches, each day a violation or breach continues shall be deemed a separate violation or breach subject to an additional civil penalty. 
C.  Termination. If a licensee breaches a right-of-way agreement executed under this chapter, the city may, following reasonable notice, an opportunity to cure, and a hearing, terminate the right-of-way agreement. 
D.  Cumulative Remedies. The remedies under this section are nonexclusive and cumulative, and shall be in addition to any other remedy the city may have at law or in equity. 
(Ord. 660 § 1 (part), 2000)  
5.34.240 - Rights reserved to the city. 
A.  Nothing in this chapter shall contract away, modify, abridge, impair or affect, in any way, to any extent, the right of the city to acquire any facility located in the public rights-of-way through the exercise of the right of eminent domain. 
B.  There is reserved to the city every right and power which is required to be reserved or provided by any ordinance of the city, and every person subject to this chapter, by its use of the public rights-of-way, agrees to be bound thereby and to comply with any action or requirements of the city in its exercise of such rights or power, heretofore or hereafter enacted or established. 
C.  Neither the execution of a right-of-way agreement nor any provisions of this chapter shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power of the city, including the city's authority to make any proper public use of the public rights-of way. 
D.  The city council may do all things which are necessary and convenient in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this chapter subject to its lawful police powers. 
E.  The city shall have the right to supervise all construction or installation work performed subject to the provisions of this chapter and make such inspections as it finds necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this chapter, a right-of-way agreement, or any other local, state or federal law, regulation, permit or standard. 
F.  The city reserves the right to impose regulations and requirements pursuant to this chapter as determined appropriate by subsequent interpretations of federal and state law. 
(Ord. 660 § 1 (part), 2000)  
Title 6 - ANIMAL REGULATION AND PROTECTION 
Chapters:  
Chapter 6.02 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
6.02.010 - Purpose—Construction. 
This Title is intended to regulate, control and protect animals existing within the city of Rohnert Park. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.02.030 - Authority to set fees and charges. 
The city council may, from time to time, by resolution, establish a schedule of fees and charges for services performed and licenses issued under this Title. The fees and charges so established may recover the reasonable cost of providing such services and issuing such licenses. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.02.050 - Penalties. 
Violation of any of the provisions of this Title shall be deemed to be an infraction unless otherwise designated. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.02.070 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this Title, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, certain words and phrases shall have the meaning given to them in this section: 
A.  "Animal" means all nonhuman members of the animal kingdom, including domestic, exotic and livestock species. 
B.  "Animal control officer" means an employee of the city or the city shelter authorized to enforce all of the provisions of this Title relating to the care, control and treatment of animals as well as any state laws which he or she is authorized to enforce. 
C.  "Assistance dog" means a specifically trained canine assigned to a disabled person for the specific purpose of assisting the disabled person. Assistance dogs include, but are not limited to, guide dogs for the blind, hearing dogs, canine companions and pet-assisted therapy dogs. 
D.  "At large" means an animal that is off the premises of its owner and not under restraint by a leash. 
E.  "Breeder" means any person, business or organization that is recognized as a "breeder" under the laws of the State of California. 
F.  "Commercial kennel" means any lot or premises on which four or more dogs or five or more cats, not to exceed ten of either, over four months of age; or thirteen or more birds, rabbits, rodents and reptiles, up to a total of twenty of all; are owned and kept by the owner or occupant for commercial purposes including, but not limited to, boarding, breeding, buying, selling, renting, exhibiting or training. A commercial kennel shall not include a veterinary facility, S.P.C.A., or the animal shelter. 
G.  "Dangerous animal" means an animal, except a dog assisting a public safety officer engaged in law enforcement duties, which demonstrates any or all of the following behavior: 
1.  An unprovoked attack that results in serious injury to, or the death of, any person when such person is acting lawfully; 
2.  An unprovoked attack that results in the death of another animal or livestock when the animal or livestock is off the property of the owner of the attacking animal; 
3.  A second unprovoked attack within a thirty-six-month period on a person that requires a defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury when the person is acting lawfully; 
4.  A second unprovoked attack within a thirty-six-month period on another animal or livestock that results in serious injury when the animal or livestock is off the property of the owner of the attacking animal; 
5.  A second unprovoked attack within a thirty-six-month period on any person that results in less than a serious injury when the person is acting lawfully. 
H.  "Domestic animal" means any animal customarily kept by humans for companionship, including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, birds, rabbits, hamsters, potbellied pigs, guinea pigs, mice, rats, iguanas and the like. Feral cats are not domestic animals. 
I.  "Exotic animal" means any species of animal not normally considered domestic or livestock. For purposes of this definition, "exotic animal" shall be defined as those animals defined by California Fish & Game Code Section 2116 as "wild animals." This includes, but is not limited to, the species listed in California Fish & Game Section 2118. 
J.  "Health officer" means any Public Health Officer of Sonoma County or designee. 
K.  "Hearing officer" means the administrative sergeant of the department of public safety or his or her designee as determined by the director of public safety. 
L.  "Hobby kennel" means any place or premises on which four or more dogs or five or more cats, not to exceed ten of either, over four months of age; or thirteen or more birds, rabbits, rodents and reptiles, up to a total of twenty of all; are owned and kept by the owner or occupant for personal, noncommercial purposes, including, but not limited to, hunting, tracking, exhibiting at shows, exhibitions, field trials or other competitions; or enhancing or perpetuating a given breed, other than dogs used in conjunction with an agricultural operation on the lot or premises. No hobby kennel operator shall sell, display, offer for sale, barter or give away more than two litters of puppies and/or two litters of kittens in any calendar year. 
M.  "License" means a permit obtained from a governmental or quasi-governmental agency which allows a person, business or organization to do described acts or maintain described premises. 
N.  "Livestock" means any animal kept by humans that do not customarily inhabit their owner's dwelling. Includes, but not limited to, equine, bovine, ovine, caprine, porcine, and any species of chickens, ducks, pigeons, geese, turkeys or other domesticated fowl, but excluding bees. 
O.  "Owner" or "Owner/Guardian" means any person who keeps or has charge of or provides custody or care to an animal for at least thirty consecutive days. This definition shall exclude veterinarians who are treating or caring for an animal in the regular practice of veterinary medicine as well as the owners or operators of an animal grooming business, kennel or pet shop while engaged in the regular practice of such business. Use of the term "Owner/Guardian" in place of "Owner" shall not imply or bestow any change in legal status or ownership of animals by the use of such term. 
P.  "Pet shop" means any premises wherein animals are kept for the purposes of wholesale or retail sale, exchange or hire to the public. 
Q.  "Pit bull" means any dog that is an American Pit Bull Terrier, American Staffordshire Terrier, Staffordshire Bull Terrier, or any mixed breed of dog which contains, as an element of its breeding, one of these aforementioned breeds and exhibits the majority of physical traits of any such breeds. 
R.  "Potentially dangerous animal" means an animal, except a dog assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties, which demonstrates for the first time any or all of the following behavior: 
1.  An unprovoked attack on a person that requires a defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury when the person is acting lawfully; 
2.  An unprovoked attack on another animal or livestock that results in serious injury when the animal or livestock is off the property of the owner of the attacking animal; 
3.  An unprovoked attack on any person that results in less than a serious injury when the person is acting lawfully; 
4.  Any unprovoked behavior that constitutes a physical threat of bodily harm to any person when the person is off the property of the owner of the animal. 
S.  "Serious injury" means any physical injury to a human or animal that requires multiple sutures or corrective or cosmetic surgery, or results in muscle tears, multiple puncture wounds, disfiguring lacerations, or severe bruising. 
T.  "Service dog" means any dog under the control of a public safety officer in the performance of, or training for, public service. 
U.  "Shelter supervisor" means the supervisor of the city's shelter or her or his designee. 
V.  "Welfare organization" means any nonprofit public benefit corporation that is organized for the purpose of improving the lives or welfare of animals. 
(Ord. 752 § 1, 2006: Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 6.04 - ANIMAL REGULATION 
Sections: 
 
6.04.010 - Animal control officers—Powers and duties. 
A.  All animal control officers shall enforce all of the provisions of this Title of the Municipal Code and all state laws relating to the care, control and treatment of animals. 
B.  If an animal control officer has reasonable cause to believe that any person has violated any of the provisions of this Title, or any state laws which the animal control officer is authorized to enforce, relating to the care, control and treatment of animals, the animal control officer may apply the penalty provisions set forth in Chapter 1.16 of this Municipal Code. 
C.  The animal control officer may seize, impound and humanely euthanize any animal when authorized to do so by this Municipal Code or by the laws of this state relating to the care, control and treatment of animals. 
D.  When the breed of an unspayed or unneutered dog is at issue, the animal control officer shall determine whether such dog is a pit bull. If the owner of the dog wishes to appeal the animal control officer's determination that the dog is a pit bull, he or she may, within ten calendar days of the determination, request a hearing before the hearing officer. The hearing shall be held in accordance with Chapter 6.10 of this Title. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. 
E.  The animal control officer shall investigate any reported incident regarding a potentially dangerous or dangerous animal. If the animal control officer determines that the animal should be deemed potentially dangerous or dangerous, the animal control officer may seize and impound the animal to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public. In addition, the animal control officer shall compose a written report to be submitted to the patrol sergeant on duty at that time. The report shall set forth the facts and reasons why the animal should be deemed potentially dangerous or dangerous. If the patrol sergeant concurs with the animal control officer's determination, the animal control officer shall serve a "Notice of Conditions Imposed and Right to Request Hearing" upon the owner of the animal. 
(Ord. 752 § 2, 2006: Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.04.030 - Refusal to present animal for inspection prohibited. 
No person shall fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order of an animal control officer under this title to present an animal for inspection. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.04.050 - Public nuisances—Prohibited. 
No owner, guardian or person otherwise having an animal in her or his care, charge, control, custody or possession shall permit or allow the existence of a public nuisance, including, but not limited to, the following: 
A.  To permit such animal to obstruct the reasonable and comfortable use of property in any neighborhood or community by running at large, chasing vehicles, molesting passersby, or continual barking, howling, screeching or otherwise making excessive noises; 
B.  To permit such animal to damage property, enter on public property, or trespass on private property; 
C.  To permit unsanitary conditions to exist on the premises where such animal is kept which would cause odors, attract flies or vermin, or which would be otherwise injurious to the public health, offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property; 
D.  To keep or maintain any animal in violation of the zoning code of the city. 
(Ord. 752 § 3, 2006; Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.04.070 - Public nuisances—Abatement. 
Whenever an animal control officer has reasonable cause to believe that a public nuisance exists, he or she may conduct an investigation of the alleged nuisance. In addition, whenever an animal control officer receives three or more complaints or affirmations in writing from persons having separate residences in the same neighborhood or from persons employed regularly in the same neighborhood, that any animal is a public nuisance as that term is used in this Municipal Code, the animal control officer may investigate to determine if a public nuisance exists. If the animal control officer determines that a public nuisance exists, the nuisance shall be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.24 of the Rohnert Park Municipal Code. 
Notwithstanding any of the preceding, no animal that is part of an agricultural operation pursuant to California Civil Code Section 3482.5 shall be deemed to be a public nuisance under this section, provided such animal is owned and kept in compliance with this Title and state law. 
(Ord. 752 § 4, 2006: Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.04.090. - Animal waste. 
A.  No owner or person otherwise having an animal in his care, charge, control, custody or possession, except a disabled person using an assistance dog, shall permit or allow any animal to do any of the following: 
1.  Defecate on any public street or other public property without immediately cleaning or removing the excrement to a proper receptacle. 
2.  Defecate on any private property other than that of its owner without the consent of the owner, lessee or other person in control of the private property. 
B.  Any person owning or otherwise having an animal in his care, charge, control, custody or possession on any public street or other public property shall carry a tool or device to be used for cleaning or removing animal excrement. This tool or device shall be presented to the animal control officer upon demand. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.04.120 - Potentially dangerous and dangerous animals—Determination and appeal. 
A.  Potentially Dangerous Determinations. If an animal is deemed potentially dangerous by the patrol sergeant in accordance with Section 6.04.010, subsection (E), the animal control officer may immediately impose reasonable conditions upon the owner of the animal to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public. If the patrol sergeant does not concur with the animal control officer's determination that the animal should be deemed potentially dangerous, the animal, if previously seized and/or impounded, shall be released to its owner. During the duration of any appeal of the patrol sergeant's determination, the owner of the animal must comply with any or all of the conditions set forth below. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Registration. The owner must register the animal as "potentially dangerous" or "dangerous," whichever is applicable, with the city's license, permits and fees center. The registration shall be maintained with the licensing files for the animal. 
2.  Confinement. 
(i)  The owner must securely confine the animal while on its premises to ensure that the animal cannot escape or come in contact with other people. If the animal is removed from the premises for any reason, the animal must be securely muzzled and restrained by a leash, under the control of a responsible person who is physically capable of restraining the animal. 
(ii)  If the animal is released to its owner pursuant to subsection (B) of this section, the owner must securely confine the animal in an enclosed structure like a kennel or other similar enclosure. Such animals may not be kept on premises where minor children are present. 
3.  Microchipping. The owner must have the animal microchipped at the city's animal shelter. The cost of such procedure shall be borne by the owner of the animal. 
4.  Sterilization. The owner must have the animal sterilized at a licensed veterinarian. The cost of such procedure shall be borne by the owner of the animal. 
5.  Training. The owner must enroll the animal in a training and/or obedience course approved by the shelter supervisor. The cost of enrollment shall be borne by the owner of the animal. 
6.  Inspection. The owner must consent to the entry upon his or her premises by the animal control officer to inspect the animal and/or premises to ensure compliance with this section. 
7.  Costs of hearing. The owner must reimburse the city for any costs incurred for conducting a hearing to determine whether the animal is potentially dangerous or dangerous. The owner shall not be held responsible for costs exceeding two hundred dollars. 
8.  Other. The animal control officer may impose additional reasonable conditions he or she deems necessary to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public. 
B.  Dangerous Determinations. If an animal is deemed dangerous in accordance with Section 6.04.010, subsection (E), the owner of the animal must immediately surrender the animal to the animal control officer, who shall subsequently transfer custody of the animal to the shelter supervisor. If the patrol sergeant does not concur with the animal control officer's determination that the animal should be deemed dangerous, the patrol sergeant may deem the animal potentially dangerous, in which case the animal control officer may act in accordance with subsection (E) of Section 6.04.010 and subsection (A) of this section. During the duration of any appeal of the patrol sergeant's determination that an animal should be deemed dangerous, the animal shall remain in the custody of the shelter supervisor. If, after a hearing is conducted pursuant to Chapter 6.10 of this Title, it is found that release of the animal to its owner would create a significant threat to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public, the shelter supervisor may humanely euthanize the animal pursuant to Section 6.08.210, subsection (C). If, after a hearing is conducted pursuant to Chapter 6.10 of this Title, it is found that the animal should not be destroyed, the shelter supervisor may release the animal to its owner. In such circumstances, the owner must comply with all of the conditions set forth above in subsection (A), including any additional reasonable conditions imposed by the animal control officer if he or she deems such conditions necessary to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public. 
C.  Appeal. If the owner of an animal determined to be potentially dangerous or dangerous wishes to appeal the patrol sergeant's determination, the owner may request a hearing before the hearing officer within ten calendar days of the determination. Once the request for an appeal is made, the hearing officer shall obtain a copy of the report written pursuant to Section 6.04.010, subsection (E). The hearing shall be held in accordance with Chapter 6.10 of this Title. 
(Ord. 752 § 5, 2006)  
6.04.130 - Potentially dangerous and dangerous animals—Penalties. 
Any person who owns or has in his or her custody or control any animal known by that person to be potentially dangerous or dangerous to the safety of any person or other animal, or that has been deemed potentially dangerous or dangerous in accordance with Section 6.04.010, subsection (E), shall comply with any and all conditions imposed pursuant to Section 6.04.120 of this chapter. Failure to do so shall constitute a misdemeanor unless the citing officer is able to make one of the findings contained in Section 1.16.010, subsections (B)(1) through (4) of this code and elects to issue a citation for an infraction. 
(Ord. 752 § 6, 2006: Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.04.140 - Cats and dogs—Maximum number. 
No person shall keep or have upon any premises owned, occupied, or controlled by him or her within the city more than three dogs or four cats without a hobby or commercial kennel license. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.04.150 - Cats—Spay/neuter requirements. 
No person owning or otherwise having a cat over four months of age in his or her care, charge, control, custody or possession shall cause, permit or allow such cat to be unconfined in or upon any public street, road, alley or other public or private place, including the exterior yards of the animal owner's property, unless such cat is spayed or neutered. An animal control officer may seize or impound every cat found in violation of this section and shall require the owners or guardians of the cat to either spay or neuter the cat within fifteen days of such violation or produce a certificate of sterilization proving that the cat is already altered. Failure to comply will result in a citation. 
When a person is cited or an animal is impounded under this section, the owner of the cat, if known, shall be notified in writing and given seven calendar days to request a hearing held in accordance with Chapter 6.10 of this Title to determine if such sterilization should be held in abeyance. The decision of the shelter supervisor shall be final. 
(Ord. 752 § 7, 2006: Ord. 738 § I (part), 2005)  
6.04.160 - Dogs—Spay/neuter requirements. 
A.  No person may own or keep any pit bull within the city limits that the person knew or should have known has not been spayed or neutered. The following exceptions apply: 
1.  The pit bull is under four months of age; 
2.  The pit bull cannot be spayed or neutered without a high likelihood of suffering serious physical injury or death due to a medical condition that has been certified by a licensed veterinarian. Evidence of the pit bull's medical condition must be submitted to the animal control officer, if requested, within thirty calendar days of the request; 
3.  The pit bull has been present in the city of Rohnert Park for less than thirty days; 
4.  The determination of whether the breed is a pit bull is under appeal pursuant to Chapter 6.10; 
5.  The pit bull is a show dog. Evidence that the pit bull is a show dog must be submitted to the animal control officer within thirty calendar days of the operative date of this chapter, or within thirty calendar days of taking possession of the unspayed or unneutered pit bull, and shall include, but is not limited to, the following: 
(i)  Proof of registration with the American Kennel Club, United Kingdom Kennel Club, and/or American Dog Breeders Association, and 
(ii)  Documentation certifying that the pit bull has been or is being trained for the purpose of show, field trials, or agility trials. 
6.  The pit bull has been trained and is being used as a service dog and/or an assistance dog. Evidence that the pit bull has been trained and is being used as a service dog and/or an assistance dog must be submitted to the animal control officer within thirty calendar days of the operative date of this chapter, or within thirty calendar days of taking possession of the unspayed or unneutered pit bull. 
B.  Penalties. In addition to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1 .16 of this Municipal Code, failure to comply with subsection (A) above may result in the impoundment of the pit bull. In order for the owner of the pit bull to reclaim the pit bull from the shelter, in addition to paying the requisite fees set forth in Section 6.08.150 of this chapter, one of the following must occur: 
1.  A veterinarian, chosen by the shelter, must spay or neuter the pit bull. The owner of the pit bull shall pay the cost of such sterilization and reclaim the pit bull from the veterinarian after the sterilization procedure is completed; or 
2.  A veterinarian, chosen by the owner of the pit bull, must spay or neuter the pit bull. The veterinarian must practice within ten miles of the city of Rohnert Park's animal shelter. The shelter supervisor may release the pit bull either to the owner or directly to the veterinarian prior to the sterilization, provided, however, that if the shelter supervisor releases the pit bull to the owner, the owner must sign an affidavit affirming that he or she will arrange for the pit bull to be spayed or neutered within five days of the pit bull's release. Upon completion of the sterilization procedure, the owner shall provide written documentation to the shelter officer verifying that such procedure occurred. If the shelter supervisor does not receive such documentation within thirty days of the pit bull's release, or if the owner of the pit bull fails to have the pit bull spayed or neutered within five days of the pit bull's release, the shelter supervisor shall have the authority to impound the pit bull a second time, and the owner may be charged with a second violation of this section. 
(Ord. 752 § 8, 2006)  
6.04.170 - Livestock—Keeping restrictions. 
No person shall stable, keep, pasture or maintain livestock within the limits of the city, unless expressly allowed to do so by the zoning code. No person owning any interest in any lot or parcel of real property within the limits of the city shall permit livestock to be owned, kept, possessed or maintained upon such lot or parcel of real property unless expressly permitted by the zoning code. This section shall not apply to any circus, carnival or show otherwise permitted to operate temporarily within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.04.190 - Birds, rabbits, rodents and reptiles—Conditions for keeping within city. 
No person shall keep on any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him or her any birds, rabbits, rodents or reptiles unless such animals are kept in an enclosure sufficient in all respects to confine such animal within such enclosure and no part of such enclosure shall be situated within twenty-five feet of any dwelling built for occupation by or occupied by human beings, except such dwelling as may be owned or occupied by the person owning or having control of such animal. Notwithstanding the provisions in this section, no person shall overcrowd in any crate, hutch, box or other receptacle, any birds, rabbits, rodents or reptiles or fail to provide proper food, water, shelter or sanitation for the same. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.04.210 - Birds—Pigeons require permits. 
The term "pigeons," as used in this chapter, includes all pigeons, whether domestic or wild and expressly including "homing" or "racing" pigeons. No person shall keep any pigeons inside the city limits unless a permit has first been obtained from the city except for persons keeping less than three pigeons solely as pets. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.04.230 - Birds, rabbits, rodents and reptiles—At-large. 
No person owning or having the custody or control of any domestic bird, rabbit, rodent and/or reptile shall permit such animal to run at large. The animal control officer may seize and impound any such animal found in violation of this section and such impoundment shall be pursuant to this Title. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.04.250 - Birds, rabbits, rodents and reptiles—Maximum number permitted. 
No person shall keep or have upon any premises owned, occupied, or controlled by him or her within the city, birds, rabbits, rodents or reptiles exceeding at any one time twelve in number, without a hobby kennel permit. Such number shall be construed to mean twelve in the aggregate or total number of such animal, regardless of the particular kind or age of such animal. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.04.270 - Transferring of animals—Prohibited conduct. 
No person or organization shall sell, display, offer for sale, barter, or give away any animal as a prize. Transfers of ownership or guardianship of animals by sale or gift are prohibited except when undertaken by a person licensed to operate a commercial kennel, hobby kennel, or pet shop, or as part of an agricultural operation, commercial hatchery, or store regularly engaged in the selling of livestock, or unless such person is the owner of such animal and such sale, display, offer for sale, barter, or gift occurs on the owner's or recipient's premises or on the premises where the animal is boarded or kept. 
This section shall not be construed to prohibit the adoption or display of animals for adoption from an animal shelter or other animal welfare organization nor the sale or gift of a pet, or its offspring, by its owner or guardian, or by the family or individual owning the same as a family pet, which transfer occurs upon the property of such person. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.04.290 - Animals kept in vehicles. 
A.  An animal shall not be confined in a vehicle unless there is adequate ventilation and unless the temperature or other conditions do not threaten the health of the animal. If an animal is confined in a vehicle in a manner that threatens its health, any animal control officer or any peace officer may enter the vehicle by whatever force is reasonably necessary to release the animal without liability upon the city or any person for resulting damage. 
B.  Any animal that has been confined in a vehicle in violation of this section may be impounded pending a hearing to determine if the animal shall be returned to its owner. In the event of any such impoundment, the owner or keeper of the animal shall be liable for all costs and expenses of impounding or keeping the animal. 
C.  Section 23117 of the Vehicle Code of the State of California is hereby incorporated into this ordinance. 
D.  Any animal control officer or peace officer may remove an animal that is not properly tethered in accordance with subsection (C) above without liability upon the city or any person for resulting damage. The driver of the vehicle may be cited for violation of such duty. 
E.  With the exception of RVs or motor homes that are adequate and serve as the residence of the owner, animals may not be housed in vehicles. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.04.310 - Neglect of animals prohibited. 
No owner/guardian or other person in control of any animal shall cause or permit such animal to be without proper care and attention. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.04.330 - Tethering a dog. 
A dog may not be restrained for more than ten hours in a twenty-four hour period. 
A.  The tether or chain provided must be at least ten feet in length, with swivels at both ends, and be properly attached to a pulley or trolley mounted on a cable so as not to interfere or become entangled with the animal or objects on the property. 
B.  Any tethering system used shall not allow the dog to leave the property of their owner or possessor. 
C.  No chain or tether shall weigh more than one-eighth of the dog's body weight. 
D.  Any chain or tether shall be attached to a properly fitting flat collar or harness worn by the dog. The use of choke chains or pinch collars is prohibited. 
E.  The chained or tethered dog must have constant access to necessary shelter and water. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.04.350 - Biting animals—Notification and disposition. 
A.  The owner or other person in custody or control of any animal that bites a human being shall immediately notify the department of public safety of such bite, giving the name and address of the person bitten, if known to him/her, and shall obey any quarantine instructions given by the department of public safety and/or health officer. The animal control officer may, in his or her discretion, order the animal quarantined at the shelter, at a veterinarian's office, or at the owner/guardian's residence and may impose such reasonable conditions thereon as may be required. 
B.  The owner or other person in custody or control of any animal that bites or otherwise causes physical injury to another animal shall, if requested by the owner or handler of the injured animal, provide to the owner or handler of the injured animal accurate and current contact information and, if available, the biting animal's license number and rabies vaccination information. 
C.  If any person fails or refuses to obey any lawful order for the quarantine of an animal for observation of rabies, the animal control officer may impound the animal for such quarantine at the expense of the owner. The animal control officer shall charge the owner in such case for the care and board of the animal. Such rates shall be set by resolution of the city council. The redemption fees provided in Section 6.08.150 of this title shall also apply to an animal quarantined for rabies observation. 
(Ord. 786 § 3, 2007)  
6.04.370 - Reporting found animals. 
Any person who apprehends or picks up a stray or apparently lost animal shall report the same to the animal shelter within twenty-four hours and shall release such animal to the owner or to the animal shelter upon demand. The person shall provide the animal shelter with a complete description of the animal, its location and a means to contact the person keeping the animal. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.04.390 - Posting of intention to trap cats. 
Any person who is intending to trap more than two stray or feral cats on their property within a month, must post such intentions by notifying neighbors on both sides, behind, and across such property. This can be accomplished by anonymously leaving a flyer of such intent on each doorstep of surrounding dwellings. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 6.06 - COMMERCIAL KENNELS, HOBBY KENNELS, PET SHOPS 
Sections: 
 
6.06.010 - Commercial kennel, hobby kennel, pet shops—License required. 
No person shall conduct, operate or keep any commercial kennel, hobby kennel or pet shop within the city without first obtaining a license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. In no case does this licensing requirement replace the requirement for a city business license. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.06.030 - Application for license. 
Application for a license for a commercial kennel, hobby kennel or pet shop shall be made in writing to the city or designee by the owner of the facility within thirty days after the establishment of such a kennel within the city. Such application shall be on a form approved by the city and shall be accompanied by a license fee, the amount of which shall be established by the resolution of the city council. If all other requirements for licensing under this chapter are met, such license fee shall be waived for any commercial kennel devoted exclusively to training or breeding assistance dogs. The city shall require such proof of qualification as the city deems necessary prior to waiving the license fee for any such facility. If the owner of any commercial kennel, hobby kennel or pet shop fails to make application for a license within thirty days after receipt of notice from the city to obtain a license, such owner shall pay a penalty for late licensing, in an amount of which shall be established by the city council, in addition to the normal licensing fee. The license fee for commercial kennel licenses shall be in lieu of the license fees and registration fees required for individual animals. The license fee for hobby kennel licenses shall be in addition to the license fees and registration fees required for individual animals. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.06.050 - Action on application. 
A.  Upon receipt of an application for a commercial kennel, hobby kennel or pet shop license the city or designee shall review the application and inspect the premises to be licensed. If the city finds that the requirements of this chapter have been complied with, the city shall issue such license to the owner. If the city finds otherwise, then the city shall deny the license. 
B.  When issuing a license pursuant to this chapter, the city or designee may make the license subject to such reasonable conditions as the city deems necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare and the protection of animals. 
C.  Upon issuing a hobby kennel license and payment of the license fees required, the city shall provide the owner of the hobby kennel facility with individual dog license tags for each dog kept on the licensed premises under the license and individual cat license tags for each cat kept on the licensed premises under the license. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.06.070 - Expiration and renewal of license. 
Every commercial kennel, hobby kennel, or pet shop license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be annual, based on a calendar year. The fee is due and payable on January 1 of each year or on the date the commercial enterprise begins operation. The fee is non-transferable and non-refundable. The procedure for renewal of any such license shall be the same as for obtaining an original license. If the owner fails to make application for the renewal of such license within sixty days after its expiration, such owner shall pay a penalty for such late application in the same amount as authorized under Section 6.06.030. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.06.090 - Denial or revocation of license. 
The city may deny or revoke any license issued pursuant to this chapter in the any of following situations: 
A.  Whenever the animal control officer determines by inspection that the licensed premises violate any of the conditions of the license, this title or state law. 
B.  Whenever the animal control officer has reason to believe that the owner of the licensed facility has willfully withheld or falsified any information required for the license. 
C.  Whenever the animal control officer has reason to believe that the owner of the licensed facility, or any employee of the owner who is presently employed by the owner, has been convicted by a court of law within the past five years of a violation of this Title or any other law relating to animals, public nuisance caused by animals or cruelty to animals, in this or any other state. For purposes of this section, a forfeiture of bail shall be deemed to be a conviction of the offense. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.06.110 - Appeal from denial or revocation of license. 
Prior to denial or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this chapter, the city shall notify the owner of the facility, in writing by certified mail, of the intent to deny or revoke the license, the reasons for such denial or revocation, and that such owner may make a written request for a hearing within ten days after the mailing of such notice if he or she desires to challenge the denial or revocation. If a valid request for a hearing is filed, the city shall set the time and place for the hearing and cause notice of such hearing to be given pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.06.130 - Conditions for new license after denial or revocation. 
If a license applied for or granted under this chapter is denied or revoked, the city shall not grant a new license to the same person for the same activity at the same location for one year after the date of the denial or revocation unless the applicant demonstrates and /or the animal control officer determines by investigation or inspection upon a preponderance of the evidence, in which the burden of proof is upon the applicant, that the grounds upon which the application was denied or the license revoked no longer exists. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.06.150 - License not transferable. 
No commercial kennel, hobby kennel or pet shop license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.06.170 - Display of license required. 
Every commercial kennel, hobby kennel or pet shop license issued pursuant to this chapter shall post its license in some conspicuous part of the licensed premises. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.06.190 - Inspections. 
As a condition to the issuance or renewal of any commercial kennel, hobby kennel, or pet shop license issued pursuant to this chapter, the animal control officer shall have the authority to conduct periodic inspections of the licensed premises. The owner of the facility shall make available to the animal control officer such information regarding the operation of the facility as the animal control officer shall require. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.06.210 - Standards for care, confinement and treatment of animals. 
The animal control officer shall establish regulations and standards for commercial kennels, hobby kennels and pet shops licensed pursuant to this chapter relating to the following: 
A.  The maximum number and species of animals to be kept on the licensed premises. 
B.  The construction, sanitation and maintenance of the facilities on the licensed premises. 
C.  Any other matters pertaining to the humane care, confinement and treatment of animals that the animal control officer deems necessary. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.06.230 - Required records for commercial kennels. 
Every commercial kennel licensed pursuant to this chapter shall keep available, on the licensed premises, records available for inspection by the animal control officer. These records shall contain all of the following: 
A.  The name, current address, and telephone number of the owner or guardian of each animal at the kennel. 
B.  The date each animal entered the kennel. 
C.  The reason for each animal being at the kennel, such as for boarding, sale, breeding or grooming. 
D.  A description of each animal at the kennel, including its age, breed, sex and color. 
E.  A current, valid rabies certificate for each animal over four months of age kept at the kennel. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 6.08 - IMPOUNDMENT 
Sections: 
 
6.08.010 - Shelter supervisor—Appointment and duties. 
The city council may provide, by contract, for the execution of the office and duties of shelter supervisor or animal control officer by any person authorized or organized under the laws of the State of California to act for the humane treatment of animals or to prevent cruelty to animals. The shelter supervisor and her or his deputies may collect license, impoundment, quarantine, adoption and other fees as approved by the city. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.08.030 - Shelter supervisor—Disposition of money received—Report. 
All money collected by the animal shelter shall be deposited into the general fund of the city. If shelter services are contracted out, all money collected together with all or a portion of the money collected from the sale of licenses for animals in the city, may be retained by or paid over to the shelter contractor in payment for the work, labor and duties performed by the shelter contractor in operating the city shelter or other like facility. The shelter supervisor shall file a quarterly report with the city as may be required by the mayor or city manager or as may be provided by agreement. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.08.050 - Shelter supervisor—Record keeping. 
The shelter supervisor shall keep such records as the state, mayor, city manager or agreement may prescribe. Such records shall at all times be available for inspection by the mayor or city manager or his or her designee. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.08.070 - Impoundment—Animals subject to impoundment. 
Any animal control officer may seize and impound an animal for a violation of any provision of this Title or state law in any of the following situations where the owner of the animal is not present and the animal control officer has reasonable cause to believe that such seizure is necessary for any of the following reasons: 
A.  To protect public safety and welfare; 
B.  To protect an animal which is injured, sick or starving; 
C.  To protect an animal from injury which has strayed onto public property or a public right of way; 
D.  To protect a domestic animal from imminent risk of harm; 
E.  To safeguard an animal which is at-large off its owner's property; Upon the impoundment of any such animal, the owner, if known, shall be notified and may request a hearing and determination in accordance with the provisions of this Title. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.08.090 - Impoundment—Care of animals. 
The shelter supervisor shall provide all animals in his or her custody with proper food, water, and shelter and shall give them all necessary care and attention. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.08.110 - Impoundment—Notification. 
A.  If any animal impounded under this Title is found by the animal control officer to be duly licensed and/or microchipped, the animal control officer shall mail notice by certified mail to the registered owner of such animal at the address given in the license or microchip application for the animal, or in-person by the animal control officer or a public safety officer. Such notice shall state that the animal has been impounded, the date and place of impoundment, a description of the animal, where the animal is being held, the name, address, and the telephone number of the agency or person to be contacted regarding release of the animal, and an indication of the ultimate disposition of the animal if no action to regain it is taken by the owner within six days after the mailing of such notice. Any dog or other animal picked up and impounded pursuant to this Title may be recovered by the owner only upon payment of the charges and costs of redemption of impounded animals as provided in Section 6.08.150 of this chapter. 
B.  The required holding period for a stray animal shall be six business days, not including the day of impoundment, except that if the shelter is open one weekday evening until 7:00 p.m. or one weekend day, then the holding period shall be four business days, not including the day of impoundment. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.08.130 - Impoundment—Redemption—Generally. 
Redemption of an impounded animal shall be made by presenting to the animal control officer any required license certificate and identification tag issued by the licensing agency or otherwise by establishing ownership and by paying to the animal control officer the redemption fee and all other proper fees and charges accrued as provided for in this Title. If the impounded animal is subject to license under this Title, the owner shall comply with the licensing requirements of the animal prior to its release. Upon such redemption being made, the animal control officer shall release the animal. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.08.150 - Impoundment—Redemption—Fees. 
No dog or other animal shall be released by the animal control officer or her or his deputies until all charges, costs of redemption, and costs of current year's license charge, if any, have been paid by the owner. The charges and costs of redemption to the owners of impounded animals shall be set by resolution of the city council. Redemption fees will include but not be limited to the following: (a) a fee for each dog or other animal impounded for violation of this Title, and in addition, (b) a fee for the actual cost of board, feed and veterinary care for each day or fractional day of impoundment, shall be due and payable from the owner to the keeper of the impounded animal(s), and (c) the fees established by Food and Agriculture Code Sections 30804.7 and 31751.7. Upon a second impoundment of the same animal while under the same ownership, such animal shall be microchipped and altered within fifteen days of being released to the owner (at the owner's expense and at the veterinarian of the owner's choosing) and the cost of the microchipping shall be added to the redemption fee. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.08.170 - Impoundment—Challenge by owner. 
If the owner of an animal wishes to challenge an impoundment, the owner shall personally deliver or mail a written request for a hearing before the shelter supervisor. The request must be received by the shelter supervisor within four days of the impoundment. The shelter supervisor shall review the request, together with additional evidence presented at or before the time of the hearing, and shall determine whether or not the impoundment was proper. Unless a provision of this Title requires otherwise, if the shelter supervisor determines that the impoundment was improper, the animal shall be immediately returned to its owner. 
(Ord. 752 § 9, 2006: Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.08.190 - Mandatory sterilization for second impound. 
A.  Any animal which is impounded by any agency within the city two or more times while under the same ownership shall be microchipped and ordered spayed or neutered within fifteen days of being released to the owner (at the owner's expense and at the veterinarian of the owner's choosing). The cost of the microchipping shall be added to the redemption fee described in Section 6.08.150 of this chapter. The owner of the animal shall provide written documentation from the veterinarian performing the surgery to the animal control officer within seven days of the surgery as verification that such surgery occurred. 
B.  Any owner of an impounded animal subject to mandatory sterilization under subsection (A) above may request, in writing and within seven calendar days following notice of the second impoundment, a hearing to be conducted by the shelter supervisor or his or her designee. Such hearing shall be held within five calendar days of such request and shall determine whether good cause exists for an exemption from the provisions of subsection (A) herein. If no good cause is established, then the animal shall be ordered to be spayed or neutered. 
C.  Good cause for an exemption from mandatory sterilization shall exist if the animal was at large due to an act of God, emergency, or other mitigating factor not caused by the negligence of the owner or other person in control of the animal, or upon presentation of documentation from the animal's veterinarian stating that a health condition exists that would preclude such a surgery. The burden of proof to establish good cause for an exemption shall be upon the owner and shall be established by a preponderance of the evidence. 
(Ord. 752 § 10, 2006: Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.08.210 - Impoundment—Disposition of impounded animals. 
A.  The shelter supervisor shall keep any impounded animal for the period set forth in Section 6.08.110, subsection (B), and for such longer period as may be required for any notice to be given under this Title. At any time after the expiration of such period of time, the shelter supervisor may, unless the owner redeems the animal or unless a bona fide home has been obtained for such animal, euthanize the animal in a humane manner. 
B.  Any animal which is voluntarily surrendered to or deposited with the shelter shall be held for the same holding period and treated with the same standards of care as stray animals, except that the period for owner redemption shall be one day, not including the day of impoundment. This holding period is excepted if the animal is determined by a veterinarian to be irremediably suffering or is voluntarily surrendered due to chronic or severe health issues. In such cases, the animal may immediately be euthanized in a humane manner. 
C.  If an animal is impounded pursuant to a determination by the patrol sergeant that the animal is dangerous as that term is defined in Section 6.02.070, subsection (G), the animal may immediately be euthanized in a humane manner if it is found, after a hearing is conducted pursuant to Chapter 6.10 of this Title, that release of the animal to its owner would create a significant threat to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public 
(Ord. 752 § 11, 2006: Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.08.230 - Impoundment—No redemption or disposition of animals for research purposes. 
No animal impounded pursuant to this Title or voluntarily surrendered to or deposited with the shelter shall be redeemed, placed for adoption or otherwise released to any person, institution, or public agency for any research purposes, including, but not limited to, biomedical research, experimentation, instruction, toxicity testing or product testing, that is invasive or harmful to the animal. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.08.250 - Impoundment—Absence of liability. 
No liability shall be incurred by the city for the impoundment, redemption or disposition of an animal made pursuant to this Title. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.08.270 - Adoption of animals—Generally. 
If an impounded animal is made available for adoption, such animal may be adopted by any qualified person upon submission of an approved application and payment of an adoption fee, the amount of which shall be established by resolution of the city council. If such animal is adopted by a Rohnert Park resident, and has received a rabies vaccine, then the person adopting the animal shall, prior to the animal's release, comply with the licensing requirements for the animal. 
If a stray animal is released to or adopted by another person, the owner of such animal may, at any time within fifteen days after the stray period has elapsed, redeem the animal by paying any fees due to the shelter and reimbursing the adopter the amount of adoption, plus covering any expenses incurred during the period the adopter had possession of the animal. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.08.290 - Relief from fees during natural disasters. 
Upon the recommendation of the shelter supervisor the fees provided for in this chapter may be waived or paid from the city's general fund when animals have been impounded because of conditions within the city or the immediate area due to fire, flood, earthquake, storm or other natural disaster. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 6.10 - HEARINGS BY SHELTER SUPERVISOR 
Sections: 
 
6.10.010 - Hearings—Notice. 
A.  Procedure for Notice. Unless otherwise specifically provided in this Title, when a provision of this Title requires that a hearing be conducted, then notice of hearing shall be given in the following ways: 
1.  Notice of the hearing shall be mailed or delivered to the applicant, license holder, or owner/guardian of the animal, or any other person who has filed a written request for such notice with the shelter supervisor or hearing officer, whichever is applicable, at least four days prior to the hearing. Mailed notice shall be sent first class and deposited, postage prepaid, in the United States mail and notice shall be deemed given when so deposited. If there is no known address to which to send the notice, then notice shall be posted in at least one place on or near the premise where the animal was impounded, and 
2.  Notice of the hearing shall be posted at least four days prior to the hearing on a bulletin board in a public area at the animal shelter, on or near the doors of the meeting room where the hearing will be held. If the hearing is to be held at a location other than the animal shelter, then notice shall be posted on the door or bulletin board of that location where the hearing is to be held. 
B.  Contents of Notice. In addition to the information specified in Section 6.08.110 of this Title, notice shall include the date, time, and place of the hearing; the identity of the shelter supervisor or hearing officer, whichever is applicable; a general explanation of the matter to be considered; and a statement that the applicant, license holder, or owner/guardian of the animal has a right to an attorney and that non-attendance at such hearing will be considered a waiver by that person of his or her right to present evidence at the hearing. 
(Ord. 752 § 12, 2006: Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.10.030 - Hearings—Procedure and decision. 
When a provision of this Title requires that a hearing be conducted, except a hearing pursuant to Section 6.08.170, the hearing shall be conducted as follows: 
A.  Procedure. At the time and place set for the hearing, the shelter supervisor or hearing officer, whichever is applicable, shall consider the matter at issue. The shelter supervisor or hearing officer shall swear witnesses, hear testimony, and receive relevant written or documentary evidence. Additional procedural rules may apply. The shelter supervisor or hearing officer shall tape record the hearing and shall preserve all photographs and other documentary evidence introduced at the time of the hearing until the time period to file an appeal has lapsed, and then may destroy such evidence. If a party has requested that the shelter supervisor or hearing officer return such evidence, the shelter supervisor or hearing officer must comply with such a request. The shelter supervisor or hearing officer may decide all issues for or against the applicant, license holder, or owner of the animal and may render such decisions even if such person fails to appear at the hearing. 
B.  Decision. Within ten days after the hearing is closed, the shelter supervisor or hearing officer shall render a written decision. The decision shall contain findings of fact and conclusions of law. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by certified mail to the applicant, license holder, or owner of the animal. 
C.  Final Appeal. Unless the decision of the shelter supervisor or hearing officer is deemed final by provisions in this Title, an applicant, license holder, or owner of an animal may appeal the decision to the director of public safety. The director of public safety shall adhere to the same procedural requirements as set forth above in subsection (A). The decision of the director of public safety shall be final. 
(Ord. 752 § 14, 2006: Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 6.12 - ANIMAL LICENSES 
Sections: 
 
6.12.010 - License—Required. 
Every owner of a dog or cat which is four months of age or older, and which is kept in the city, shall obtain a license tag and annual license for such dog or cat from the licensing agency and shall pay the annual fee imposed by a resolution of the city council. No person shall refuse to exhibit such license when so directed by a public safety or animal control officer. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.12.030 - License—Vaccination required. 
The licensing agency shall not issue any dog or cat license under this chapter without presentation of a certificate of vaccination signed by a veterinarian showing that the dog or cat has been vaccinated with an approved rabies vaccine and the period of time from the date of vaccination to the date of expiration of the vaccination does not exceed the time interval prescribed by the State Department of Health. In no case shall a license be issued with an expiration date greater than the rabies vaccination expiration date. Where a certificate of vaccination shows that a dog should not be vaccinated due to infirmity or other disability, the nature of the infirmity and/or other disability and the estimated date of termination thereof shall be shown. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.12.050 - License—Annual fee imposed. 
An annual dog and cat license fee set by resolution of the city council is imposed upon every dog and cat four months and older which is kept in the city by any person who is an owner as defined in Section 6.02.070 of this Title. Such license fee shall be reduced by at least fifty percent for spayed or neutered dogs or cats. The license fee is due and payable thirty days following the day upon which the dog or cat is four months old, or thirty days following the day upon which the dog or cat, if over the age of four months, is first owned by a resident of the city and thereafter on the anniversary date of the license or upon expiration of the rabies vaccination. The fee is an annual fee and shall not in any case be prorated. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.12.070 - License—Application—Issuance of certificate. 
Upon each application for a license, the owner shall furnish to the city, in writing, his or her name, the address where the dog or cat is kept, the name, breed, age, sex and color of the animal, and proof of current vaccination. The city shall furnish application forms for such purpose and upon payment of the fee, and penalty, if any, shall issue a numbered license tag. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.12.090 - License tag—Duplicate. 
If a license tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate or other tag in lieu thereof shall be procured from the licensing agency within thirty days after loss or destruction. Upon receiving payment of a replacement fee, the licensing agency shall issue a replacement tag to the owner. The replacement fee shall be fixed by resolution duly adopted by the council which may be amended as necessary. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.12.110 - License tag—Attachment—Exceptions 
The dog and cat license tag issued to any dog or cat licensed pursuant to this Title shall be securely affixed to a collar, harness, or other device and shall be worn by such dog or cat at all times that the animal is in the city, except when the animal is confined in a commercial kennel, hobby kennel, or veterinary facility, or it is being exhibited at a show, field trial or other competition. The license tag shall be shown by the owner at any time upon demand by the animal control officer, licensing agency or its representatives. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.12.130 - License tag—Delinquent fee—Penalty. 
The annual dog and cat license fee is delinquent if not paid within sixty days after it becomes due. A delinquent fee shall be added to any delinquent animal license fee. The delinquent fee shall be fixed by resolution duly adopted by the council which may be amended as necessary. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 6.14 - CONTROL 
Sections: 
 
6.14.010 - Restraint/Leash requirements. 
A.  No person owning or otherwise having an animal in his or her care, charge, control, custody or possession shall cause, permit, or allow such animal to enter or trespass upon public or private property so as to damage or destroy anything of value therein, or to interfere with the owners or occupants' use and enjoyment thereof. 
B.  No person owning or otherwise having a dog in his or her care, charge, control, custody or possession shall cause, permit or allow such dog to be in or upon any public street, road, alley or other public place unless such dog is restrained and under control by a leash no more than six feet in length or confined in a vehicle in a manner allowed under Section 6.04.290 of this Title. 
C.  The restraint requirements provided in this section shall not apply to a service or assistance dog; a dog participating in field or obedience trials; animal exhibitions; or a dog assisting a public safety officer engaged in law enforcement duties. 
D.  Any animal found in any public place, or upon private property of another without the consent of the owner or possessor of the private property, in violation of this Title, may be impounded. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.14.030 - Dogs in public parks—Prohibited—Exception. 
Dogs are prohibited in public parks and playground areas unless such dogs are under physical restraint by a person capable of controlling the dog by means of a leash. This provision shall not apply to any area specifically designated as a dog park or off leash exercise area. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 6.16 - WILD AND EXOTIC ANIMALS 
Sections: 
 
6.16.010 - Wild and exotic animals—Keeping without proof of proper approvals prohibited. 
No owner of any wild or exotic animal shall maintain such animal without proof of proper federal and state permits, inspections, and other required approvals. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.16.030 - Exotic animals at large—Prohibited. 
No person shall permit or allow any exotic animal to run at large. The animal control officer may seize and impound any exotic animal found in violation of this section and such impoundment shall be pursuant to this Title. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.16.050 - Display of wild or exotic animals—Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to display or sponsor a display of wild or exotic animals on any public or private land within the city of Rohnert Park. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.16.070 - Display of wild or exotic animals—Enforcement. 
Police officers and the city's animal control officers shall have the power and authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter and perform all duties imposed by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.16.090 - Display of wild or exotic animals—Exceptions. 
The following are exempt from the provisions of this chapter: 
A.  Institutions accredited by the American Zoo and Aquarium Association. 
B.  Veterinarians, in the ordinary course of a veterinarian's practice of business. 
C.  Institutions accredited by The Association of Sanctuaries and the American Sanctuary Association. 
D.  Any person not otherwise included in these exceptions may submit written evidence to the city manager demonstrating that an additional exception should be granted because it is substantially similar to the purposes of the exceptions provided for in this section. 
(Ord. 738 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY  
Chapter 8.04 - FOOD HANDLING ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
8.04.010 - Health officer—Defined. 
The "health officer" means the health officer of this city or his authorized representative as selected by the city manager. In the event the city manager has not selected a health officer then the Sonoma County health officer or his duly authorized representative shall serve in that capacity. 
(Ord. 285 § 1, 1975: Ord. 126 § 1, 1970)  
8.04.020 - Health officer—Duties. 
The health officer shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter in addition to the provisions of state law herein concerned and the rules and regulations promulgated by the State Department of Public Health thereunder. 
(Ord. 126 § 2, 1970)  
8.04.030 - Definitions—Application of State Code. 
In the construction of this chapter all words shall have the meanings as provided in the Health and Safety Code of the state of California and in particular the California restaurant act. 
(Ord. 126 § 3, 1970)  
8.04.040 - Health permit required—Fee exemptions. 
A.  No person shall operate in the city any restaurant, itinerant restaurant, food vending vehicle, vending machine, delicatessen, bakery, grocery, market, food or beverage drive-in or stand, retail food production or marketing establishment, or any other enterprise or establishment in which food or beverage is offered for sale or sold, and concerning which the health officer is required or permitted by state law to conduct periodic inspections or to act in the enforcement of any statute, order, quarantine, rule or regulation prescribed by state law or by a state officer or department relating to public health without a valid local health permit. 
B.  "Retail food production and marketing establishment" as used herein, has the meaning defined in the retail food production and marketing law (Health and Safety Code Section 28800 et seq.). 
C.  The following enterprises, establishments and operations are subject to this chapter but are exempt from the annual fees herein provided: 
1.  Any cafeteria, eating place or other enterprise or establishment operated in or by a school in the public school system or an academically equivalent private school; 
2.  Any cafeteria, eating place or other enterprise or establishment operated by a public agency, or in a public building or premises, which is supported in whole or in part by taxes. 
D.  The following enterprises, establishments, and operations are exempt from this chapter: 
Any vending machine dispensing only soft drinks in sealed containers. 
E.  The exemptions provided by this chapter shall be retroactive to and effective as of February 18, 1970. 
(Ord. 286 § 1, 1975; Ord. 141 § 1, 1971: Ord. 126 § 4, 1970)  
8.04.050 - Health permit—Issuance procedure. 
Local health permits shall be issued only after application therefor to the health officer, investigation by the health officer of compliance by the applicant with all applicable statutes, orders, quarantines, rules or regulations, and a finding by the health officer that the applicant is in substantial compliance with such laws, rules and regulations and this chapter. 
(Ord. 126 § 5, 1970)  
8.04.060 - Health permit—Application. 
Applications for local health permit shall be in writing on a form approved by the health officer and signed by the applicant and shall include the items of information following: 
A.  Name and address of the applicant; 
B.  Name and address of the establishment or enterprise for which the permit is sought, including in the case of multiple locations, the names and addresses of each enterprise or establishment; 
C.  The general nature of the business of each enterprise or establishment; 
D.  The number of persons working in each enterprise or establishment on a representative day, being the median number evidenced by social security tax returns during the preceding year; 
E.  The calendar year for which the permit or permits are sought; 
F.  The amount of inspection fee accompanying the application; 
G.  The date of the application. 
(Ord. 126 § 6, 1970)  
8.04.070 - Inspection fee—Payment. 
Each applicant shall pay the annual inspection fee or fees established by this chapter. So long as the health officer of the county of Sonoma acts in the capacity of the health officer of this city, the aforesaid fees shall be paid directly to the county of Sonoma. 
(Ord. 126 § 7, 1970)  
8.04.080 - Separate enterprise. 
Each itinerant restaurant, each food vending vehicle, each vending machine and each separate location of business shall be deemed a separate enterprise or establishment for purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 126 § 8, 1970)  
8.04.090 - Health permit—Application—Investigation. 
Upon receipt of the application and fees, the health officer shall investigate the enterprise or establishments for which local health permits are sought to determine compliance with this chapter and with applicable state laws, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. 126 § 9, 1970)  
8.04.100 - Health permit—Issuance—Conditions. 
The health officer shall issue a local health permit to the applicant for each location, enterprise or establishment which is in compliance with said standards. The health officer shall not issue a local health permit to the applicant for any location, enterprise or establishment not in compliance with said standards, but shall give the applicant written notice of deficiencies which preclude issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. 126 § 10, 1970)  
8.04.110 - Health permit—Term—Posting—Nontransferability. 
Local health permits shall be valid for the calendar year in which issued plus thirty days. Each permit shall be prominently posted in plain public view at the location or upon the equipment for which it was issued. Permits shall not be transferable. 
(Ord. 126 § 11, 1970)  
8.04.120 - Health permit—Renewal. 
Permits shall be renewed upon application of the permittee during the first thirty days of each calendar year. Each application for renewal shall be in like form as an original application, but shall have the word "renewal" printed on the lower right-hand corner of the first page thereof. Each application for renewal shall be accompanied by the fees herein fixed. The health officer shall investigate and issue or deny a permit upon receipt of an application for renewal in like manner as upon an original application. The filing of an application for renewal of local health permits shall automatically extend the term of the current permit issued for the location enterprise or establishment until the date of notice of issuance or denial of a new permit. 
(Ord. 126 § 12, 1970)  
8.04.130 - Health permit—Fee schedule. 
The following are fixed as the annual inspection fees for local health permits: 
A.  Each food establishment, thirty-five dollars; 
For the purpose of this subsection, a food establishment shall be considered as any one of the following uses: 
1.  Itinerant restaurant, 
2.  Mobile vending machines or food vending vehicle, 
3.  Groceries and markets, 
4.  Bakeries, 
5.  Any other food sales establishments, 
6.  Restaurants; 
B.  Food vending machines, four dollars per machine; 
C.  Plan Checks. Plan checks for the following establishments: 
Restaurants, itinerant restaurants, food processing, food production, marketing and bakery, fifty dollars for establishments less than two thousand feet; seventy-five dollars for establishments between two thousand and six thousand feet; one hundred dollars for establishments over six thousand feet; 
D.  Minimal remodeling fee, applicable if a site visitation is necessary, twenty-five dollars; 
E.  Violation and reinspection fee, twenty-five dollars applicable to subsections A through D; 
F.  Penalty assessment, late permit, twenty-five percent of original fee, added to original fee. 
(Ord. 320 § 1, 1977: Ord. 126 § 13, 1970)  
8.04.140 - Denial—Appeal. 
In the event of a denial by the health officer of a permit as required by this chapter for any reason other than nonpayment of the required fees or failure to file a proper application, the applicants may appeal in writing to the city council from the decision of the health officer. The city council shall hold a public hearing at their next regular meeting, provided the meeting is at least ten days from the receipt of the written appeal by the city clerk of the city. The health officer shall appear at the hearing and render his report to the city council. At the conclusion of the hearing or any continuance thereof, the city council may affirm the action of the health officer, or take other action as the city council deems appropriate. 
(Ord. 126 § 14, 1970)  
8.04.150 - Penalty for violations. 
Any violation of this chapter or of an order of the health officer issued hereunder is a misdemeanor punishable by fine of not less than twenty-five dollars nor more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 126 § 15, 1970)  
Chapter 8.08 - WEED ABATEMENT 
 
8.08.010 - Public nuisance declared. 
All weeds growing upon any private property or in any public street or alley within the city, and bearing seeds of a wingy or downy nature or which, because of having attained such a large growth and being dry, have become a fire menace, or which are otherwise noxious or dangerous, constitute a public nuisance, which nuisance shall be abated as provided in this chapter. Every property owner shall destroy such weeds or remove them from his property and the abutting half of the street in front, and the alley, if any, behind his property, and between the lot lines thereof as extended. 
(Ord. 27 § 1, 1963)  
8.08.020 - Resolution declaring nuisance—Notice. 
Whenever any such weeds are growing upon any private property or in any street or alley within the city, the city council shall pass a resolution declaring the same to be a public nuisance, and order the city manager to give notice of the passage of such resolution as herein provided and stating therein that unless such nuisance be abated without delay by the destruction or removal of such weeds, the work of abating such nuisance will be done by the city authorities or their designated agents or contractors, and the expense thereof shall be assessed upon the lots and lands from which, and/or in the front and rear of which, such weeds shall have been destroyed or removed. Such resolution shall fix the time and place for hearing any objections to the proposed destruction or removal of such weeds. 
(Ord. 27 § 2, 1963)  
8.08.030 - Private land to be kept clear of weeds. 
It is unlawful for any person having the control, possession or ownership of any lot or block of land within the limits of the city to permit or allow the lot or block of land to become obstructed by weeds, grass or other vegetable growth in such a manner as to menace the public safety in the matter of fire. 
(Ord. 57 § 1, 1965)  
8.08.040 - Destruction notice—Form—Publication. 
The notice described in Section 8.08.020 shall be substantially in the following form: 
"NOTICE TO DESTROY WEEDS 
 NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that on ____________ , 19 ____________ , pursuant to the provisions of Ordinance no. 27 of the City of Rohnert Park, the City Council passed a resolution declaring that all weeds growing upon any private property or in any public street or alley, bearing seeds of a wingy or downy nature, or having attained such a large growth, and being dry, are a fire menace, or which are otherwise noxious, or dangerous, constitute a public nuisance, which nuisance must be abated by the destruction and removal thereof. 
 NOTICE IS FURTHER GIVEN that property owners shall without delay remove all such weeds from their property and the abutting half of the street in front and alleys, if any, behind such property, and between the lot lines thereof as extended, or such weeds will be destroyed or removed and such nuisance abated by the City authorities, or their designated agents or contractors, in which case the cost of such destruction or removal will be assessed upon the lots and lands from which, or from the front or rear of which, such weeds shall have been destroyed or removed; and such cost will constitute a charge upon such lots or lands until paid, and a penalty of ten percent for nonpayment within the time and in the manner prescribed, plus a penalty of one-half of one percent per month for nonpayment of the charge and basic penalty, will attach thereto. 
 All property owners having any objections to the proposed destruction or removal of such weeds are hereby notified to attend a meeting of the City Council to be held ____________ on ____________ , 19 ____________ , at eight o'clock p.m., when and where their objections will be heard and given due consideration. 
Dated: ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
____________ 
City Manager" 
Such notice shall be published at least twice in a newspaper published and circulated in said city, the first publication of which shall be at least ten days prior to the time fixed by the city council for hearing objections. 
(Ord. 27 § 3, 1963)  
8.08.050 - Destruction notice—Hearing. 
At the time stated in the notice, the city council shall hear and consider any and all objections to the proposed destruction or removal of such weeds, and may continue the hearing from time to time. Upon the conclusion of such hearing, the city council by motion or resolution, shall allow or overrule any or all objections, if any, after which the city council shall thereupon be deemed to have acquired jurisdiction to proceed to perform the work of destruction and removal of such weeds. The decision of the city council at the conclusion of such hearing shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 271 § 1, 1975: Ord. 27 § 4, 1963)  
8.08.060 - Order to abate nuisance. 
After final action has been taken by the city council on the disposition of all objections, or in case no objections have been received, the city council shall by resolution order the city manager to abate such nuisance, or cause the same to be abated, by having the weeds referred to destroyed or removed; and the city manager and his deputies, assistants, employees, contracting agents, or other representatives are expressly authorized to enter upon private property for that purpose. Any property owner shall have the right to destroy or remove such weeds himself or have the same destroyed or removed at his own expense, provided that such weeds shall have been removed prior to the arrival of the maintenance superintendent or his authorized representatives to remove them. However, it is unlawful for any property owner or other person to burn or attempt to burn any such weeds without first having obtained written permission to do so from the city manager. 
(Ord. 27 § 5, 1963)  
8.08.070 - Abatement—Account and report of cost. 
The city manager shall keep an account of the cost of abating such nuisance upon each separate lot or parcel of land, and the abutting half of the street in front, and alley, if any, in the rear thereof, and embody the account in a report and assessment list to the city council, which shall be filed with the clerk. The report shall refer to each separate lot or parcel of land by description sufficient to identify the lot or parcel, together with the expense proposed to be assessed against each separate lot or parcel of land therefor respectively; provided, that if the cost of abating the nuisance upon any one or more lots or parcels for any reason cannot be included within the report and assessment at the time the report and assessment on the remainder of the lots and parcels is filed, then the report and assessment on the lots and parcels not so included shall be included within the report and assessment for weed abatement for the next subsequent period. 
(Ord. 27 § 6, 1963)  
8.08.080 - Abatement—Notice of cost report. 
The city clerk shall post a copy of such report and assessment list on the bulletin board near the entrance door of the city office together with a notice of the filing thereof and of the time and place when and where it will be submitted to the city council for hearing and confirmation, notifying property owners that they may appear at such time and place and object to any matter contained therein. A like notice shall also be published twice in a newspaper of general circulation, published and circulated within the city. The posting and first publication of said notice shall be made and completed at least ten days before the time such report shall have been submitted to the city council. Such notice, as so posted and published, shall be substantially in the following form: 
"NOTICE OF HEARING OF REPORT AND 
ASSESSMENT FOR WEED ABATEMENT 
 NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that on ____________ , 19 ____________ , the City Manager of the City of Rohnert Park, filed with the City Clerk a report and assessment on abatement of weeds within said City, a copy of which is posted on the bulletin board at the entrance to the City Office. 
  NOTICE IS FURTHER GIVEN that on ____________ , the ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ , at the hour of eight o'clock p.m. in the City Council Chambers, said report and assessment list will be presented to the City Council of said City for consideration and confirmation, and that any and all persons interested, having any objections to said report and assessment list, or to any matter or thing contained therein, may appear at said time and place and be heard. 
Dated: ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
____________ 
Clerk, City of Rohnert Park" 
(Ord. 27 § 7, 1963)  
8.08.090 - Abatement—Cost report—Hearing and confirmation. 
At the time and place fixed for receiving and considering such report, the city council shall hear the same together with any objections which may be raised by any of the property owners liable to be assessed for the work of abating such nuisance, and said city manager shall attend such meeting with his record thereof, and upon such hearing the city council may make such modifications in the proposed assessments therefor as it may deem necessary, after which such report and assessment list shall be confirmed by resolution. 
The amount of the cost of abating such nuisance upon, or in the front or rear of the various lots or parcels of land respectively referred to in such report, shall constitute special assessments against such respective lots or parcels of land, and after thus made and confirmed shall constitute a charge on such properties for the amount of such assessments until paid. 
(Ord. 27 § 8, 1963)  
8.08.100 - Payment of cost assessment and penalty. 
All special assessments against such respective lots or parcels of land are due and payable within thirty days after the date of confirmation by the city council at the office of the city, Rohnert Park, California. In the event that the charge is not paid within the time, and at the place so provided, there shall attach to the charge a penalty of ten percent. Moreover, in the event that the payment and penalty is not paid, there shall attach thereto a penalty of one-half of one percent per month for nonpayment of the charges and basic penalty. 
(Ord. 27 § 9, 1963)  
Chapter 8.12 - REFUSE DISPOSAL 
 
8.12.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
"City manager" means the city manager of the city or his or her designee. 
"City sanitation officer" means the city sanitation officer of the city or his duly authorized representative. 
"Combustible rubbish" means and includes paper, cardboard, light wood shavings, kindling, leaves and any other item that readily commences to burn upon contact with open flames. 
"Contract agent" means and includes, for the purpose of this chapter, any person, firm or corporation or association, or the agents or employees thereof with whom the city shall have duly contracted under the terms hereinafter set out in this chapter, to collect, transport through the streets, alleys or public ways of the city, and dispose of refuse, garbage, wet garbage and rubbish produced within the limits of the city. 
"Garbage" means and includes kitchen and table refuse, offal, swill and also every accumulation of animal and vegetable refuse, and other matter that attends the preparation, consumption, decay, or dealing in or storage of, meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits or vegetables. It also includes crockery, bottles, tin vessels, ashes, and all refuse save and excepting as herein defined as rubbish or wet garbage. 
"Place of business" means any hotel, motel, trailer park, restaurant, market, hospital or any commercial or industrial establishment where there is any accumulation of garbage, wet garbage, refuse or rubbish. 
"Refuse" means and includes all matter and materials which are rejected by owners or producers thereof as offensive or useless, and which by their presence or accumulation may injuriously affect the health, comfort, or safety of the community by increasing disease or hazard by fire. 
"Rubbish" means and includes all combustible and noncombustible waste and refuse matter, excepting garbage ordinarily accumulating in and about residences, flats, buildings, apartment houses, lodging houses, hotels, restaurants, eating houses, stores, shops, offices and other public buildings. Among other things, it includes tree trimmings, cut in lengths not to exceed three feet in length or two inches in diameter, grass cuttings, dead plants, and weeds, and leaves but shall not include brick, mortar, or other debris incident to the construction of buildings. 
"Rubbish" does not include discarded appliances, furniture, or other bulky items which cannot be readily placed within the receptacle provided. 
"Self-hauling" means the transportation of refuse, garbage, wet garbage, rubbish, recyclables or compostables directly to a licensed or permitted landfill or other licensed or permitted disposal facility in lieu of utilizing the collection services offered by a collector. 
"Wet garbage" means all clean garbage suitable for food for hogs, coming from restaurants, cafes, cafeterias, hospitals, hotels, boardinghouses, clubs and all other eating places in the city, and from butcher shops and dealers in fresh vegetables, and consists of and includes only kitchen and table refuse, offal and swill, and every accumulation of animal and vegetable scraps, refuse or waste, and other matter that attends the preparation, consumption, decay, or dealing in, or storage of, meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits or vegetables; provided, however, that this definition is not intended to nor does it include the by-products of butcher shops where such by-products have a commercial value and are not decomposed nor offensive, and where such by-products have not been rejected by the owners or producers thereof as offensive or useless. 
(Ord. 776 § 1, 2007: Ord. 269 § 1, 1975; Ord. 149 § 2, 1971; Ord. 9 § 1, 1962) 
(Ord. No. 851, § 2(Exh. 1(2)), 11-27-2012)  
8.12.020 - Authority to create sanitation department. 
The power is granted the council of the city to create at any time by resolution or ordinance a sanitation department of the city and to collect, remove and dispose of all garbage, wet garbage, rubbish and refuse as a sanitary measure and as a benefit to the public health. 
(Ord. 9 § 2, 1962)  
8.12.030 - Depositing garbage, rubbish or refuse. 
It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit or cause to be thrown or deposited, any garbage, rubbish or refuse, as such terms are defined in Section 8.12.010 (except brick, brickbats, cement, plaster, stones and gravel, and these only under a building permit), in or upon any vacant lot or in any back yard, or in or upon any street, alley, gutter, highway, park or other public place in the city, or to deposit or place or keep any rubbish or waste matter except in the manner described in Sections 8.12.080 through 8.12.160. 
(Ord. 9 § 3, 1962)  
8.12.040 - Burning of garbage and rubbish. 
It is unlawful to burn or cause to be burned in the city any garbage. Rubbish may be burned subject to the fire regulations of the city. 
(Ord. 9 § 4, 1962)  
8.12.050 - Rules and interpretations of city sanitation officer. 
The city sanitation officer shall make such rules and interpretations of the terms of this chapter not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter as may be necessary, reasonable and proper to effect the proper, expedient, economical and efficient collection and removal of garbage, wet garbage, rubbish or refuse by the contract agent. 
(Ord. 9 § 5, 1962)  
8.12.060 - Emergency removal of materials constituting a health menace. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit the removal and hauling by an unlicensed person of materials considered by the health officer or city sanitation officer to constitute a health menace of such nature as necessary to be ordered by either of such officers to be promptly removed. 
(Ord. 9 § 6, 1962)  
8.12.070 - Sanitation officer—Enforcement and right of entry. 
The city sanitation officer shall be the city official responsible for enforcement of the ordinance codified in this chapter. In the discharge of his duties the city sanitation officer shall have the right to enter on the premises to determine if the provisions of this chapter are being upheld subject to the procedure and methods specified by the city in Chapter 1.12. 
(Ord. 269 § 2, 1975: Ord. 9 § 7, 1962)  
8.12.080 - Compliance with division required. 
It is unlawful for any person to deposit, keep, accumulate or permit, cause or suffer any rubbish, wet garbage, or garbage to be deposited, kept or accumulated upon any lot or parcel of land, or on any public or private place, street, lane, alley or drive, unless the same shall be kept, deposited or allowed to accumulate as provided in Sections 8.12.090 through 8.12.160. 
(Ord. 9 § 8, 1962)  
8.12.090 - Garbage receptacles—Generally. 
It is unlawful for any person to keep, accumulate or permit to be accumulated, any garbage upon any lot or parcel of land, or on any public or private lane, place, street, alley or drive, unless the same shall be in receptacles approved by the city sanitation officer. Such receptacles shall at all times be kept covered or closed except when necessary to place garbage therein or to take garbage therefrom. Each such receptacle, including its cover, shall be kept clean from accumulating grease or decomposing material. 
(Ord. 305 § 1, 1975: Ord. 9 § 9, 1962)  
8.12.100 - Garbage receptacles—Cleaning. 
After each emptying of garbage receptacles and before any such receptacles are again used, the same shall be thoroughly cleaned and all grease and adherent materials removed by the owner or person in control or having charge of such receptacles. 
(Ord. 9 § 10, 1962)  
8.12.110 - Receptacles for wet garbage. 
It shall be the duty of every accumulator of wet garbage within the city to provide or cause to be provided, and at all times to keep, or cause to be kept, separate containers or receptacles of a type that are approved by the city sanitation officer. They shall be kept covered at all times except when necessary to place garbage therein or to take garbage therefrom. Each such receptacle, including its cover, shall be kept clean from accumulating grease or decomposing material. 
(Ord. 305 § 2, 1975: Ord. 9 § 11, 1962)  
8.12.120 - Rubbish receptacles—Placement for collection. 
It is unlawful for any person to keep, accumulate or permit to be kept or accumulated any rubbish, except tree trimmings, unless the same are kept in a suitable box, barrel or other suitable receptacles, to be kept on each of such premises, sufficient to hold the rubbish which would ordinarily accumulate on such premises. 
All receptacles containing rubbish, including grass clippings and tree trimmings, shall be placed by the occupant of each residential structure within the city at or near the front of the residential structure at a location readily accessible to the contracting agent. Placement of said rubbish shall be made at a time immediately prior to the regular scheduled time for garbage collection. 
(Ord. 61 § 1, 1965: Ord. 9 § 12, 1962)  
8.12.130 - Tampering with receptacles. 
No person, other than the owner thereof, his agents or employees or the contract agent, shall tamper or meddle with any garbage, wet garbage or rubbish receptacles, or remove the contents thereof from the location where the same shall have been placed by such owner or his agent. 
(Ord. 9 § 13, 1962)  
8.12.140 - Unlawful deposits. 
It is unlawful to deposit any refuse or rubbish in or upon any public or private lane, place, street, alley or drive, or any gutters or drain facilities connected therewith. 
(Ord. 9 § 14, 1962)  
8.12.150 - Permit required to bury garbage. 
No person shall place any garbage upon or beneath the surface of any premises in the city without first obtaining a permit from the city health officer. 
(Ord. 9 § 15, 1962)  
8.12.160 - Period of accumulation limited. 
Every person occupying or having charge or control of any place of business where there is any accumulation of garbage shall cause the same to be removed therefrom or disposed of in some lawful manner at least twice each calendar week. Every person occupying or having charge or control of any place or premises, other than a place of business, where there is any accumulation of garbage, shall cause the same to be so removed or disposed of at least once each calendar week. 
No person shall cause or permit combustible rubbish to accumulate at any place or on any premises under his charge or control for a period in excess of one calendar week, or permit or allow noncombustible rubbish to accumulate thereat for a period in excess of one calendar month. 
(Ord. 9 § 16, 1962)  
8.12.170 - Construction of vehicles carrying garbage or rubbish. 
No garbage or rubbish shall be removed and carried on and along the streets and alleys of the city except that same be carried, conveyed or hauled in conveyances so constructed as to be dust proof, and so arranged as not to permit dust or other matter to sift through or fall upon the streets and alleys. The contents of such conveyances must be further protected with appropriate covers so as to prevent the same from being blown upon the streets, alleys and adjacent lands. 
(Ord. 9 § 17, 1962)  
8.12.180 - Containers in which wet garbage is transported. 
No wet garbage shall be removed and carried on or along any street or alley of the city except the same be transported in watertight containers with proper covers so that the garbage shall not be offensive and every such container shall be kept clean, and the garbage shall be so loaded that none of it shall fall, drip, or spill to or on the ground, sidewalk or pavement. 
(Ord. 9 § 18, 1962)  
8.12.190 - Trucks to be kept clean—Displaying name and number. 
Every truck used in the collection or removal of garbage, wet garbage, or rubbish, shall be kept well painted, clean inside and out, and in a prominent place on each truck, display the name of the contract agent and the truck number. 
(Ord. 9 § 19, 1962)  
8.12.200 - Contract for collection and disposal. 
For the collection and disposal of refuse, garbage, wet garbage and rubbish, a contract for a period not to exceed ten years may be entered into by the city in accordance with and subject to the terms and conditions of this chapter. 
The city may include in any such contract the exclusive right to maintain a debris box service within the city. 
(Ord. 149 § 3, 1971: Ord. 9 § 20, 1962)  
8.12.210 - Exclusive right of contractor. 
At such time as there is in force a contract entered into by the city with any person for the collection of garbage in the city, it is unlawful for any person, other than the contractor or the persons in the employ of the contractor having such contract, to collect or transport any garbage within the boundaries of the city, including future annexations. The prohibition imposed by this section shall not apply to the provision of debris box services within the city in accord with the provisions of a contract with the city. The prohibition imposed by this section shall also not apply to those persons who have obtained a valid self-haul permit from the city as provided for in Section 8.12.350. 
(Ord. 606 § 1, 1995: Ord. 9 § 21, 1962) 
(Ord. No. 851, § 2(Exh. 1(3)), 11-27-2012)  
8.12.220 - Contract—Terms and conditions. 
A.  Manner of collection and disposition. Such contract authorized by this chapter shall provide that the contractor shall collect and dispose of the refuse, garbage, wet garbage and rubbish in the city in the manner provided in this chapter. 
B.  Bond of contractor. Contractors shall be required to furnish either a cash bond or a surety bond to the city in an amount not less than five thousand dollars, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Exclusive right of contractor. The city may grant a contractor the sole and exclusive right, except as in this chapter otherwise provided, to engage in the business of collecting for a fee all garbage and rubbish in the city and transporting the same through the streets and public ways of the city. 
D.  Disposition at dump. Such contract shall further provide that the contractor shall be required to dispose of all such garbage and rubbish, save and excepting wet garbage, at a dump satisfactory to the city. 
E.  Workmen's Compensation Insurance. Such contract shall also require that the contractor procure for the period covered by the proposed contract, full compensation insurance with an industrial carrier, as defined by and in accordance with the provisions of the act of the legislature of the state known as the "Workman's Compensation Act," approved May 26, 1913, and as subsequently amended. 
F.  Public liability insurance. Such contract shall also require that the contractor carry public liability insurance to the extent of not less than fifty thousand dollars for the death or injury of one person, one hundred thousand dollars for the death or injury of more than one person, and property damage insurance to the extent of not less than twenty thousand dollars, such insurance to cover both the city and the contractor. 
G.  Inclusion of additional terms by resolution of council. The city council, by resolution, shall have the power to provide for the inclusion in such contract of such terms as it deems necessary to protect the interests of the city. 
(Ord. 606 § 2, 1995: Ord. 9 § 22, 1962)  
8.12.230 - Contract—Extension. 
The city council may grant extensions of any contract entered into pursuant to this chapter upon such terms and conditions as the council may deem necessary in the best public interest. 
(Ord. 9 § 23, 1962)  
8.12.240 - Deposit required. 
Prior to establishing an account, property owners and occupants are required to provide a deposit for refuse disposal services as set by the city manager. 
(Ord. 776 § 2, 2007: Ord. 9 § 24, 1962)  
8.12.260 - Rates for collection. 
Any person from whom garbage, wet garbage, rubbish or refuse is collected under the provisions of this chapter shall pay to the contract agent(s) granted a contract for collection and disposal pursuant to [Section] 8.12.200 the following fee(s) for such services: 
A.  Single-Family Residences, Duplex, Triplex, and Fourplex. A monthly charge established by the contract agent, which shall not exceed maximum rate established by the city, which shall include all garbage, wet garbage, rubbish and refuse which has been placed within the receptacles and located on the premises as provided under this chapter. 
B.  Commercial Establishments and Apartment Houses. These rates are based on the total number of apartments or mobile homes whether occupied or vacant, subject to the following provisions: 
1.  If the entire premises is unoccupied, no charge is made; 
2.  Where thirty-gallon cans are used for collection purposes by any apartment house the rate shall be set by the contract agent, at an amount not exceeding the maximum rate established by the city, for each apartment unit. 
3.  Where thirty-gallon cans are used for collection purposes by any commercial establishment the rate shall be set by the contract agent, at an amount not exceeding the maximum rate established by the city. 
4.  The city sanitation officer may require the use of bins, furnished by the contract agent, for any commercial establishment or apartment house. When bins are used, the rates shall be set by the contract agent, at an amount not exceeding the maximum rate established by the city. 
Where a complete bin is not regularly utilized the rate may be adjusted with the consent of the city sanitation officer. Where a type of bin service is provided for which no rate is provided a comparable rate may be established by the contract agent with the written consent of the city manager. 
5.  No charge shall be made for any vacant apartment provided written notice of such vacancy is promptly delivered to the city manager, and, provided further, that the contract agent shall not be required to prorate any charge for an apartment which is vacant for only a portion of the regular billing period. 
6.  All business conducted in a residence must pay the business rate for all garbage and refuse handled. 
7.  The contract agent shall make available bins for the collection of garbage, wet garbage, rubbish and refuse to all business establishments and apartment houses, when requested by the owners or required by the city sanitation officer. Said bins shall be of a design approved by the city sanitation officer. 
8.  The city sanitation officer shall have the right to require that apartment houses, fourplexes, condominiums, planned developments and other multi-family residential units utilize bins for the collection of garbage, rubbish and refuse. 
C.  Mobile Home Parks. The owners of all mobile home parks shall pay a monthly charge as follows: 
1.  For each "adults only" mobile home park a charge set by the contract agent, at an amount not exceeding the maximum rate established by the city, for each occupied unit; 
2.  For each mobile home park which is not restricted to "adults," a charge set by the contract agent, at an amount not exceeding the maximum rate established by the city, for each occupied unit. 
D.  Special Collections. For a special collection of rubbish or refuse there shall be a charge set by the contract agent, at an amount not exceeding the maximum rate established by the city, for each cubic yard or fraction thereof. A special collection of rubbish shall consist of any collection not included within the established monthly rate and shall include any bulky items which cannot be placed within the regularly used collection receptacle. 
E.  Free Service to City. The contract agent shall provide free service to all city-owned facilities. 
F.  Cost of Living Adjustment. The city may, by an appropriate agreement with the contract agent for the collection and disposal of refuse within the city, provide for an annual adjustment in the maximum rates established in this chapter pursuant to any increase or decrease in the cost of living index or such other standard as may be selected by the city council. Any such adjustment in the rates must be approved by the city manager consistent with the terms of the contract with the contract agent. 
(Ord. No. 851, § 2(Exh. 1(1)), 11-27-2012) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 851, § 2, Exhibit 1(1), adopted Nov. 27, 2012, deleted § 8.12.260, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, Section 8.12.260 pertained to "Rates for city collection." See Ordinance List and Disposition Table for derivation.  
8.12.265 - Collection charge exemptions and refunds. 
A.  Exemptions. A customer may request an exemption from collection charges if his or her property will be vacant by filing a request with the utility billing supervisor two weeks before the vacancy. The property owner must certify that his or her property will be vacant and will not require any garbage collection services for a period of at least sixty consecutive days due to vacancy. The city manager will verify exemption applications by confirming that all property for which a charge waiver has been requested is vacant and uses no collection services. Any property deemed eligible for an exemption shall be exempted from the date of vacancy. Property owners will be required to submit a new exemption application every six months to continue the exemption. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly receive the benefits of this exemption when the basis for the exemption does not exist or ceases to exist. Any property owner receiving an exemption must give the city written notice concurrent with any change in occupancy so that the city may restart service as soon as the property is no longer vacant. 
B.  Refunds. Whenever the amount of any charge has been overpaid, or paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in this section. Application for refunds must be made on a form provided by the city. No refund will be made if application therefore is filed with the city more than six months after the date that such vacancy occurred. The applicant shall certify that all statements of fact in such application are true and correct. 
C.  Any service user or property owner aggrieved by any decision of the utility billing supervisor with respect to the amount of such charge, or exemption or refund if any, may appeal to the city manager by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk, within fifteen days of the serving or mailing of the determination of the utility billing supervisor. The city manager shall consider the appeal within thirty days of receipt and render a written decision within fifteen days of the hearing. The findings of the city manager shall be final. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of written decision. 
D.  The submission of a written claim as set forth in Chapter 2.44 shall be a prerequisite to a suit challenging a city decision made pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 776 § 4, 2007)  
8.12.270 - Unlawful collection. 
It is unlawful for any person other than the city, or such garbage collector as may be designated by the city, under contract therefor or license, or his agents or employees, to engage in the business of collection, disposing of, transporting, carrying or conveying through the streets, alleys, or public thoroughfares of the city any garbage, refuse or rubbish or other matter offensive to the sight. 
(Ord. 9 § 27, 1962)  
8.12.280 - Who may collect or remove. 
No person, other than the contract agent, shall gather, collect or remove any garbage from any place or premise in the city, or convey or transport the same over the public streets thereof; provided, however, that garbage collection or disposal contractors when serving other municipalities, county garbage districts, state or federal institutions or any person in the employ of such governmental agencies may haul such material over such streets after having first obtained a permit to do so from the city sanitation officer. 
(Ord. 9 § 28, 1962)  
8.12.281 - Ownership of recyclable material. 
Any recyclable materials, including but not limited to paper, cardboard, glass and aluminum, which have been placed by the owner at the curbside for collection by the city's contract agent, or in bins or other receptacles provided by the contract agent, shall become the property of the contract agent, and the subsequent removal of such recyclable materials by any person or entity, other than the contract agent, shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as provided in Section 8.12.340. 
(Ord. 425 § 1, 1983)  
8.12.282 - Permit required for recycling. 
Any person, firm or business entity, other than the contract agent, engaged in the business of collecting recyclable materials in the city shall first obtain a permit for such recycling business from the city manager. 
(Ord. 425 § 2, 1983)  
8.12.290 - Supervision of collection by city sanitation officer. 
The city sanitation officer shall supervise the collection and removal of all garbage, rubbish and refuse by the contract agent. 
(Ord. 9 § 29, 1962)  
8.12.300 - Collection routes—Time. 
The city sanitation officer shall establish routes, days and hours for collection of garbage, rubbish and refuse, and may change the same from time to time. When such routes, days and hours are established or changed, he shall give reasonable notice thereof. 
(Ord. 9 § 30, 1962)  
8.12.310 - Placing for collection—Generally. 
The contract agent shall collect and remove from all places and premises in the city all garbage, wet garbage, rubbish or refuse which is contained in a receptacle of the type or kind prescribed by this chapter. All receptacles shall be so placed as to be easily accessible to the contract agent. 
All receptacles for rubbish, including grass clippings and tree trimmings, shall immediately prior to the regular scheduled date for garbage collection at all residential structures within the city, be placed at or near the front of the residential structure at a place readily accessible to the contract agent. 
(Ord. 61 § 4, 1965; Ord. 9 § 31, 1962)  
8.12.320 - Placing for collection cases of practical difficulty. 
In all cases where the city sanitation officer finds that practical difficulty exists in complying with the requirements of this chapter as to the placing of garbage, wet garbage, rubbish or refuse for collection by the contract agent, the city sanitation officer shall designate where the same shall be placed or kept for collection by such agent, and the conditions under which it shall be collected. 
(Ord. 9 § 32, 1962)  
8.12.330 - Interfering with authorized collection prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person in any manner to interfere with the collection and disposal of refuse, garbage or rubbish by any person authorized by license or contract to collect and dispose of the same. 
(Ord. 9 § 33, 1962)  
8.12.340 - Penalty. 
Whenever in this chapter any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor, the violation of any such provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
Every day any violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 269 § 3, 1975: Ord. 9 § 35, 1962)  
8.12.350 - Self-hauling permits. 
A.  Permit Required. The owner, occupant or other person responsible for day-to-day operation of a single-family residential unit, may apply for and obtain a permit to self-haul, and shall not self-haul without a valid self-haul permit issued per this section. Every owner, occupant or other person responsible for day-to-day operation of a single-family residential unit who desires to self-haul in lieu of making arrangements for the collection of refuse, garbage, wet garbage, rubbish, recyclables and compostables shall obtain a self-haul permit from the city's public works director or his or her designee prior to commencing self-hauling. 
B.  Term. A permit to self-haul shall be good for one calendar year, or such part of the calendar year that is remaining after the issuance of the permit. All self-haul permits shall expire on December thirty-first, and may be renewed annually. An application for a renewal permit should be filed at least sixty days prior to the expiration date of the permit to allow adequate time for processing, inspection and verifications required to issue the permit. 
C.  Issuance of Permit. The city's public works director or his or her designee shall issue a self-haul permit within five working days of the receipt of an application deemed complete by the director and the production of the items listed in numbers 2—8 below: 
1.  Applicant files an application, on a form approved by the director, with all required information supplied. Failure to provide all required information will result in the director rejecting the application as incomplete. 
2.  The applicant produces for inspection the vehicle the applicant intends to use for hauling refuse, garbage, wet garbage, rubbish, recyclables and compostables, and the vehicle meets the following standards: 
a.  The vehicle has the capacity to haul a minimum of thirty-two gallons (4.3 cubic feet) of refuse, garbage, wet garbage, rubbish, recyclables or compostables; 
b.  The vehicle is capable of safely hauling refuse, garbage, wet garbage, rubbish, recyclables and disposables in a safe and sanitary manner so that such matter will not spill, leak, drip, blow, scatter or fall from the vehicle; 
c.  If the vehicle is not fully enclosed, the applicant produces a tarp or other material that will be used to completely secure the materials being self-hauled. 
3.  The applicant produces evidence that he or she owns or leases the vehicle or has a written agreement to use the vehicle for the hauling of refuse, garbage, wet garbage, rubbish, recyclables and compostables; 
4.  The applicant produces evidence that he or she has a valid California driver's license to operate the vehicle produced for inspection and that the vehicle is registered in the State of California; 
5.  The applicant provides the city with a certificate of automobile insurance for the vehicle; 
6.  The vehicle is operational and meets all applicable Vehicle Code standards; 
7.  The applicant provides the city with proof that the applicant has containers for the storage of refuse, garbage, wet garbage, rubbish, recyclables and compostables on the applicant's property before the materials are hauled to a disposal facility; and 
8.  The applicant pays the fee for a self-hauling permit authorized by resolution of the city council. Permits issued between January 1 and March 31 shall pay one hundred percent of the permit fee; permits issued between April 1 and June 30 shall pay seventy-five percent of the permit fee; permits issued between July 1 and September 30 shall pay fifty percent of the permit fee; permits issued between October 1 and December 31 shall pay twenty-five percent of the permit fee. 
D.  Appeal of Denial. An applicant whose application for a self-hauling permit has been denied may appeal that decision. An appeal may be filed within ten days of the date the applicant was notified of the denial. Appeals shall be heard by the city manager. The decision of the city manager is final. 
E.  Operational Standards. 
1.  Permittees must dispose of refuse, garbage, wet garbage, and rubbish weekly and shall procure and retain weekly receipts from any licensed or permitted landfill or other licensed or permitted disposal facility. Receipts shall be submitted to the city for the preceding one-quarter calendar year on a quarterly basis upon reasonable request by appropriate city authority. Failure to show proof of refuse, garbage, wet garbage, and rubbish disposal for each week that a person is permitted to self haul shall constitute a public health and safety nuisance sufficient to permit city to revoke the permittee's self-hauling permit. 
2.  Permittees must notify the city of any change in the vehicle being used to haul refuse, garbage, wet garbage, rubbish, recyclables or compostables by the permittee. Permittees must bring the new vehicle in for an inspection and demonstrate compliance with items 1 through 5 of paragraph [C] of this section before the new vehicle is used to haul any materials under the permit. 
3.  Permittee must keep on file with the city copies of the current automobile insurance and registration for the vehicle used to self-haul and the permitee's current California driver's license. Permittee must provide proof to city of renewed automobile insurance, vehicle registration, and California driver's license within five days of expiration of respective document. 
4.  Permittees must separate and bag refuse, garbage, wet garbage, rubbish, recyclables and compostables. 
5.  Permittees are liable for any damages and clean up costs resulting from any refuse, garbage, wet garbage, rubbish, recyclables or compostables spilling, leaking, dripping, blowing, scattering or falling during the course of the permittees self-hauling activity. 
6.  Permitees shall, at such times as the city manager may specify, report to the city the type, quantity, volume and weight of refuse, garbage, wet garbage, rubbish, recyclables and compostables to be removed, and shall pay an AB 939 information reporting fee, in an amount to be set by the city council by resolution. 
E.  Revocation of Permit. The permit shall be subject to revocation if the permittee violates any provision of this chapter. A notice of revocation shall be mailed to the permittee informing them that their self-hauling permit is being revoked, identifying the violations of this chapter that have occurred, and informing the permittee that he or she has the right to dispute the revocation by an appeal to the city manager. An appeal of a revocation must be filed within five days of the mailing of notice of the revocation. A revocation appeal hearing will be scheduled within five days of the date the city receives the request for an appeal. The city manager will issue a decision on the appeal within five days of the hearing and provide the permittee written notice of the decision. The decision of the city manager on the appeal shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 851, § 2(Exh. 1(4)), 11-27-2012)  
Chapter 8.16 - ABANDONED VEHICLES 
 
8.16.010 - Declaration of policy—Definitions. 
In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the city council makes the following findings and declarations: 
The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property not including highways is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof, on private or public property not including highways, except as expressly hereinafter permitted, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  "Vehicle" means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except as a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
B.  "Highway" means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. "Highway" includes street. 
C.  "Public property" does not include "highway." 
D.  "Owner of the vehicle" means the last registered owner and legal owner of record. 
(Ord. 150 § 1, 1971)  
8.16.020 - Exclusions. 
This chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  A vehicle or parts thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
B.  A vehicle or parts thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise. 
Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code and this chapter. 
(Ord. 150 § 2, 1971)  
8.16.030 - Chapter not exclusive regulation. 
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 150 § 3, 1971)  
8.16.040 - Chief of police to enforce. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the chief of police. In the enforcement of this chapter such officer and his deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 150 § 4, 1971)  
8.16.050 - Authority to enter private property for removal. 
When the city council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 150 § 5, 1971)  
8.16.060 - Amount of assessment determined by council. 
The city council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs (excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or parts thereof) under this chapter. 
(Ord. 150 § 6, 1971)  
8.16.070 - Authority to abate nuisance. 
Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property or public property within the city, the chief of police shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed herein. 
(Ord. 150 § 7, 1971)  
8.16.080 - Notice—Form. 
A ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered or certified mail to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The notices of intention shall be in substantially the following forms: 
"NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE 
(Name and address of owner of the land) 
 As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at (address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to (section of ordinance) has determined that there exists upon said land an (or parts of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle registered to ____________ , license number ____________ , which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of (ordinance number). 
 You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice, and upon your failure to do so the same will be abated and removed by the City and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs, assessed to you as owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located. 
 As owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located, you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the Chief of Police of Rohnert Park within such 10-day period, the Chief of Police of Rohnert Park shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) as a public nuisance and assess the costs of aforesaid without a public hearing. You may submit a sworn written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing. 
Notice Mailed 	____________ 	s/ ____________ " 
	(date) 	(Chief of Police) 
 
"NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE 
(Name and address of last registered and/or legal owner of record of vehicle—notice should be given to both if different) 
 As last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of (description of vehicle—make, model, license, etc.), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to (section of ordinance) has determined that said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle at (describe location on public or private property) and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of (ordinance number). 
 You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice. 
 As registered (and/or legal) owner of record of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, appear in person or request a public hearing on the matter. If the owner fails to appear or requests a public hearing within such 10-day period, the Chief of Police shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) without a hearing. 
Notice Mailed 	____________ 	s/ ____________ " 
	(date) 	(Chief of Police) 
 
(Ord. 289 §§ l, 2, 1975; Ord. 150 § 8, 1971)  
8.16.090 - Public hearing—Notice. 
Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land received by the chief of police within ten days after the mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held by the chief of police on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof against the property on which it is located. 
If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land within such ten-day period, said statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require his presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by registered mail, at least ten days before the hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a request for hearing is not received within said ten days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the city shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing. 
(Ord. 150 § 9, 1971)  
8.16.100 - City council to conduct hearing—Decision. 
All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the chief of police who shall hear all facts and testimony he deems pertinent. Said facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the said private property or public property. The chief of police shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial. 
The chief of police may impose such conditions and take such other action as he deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. He may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or parts thereof if, in his opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the chief of police may find that a vehicle or parts thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or parts thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. 
If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land and that he has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the chief of police shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such owner of the land. 
If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land but does not appear, or if an interested party makes a written presentation to the chief of police but does not appear, he shall be notified in writing of the decision. 
(Ord. 287 § 3, 1975; Ord. 150 § 10, 1971)  
8.16.110 - Notice of appeal. 
Any interested party may appeal the decision of the chief of police by filing a written notice of appeal with the said chief of police within five days after his decision. 
Such appeal shall be heard by the city council which may affirm, amend, or reverse the order or take other action deemed appropriate. 
The clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant and those persons specified in Section 8.16.080. 
In conducting the hearing the city council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. 
(Ord. 150 § 11, 1971)  
8.16.120 - Removal after notice. 
Five days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance, five days from the date of mailing of notice of the decision if such notice is required by Section 8.16.100, or fifteen days after such action of the governing body authorizing removal following appeal, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard or automobile dismantler's yard. After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not thereafter be constructed or made operable. 
(Ord. 287 § 4, 1975; Ord. 150 § 12, 1971)  
8.16.130 - Notice of removal to Department of Motor Vehicles. 
Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or parts thereof removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates. 
(Ord. 150 § 13, 1971)  
8.16.140 - Assessment. 
If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to Section 8.16.100 are not paid within thirty days of the date of the order, or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. Said assessment shall have the same priority as other city taxes. 
(Ord. 150 § 14, 1971)  
8.16.150 - Parking or leaving inoperable vehicle deemed a misdemeanor. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to abandon, park, store, or leave or permit the abandonment, parking, storing or leaving of any licensed or unlicensed vehicle or parts thereof which is in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative condition upon any private property or public property not including highways within the city for a period in excess of three days unless such vehicle or parts thereof is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not plainly visible from the street or other public or private property, or unless such vehicle is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, or a junkyard. 
(Ord. 150 § 15, 1971)  
8.16.160 - Refusal to remove. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail or refuse to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof or refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the abatement provisions of this chapter or state law where such state law is applicable. 
(Ord. 150 § 16, 1971)  
Chapter 8.20 - OPEN OUTDOOR FIRES 
 
8.20.010 - Generally. 
No person, firm, corporation, association or public agency shall ignite, cause to be ignited, permit to be ignited, or suffer, allow, or maintain any open outdoor fire within the city, except as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 146 § 1, 1971)  
8.20.020 - Definitions. 
These words, as used in this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Flue" means any duct or passage for air, gases or the like, such as a stack or chimney. 
B.  "Open outdoor fire" means any combustion of combustible material of any type outdoors in the open, not in any enclosure, where the products of combustion are not directed through a flue. 
(Ord. 146 § 2, 1971)  
8.20.030 - Exceptions. 
The following fires are excepted from provisions of this chapter: 
A.  Fires used only for cooking of food for human beings or for recreational purposes; 
B.  Any fire set or permitted by any public officer in the performance of official duty, if such fire is set or permission given for the purpose of weed abatement, the prevention of a fire hazard, including the disposal of dangerous materials where there is no safe alternate method of disposal, or in the instruction of public employees in the methods of fighting fires, which fire is, in the opinion of such official, necessary; 
C.  Fires set for the purpose of instruction of industrial employees in the methods of fighting fires, provided prior permission has been granted by the fire chief and by the air pollution control district; 
D.  An agricultural fire set by or permitted by the county agricultural commissioner, if such fire is set or permission given in the performance of the official duty of such county agricultural commissioner for the purpose of disease and pest prevention; 
E.  Safety flares for the combustion of waste gases; 
F.  1.  Fires, set or permitted by the fire chief necessary to maintain and continue the growing of field crops as a gainful occupation, for the purpose of disposal of stubble and straw. The fire chief shall notify the air pollution control officer in advance of each fire set or permitted by him under this subsection, 
2.  Fires, set or permitted by the fire chief necessary to maintain and continue the grazing of animals as a gainful occupation, for the purpose of range improvement and grazing, improvement of land for wild life and game habitat, or such other beneficial use as the fire chief may deem warranted. A fire set or permitted under this subsection shall be permitted only upon an application for a permit made in writing to the fire chief not less than forty-five days before the proposed burn. The application shall contain the reason for the burn; a description of any prior burns on the same property, with a statement of results; a map sufficiently accurate to show the general location of the property affected and its relationship to adjoining properties; the method that will be followed to ignite, maintain and control the burn; a description of chemical or mechanical pretreatment of the range land. The fire chief shall notify the air pollution control officer and all affected fire officials in advance of each fire set or permitted by him under this subsection, 
3.  Fires, set or permitted by a city official having jurisdiction in the performance of official duty, necessary to control the growth of vegetation in irrigation ditches and canals. The fire official shall notify the air pollution control officer in advance of each fire set or permitted by him under this subsection; 
G.  Fires, set or permitted by a public official in charge of flood control activities, for the purpose of disposal of material which is lying or growing within natural channels or flood control channels which fires are in the opinion of such official a necessary incident to the clearing and maintenance of watercourses and flood control channels for the specific purpose of preventing or eliminating a flood hazard, provided that the air pollution control officer has given prior approval; 
H.  Except in cases of emergency, permits for setting of any fire or fires permitted by paragraphs B, C, D and E of this section shall be granted by the public official having jurisdiction and only after consultation with the air pollution control officer; 
I.  Any fire if it can be demonstrated that nothing but carbon dioxide, nitrogen dioxide, or water vapor is emitted under all operating conditions. 
(Ord. 146 § 3, 1971)  
8.20.040 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of the ordinances of the city, is guilty of a misdemeanor unless by ordinance the violation is made an infraction. Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by any ordinance of the city, any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the ordinances of the city shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Every violation determined to be an infraction is punishable by 
A.  A fine not exceeding fifty dollars for a first violation; 
B.  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year; 
C.  A fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year. 
Each such person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the ordinances of the city is committed, continued or permitted by any such person, and he shall be punished accordingly. 
(Ord. 293 §§ 1, 2, 1975: Ord. 255 § 1, 1975: Ord. 146 § 6, 1971)  
Chapter 8.24 - INCINERATORS AND BARBECUE PITS 
 
8.24.010 - Specifications. 
A.  Permit to Install, Incinerator. No incinerator shall be constructed, located, installed, equipped, maintained, or used unless by virtue of a permit secured from the fire chief approving the type and location of such incinerator. 
B.  Approval of Locations. The location and type of every incinerator shall be approved in writing by the fire chief. If the location thus approved should thereafter create a public or private nuisance or fire hazard, the fire chief may revoke his previous approval and the person owning the incinerator shall immediately move the incinerator to a location approved by the fire chief in writing, or cease burning therein. 
The location and type of every barbecue pit which is an independent structure shall be approved by the fire chief. 
C.  Restriction on Use of Barbecue Pits—Not Applicable to Portable Barbecues. No barbecue pits shall be used for the disposal of combustible waste material. 
This chapter shall not be applicable to portable barbecue devices when burning charcoal for cooking purposes. 
D.  Spark Arrestors. Every incinerator and barbecue pit shall be equipped and maintained with a spark arrestor approved by the fire chief. 
E.  Maintenance. Every incinerator and every barbecue pit and equipment thereof shall be maintained in good condition, working order, and repair at all times. 
(Ord. 57 § 2, 1965)  
8.24.020 - Outdoor burning. 
A.  No person shall ignite, set fire to or burn any rubbish, papers, shavings, boxes, grass, brush or other combustible materials except as follows: 
1.  In an approved incinerator, except for those fires authorized and allowed in Section 8.20.030; 
2.  All burning regulated under this section shall be done between the hours of five a.m. and ten a.m. except when such burning is done pursuant to a permit from the fire chief or is done in an incinerator so constructed or located as to be a part of or opening into any building. 
B.  Burning on Public Property. No person shall burn any combustible waste material on any publicly-owned or controlled lot or parcel of land which has not been set aside by property authority therefore. 
No person shall burn combustible waste material, except uncut vegetation, on any public bridge, street, sidewalk, or parkway or other similar public place. 
C.  Not to Create Fire Hazards. No person shall so construct, erect, install, equip, maintain or use any incinerator or barbecue pit or so burn any combustible material as to constitute or occasion a fire hazard by the use or burning thereof, or so as to endanger the life or property of any person thereby. 
(Ord. 276 § 1, 1975; Ord. 146 § 5, 1971; Ord. 57 § 3(A)—(C), 1965)  
8.24.030 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor unless by ordinance the violation is made an infraction. Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by any ordinance of the city, any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the ordinances of the city shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Every violation determined to be an infraction is punishable by: 
A.  A fine not exceeding fifty dollars for a first violation; 
B.  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year; 
C.  A fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year. 
Each such person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the ordinances of the city is committed, continued or permitted by any such person, and he shall be punished accordingly. 
(Ord. 293 §§ l (part), 2 (part), 1975: Ord. 255 § l (part), 1975: Ord. 57 § 4, 1965)  
Chapter 8.26 - INSTALLATION OF WOOD-BURNING APPLIANCES 
 
8.26.010 - Title. 
This Ordinance shall be known as the Wood-Burning Appliances Ordinance of the City of Rohnert Park. 
(Ord. 720 § 1 (part), 2004)  
8.26.020 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is (1) to improve air quality within the City of Rohnert Park and (2) to regulate the type of wood-burning appliances that may be installed and maintained within the city. 
(Ord. 720 § 1 (part), 2004)  
8.26.030 - Findings. 
A.  The State Air Resources Board (ARB) adopted a particulate matter (PM10) Ambient Air Quality Standard (AAQS) in December 1982, and levels for the PM10 AAQS were selected pursuant to California Code of Regulations, Title 17, and Section 70200 to protect the health of people who are sensitive to exposure to particulate matter. 
B.  Research indicates that wood smoke is a contributor to PM10 levels and poses significant health risks to the public. 
C.  The city council desires to lessen the risk to human health and the environment caused by pollution from wood-burning appliances. 
D.  A need exists to adopt regulations that apply to wood-burning combustion emissions. 
E.  The proposed ordinance will minimize the increase in particulate emissions from future installation of certain wood-burning appliances, and will decrease particulate emissions by the removal of certain wood-burning appliances at the time of renovation. 
(Ord. 720 § 1 (part), 2004)  
8.26.040 - Definitions. 
These words, as used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Bay Area Air Quality Management District" means the air quality agency for the San Francisco Bay Area pursuant to the California Health and Safety Code. 
B.  "EPA" means the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
C.  "EPA certified wood heaters" means any wood heater that meets the standard in Title 40 Part 60.530 Subpart AAA Code of Federal Regulations in effect at the time of installation and is certified and labeled pursuant to those regulations. An EPA certified wood heater may be freestanding, built-in, or is an insert within a fireplace. 
D.  "Fireplace" means any permanently installed masonry or factory-built wood-burning appliance designed to be used with an air-to-fuel ratio greater than or equal to 35 to 1. 
E.  "Garbage" means all solid, semi-solid and liquid wastes generated from residential, commercial and industrial sources, including trash, refuse, rubbish, industrial wastes, asphalted products, manure, vegetable or animal solids, and semi solid wastes. 
F.  "Gas fireplace" means any masonry or factory-built fireplace in which a device that has been designed to burn natural gas or liquefied petroleum gas in a manner that simulates the appearance of burning wood has been permanently installed so the burner pan and associated equipment are affixed to the masonry or metal base of the fireplace. 
G.  "Insert" means any wood-burning heater designed to be installed in an existing masonry or factory built fireplace. 
H.  "Paints" means all exterior and interior house and trim paints, enamels, varnishes, lacquers, stains, primers, sealers, under-coatings, roof coatings, wood preservatives, shellacs, and other paints or paint-like products. 
I.  "Paint solvents" means all original solvents sold or used to thin paints or clean up painting equipment. 
J.  "Pellet-fueled heater" means any appliance that operates exclusively on solid fuel pellets. 
K.  "Solid fuel" means wood or any other non-gases or non-liquid fuel. 
L.  "Temporary Sole Source" means the use of a wood-burning appliance determined to be temporary as determined by the building department of the city. 
M.  "Treated wood" means wood of any species that has been chemically impregnated, painted or similarly modified to improve resistance to insects or decay. 
N.  "Waste petroleum product" means any petroleum product other than fuels that has been refined from crude oil, and has been used or has been contaminated with physical or chemical impurities. 
O.  "Wood-burning appliance" means a fireplace, wood heater, or pellet-fired heater or similar device burning solid fuel used for aesthetic or space-heating purposes. 
P.  "Wood heater" means an enclosed, wood-burning appliance capable of and intended for space heating that meets all the following criteria: 
1.  An air-to-fuel ratio in the combustion chamber averaging less than 35-to-l as determined by the test procedures prescribed and approved by the building official; 
2.  A usable firebox volume less than twenty cubic feet (0.57 cubic meters); 
3.  A minimum burn rate less than eleven lb/hr (kg/hr); and 
4.  A maximum weight of less than 1,760 lbs (800kg). For the purpose of this ordinance, fixtures and devices that are normally sold separately, such as flue pipe, chimney and masonry components that are not an integral part of the appliance or heat distribution ducting do not count as part of the appliance weight. 
(Ord. 720 § 1 (part), 2004)  
8.26.050 - Applicability. 
Any wood-burning appliances installed in new residential units or wood-burning appliances being added to or replacing wood-burning appliances in existing residential units shall comply with this chapter. 
All wood-burning appliances installed in new commercial buildings or wood-burning appliances being added to or replacing wood-burning appliances in existing commercial buildings shall comply with this chapter. Commercial buildings shall include, but not be limited to, hotels and restaurants. 
Any wood-burning appliances specifically designed for cooking and all gas appliances shall be exempt from this chapter. The conversion of a gas fireplace to burn wood shall constitute the installation of a wood-burning appliance and shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter. 
A wood-burning appliance shall comply with this chapter if: (1) it is reconstructed, (2) additions, alterations, or repairs are made to the appliance that require opening up immediately-adjacent walls, or (3) the residential unit or commercial building in which the wood-burning appliance is located is renovated, and the renovation includes opening up walls immediately adjacent to the wood-burning appliance. 
(Ord. 720 § 1 (part), 2004)  
8.26.060 - Curtailment. 
It shall be unlawful to use any wood-burning appliance when the Bay Area Air Quality Management District issues a "Spare the Air Tonight" warning and when an alternate approved heat source is available. 
(Ord. 720 § 1 (part), 2004)  
8.26.070 - New installation or replacement of non-compliant appliances. 
It shall be unlawful to install a wood-burning appliance that is not one of the following: (1) a pellet-fueled wood heater, (2) an EPA certified wood heater, or (3) a fireplace certified by EPA or another authoritative agency should EPA or another authoritative agency develop a fireplace certification program. 
(Ord. 720 § 1 (part), 2004)  
8.26.080 - Prohibited fuels. 
A.  It shall be unlawful to use of any of the following fuels in a wood-burning appliance: 
1.  Garbage; 
2.  Treated wood; 
3.  Plastic products; 
4.  Rubber products; 
5.  Waste petroleum products; 
6.  Paints; 
7.  Paint solvents; 
8.  Coal; 
9.  Glossy or colored paper; 
10.  Particle board; or 
11.  Salt water driftwood. 
B.  This section shall not apply to products designed specifically for use as fuel in a wood-burning appliance. 
(Ord. 720 § 1 (part), 2004)  
8.26.090 - Enforcement. 
Any person who plans to install a wood-burning appliance must submit documentation to the city demonstrating that the wood-burning appliance is a pellet-fueled wood heater, an EPA certified wood heater, or a fireplace certified by EPA should EPA develop a fireplace certification program. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter will receive a "Notice of Violation" from the building division of the city after it has been determined that a violation has occurred. The "Notice of Violation" shall inform the person(s) or property owner(s) violating this chapter that they are in violation of the chapter and shall direct them to stop all activity in violation of this chapter. Only one (1) "Notice of Violation" will be issued to each person or property owner in violation of this chapter. Subsequent violations of this chapter will be considered a separate violation and will be subject to the provisions for a second violation as outlined in this section. 
Every person who violates any provision of this chapter a second time is guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. 720 § 1 (part), 2004)  
Chapter 8.28 - REMOVAL OF FIRE DEBRIS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Prior ordinance history: Ord. 57 § 3D 
 
8.28.010 - Responsibility assigned. 
Any owner of property on which a fire has occurred, shall remove all debris resulting from the fire and the efforts to suppress the fire within thirty days of the fire, or the completion of any fire investigation, whichever is later. 
(Ord. 688 § 2(part), 2002)  
8.28.020 - Fencing required. 
Where a structure fire has resulted in major loss or destruction of the structure, or at the direction of the building official, any owner of property on which the structure fire has occurred shall erect a six foot high fence that completely secures and surrounds the site. The fence shall be constructed of chain link, or other equivalent fencing, as approved by the building official; provided, however, that a solid fence, such as wood board, shall not be allowed. Required fencing shall be constructed within thirty days of the fire, or the completion of any fire investigation, whichever is later. 
(Ord. 688 § 2(part), 2002)  
8.28.030 - Secured openings. 
Where a structure fire has occurred, and the building official has declared the structure to be sub-standard or dangerous within the meaning of Rohnert Park Municipal Code, Chapter 15.12, Uniform Housing Code, Section 1001.1 and Chapter 15.30, Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, Section 302, the property owner shall secure each opening, such as a garage door, entry and exit doors and windows to the structure, so as to prevent entry within thirty days of the structure fire, or the completion of any fire investigation, whichever is later. Materials used for securing openings shall be plywood or other equivalent material, as approved by the building official. 
(Ord. 688 § 2(part), 2002)  
Chapter 8.30 - COMMERCIAL CANNABIS FACILITIES, CANNABIS DELIVERIES, AND CANNABIS CULTIVATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 914, § 3(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 12, 2017, amended Ch. 8.30, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 8.30, §§ 8.30.010—8.30.050, pertained to marijuana cultivation, processing, delivery, and dispensaries, and derived from Ord. No. 896 , § 4(Exh. A), adopted Feb. 9, 2016. 
 
8.30.010 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  The purpose and intent of this chapter is to prohibit commercial cannabis activities and to regulate private cannabis cultivation, as defined above, within the city limits to the fullest extent allowed under law. 
B.  It is recognized that it is a federal violation under the Controlled Substances Act to possess or distribute cannabis even if for medical purposes. 
C.  There is evidence that commercial cannabis activities, including cultivation, processing, manufacturing, delivery, and sales, can affect the health, safety, and well-being of city residents by increasing the risks of criminal activity, environmental degradation, malodorous odors, and construction and electrical fire hazards. 
( Ord. No. 914 , § 3(Exh. A), 12-12-2017)  
8.30.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Accessory structure" shall mean an "accessory building or use" as defined in Section 17.04.030 of this code. 
B.  "Cannabis" shall have the meaning set forth in Business and Professions Code section 26001(f) and includes all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. "Cannabis" does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. "Cannabis" does not mean "industrial hemp" as defined by Section 11018.5 of the Health and Safety Code. 
C.  "Commercial cannabis activity" has the meaning set forth in Business and Professions Code section 26001(k), and includes the cultivation, possession, manufacture, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, transporting, distribution, or sale of cannabis or cannabis products as provided under MAUCRSA. 
D.  "Commercial cannabis facility" means any building, facility, use, establishment, property, or location where any person or entity establishes, commences, engages in, conducts, or carries on, or permits another person or entity to establish, commence, engage in, conduct, or carry on, any commercial cannabis activity that requires a state license or nonprofit license under Business and Professions Code sections 26000 and following, including but not limited to cannabis cultivation, cannabis distribution, cannabis transportation, cannabis storage, manufacturing of cannabis products, cannabis processing, the sale of any cannabis or cannabis products, and the operation of a cannabis microbusiness. 
E.  "Cultivation" means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis. 
F.  "MAUCRSA" means the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act as codified in Division 10 of the Business and Professions Code, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
G.  "Outdoor" means any location within the city of Rohnert Park that is not within a fully enclosed and secure structure. 
H.  "Private residence" shall mean a house, an apartment unit, a mobile home, or other similar dwelling. 
( Ord. No. 914 , § 3(Exh. A), 12-12-2017)  
8.30.030 - Commercial cannabis facilities. 
Commercial cannabis facilities are prohibited in all zones and districts in the city. No person or entity may establish or operate a commercial cannabis facility within city limits. No property owner may allow its property to be used by any person or entity as a commercial cannabis facility. 
( Ord. No. 914 , § 3(Exh. A), 12-12-2017)  
8.30.040 - Cannabis deliveries. 
No state-licensed commercial cannabis facility may deliver or transport cannabis to any person or property located in the city. 
( Ord. No. 914 , § 3(Exh. A), 12-12-2017)  
8.30.050 - Cannabis cultivation; regulations. 
A.  No person may cultivate cannabis at any location within the city, except that a person may cultivate no more than six living cannabis plants inside a private residence. Such cultivation may only occur in residences that are fully enclosed and secured against unauthorized entry. 
B.  All persons cultivating cannabis inside a private residence, shall comply with the following: 
1.  All planting, cultivation, harvesting, drying, and processing (or similar actions) of cannabis plants, and the cannabis produced by the plants, shall be conducted entirely inside a private residence. 
2.  Not more than six living cannabis plants may be planted, cultivated, harvested, dried, or processed inside a private residence at one time. 
3.  The cannabis cultivation area shall not exceed one hundred square feet in total area for all cannabis plants being cultivated and shall not exceed ten feet in height. 
4.  Cannabis cultivation is not permitted in a greenhouse that is on the property of the private residence unless physically part of the private residence. 
5.  An accessory structure, as defined by this chapter, shall not be used for cannabis cultivation under this section. 
6.  The use of gas products (CO2, butane, etc.) for cannabis cultivation or processing is prohibited. 
7.  Cannabis cultivation lighting shall not exceed one thousand two hundred watts total. 
8.  No living cannabis plants shall be visible, and light, heat, or other environmental impacts associated with personal cultivation shall be detectable, from a public place, right-of-way, or neighboring property. 
9.  All private residences used for cannabis cultivation shall, at all times, comply with all applicable provisions of Title 15 of this code and the California Building Standards Code, as amended from time to time. 
10.  Not more potable water than is reasonably necessary to sustain six living cannabis plants shall be utilized. 
11.  Cannabis cultivation shall not create any public nuisance condition, including but not limited to those conditions set forth in Chapter 1.24 of this code. 
( Ord. No. 914 , § 3(Exh. A), 12-12-2017)  
8.30.060 - Enforcement. 
The city may enforce this chapter in any manner permitted by law. Any violation of this chapter shall be and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall, at the discretion of the city, create a cause of action for injunctive relief. 
( Ord. No. 914 , § 3(Exh. A), 12-12-2017)  
Chapter 8.32 - SMOKING AND SECONDHAND SMOKE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 915 , § 2(Exh. A.), adopted Jan. 23, 2018, amended ch. 8.32 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 8.32, §§ 8.32.010—8.32.120, pertained to use of tobacco and electronic cigarettes, and derived from Ord. No. 813, § 4A, adopted Apr. 28, 2009; Ord. No. 904 , § 2, adopted March 14, 2017. 
 
8.32.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of individuals residing, working, or visiting in the city of Rohnert Park by limiting exposure of secondhand smoke to nonsmokers, especially children; by protecting the public from smoking and smoking-related litter and pollution; and, by affirming and promoting a healthy environment in the city. 
( Ord. No. 915 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-23-2018)  
8.32.020 - Findings. 
A.  Numerous studies have determined that smoking is a major contributor to indoor air pollution. 
B.  The Surgeon General of the United States has documented that breathing secondhand smoke is a significant health hazard, particularly to elderly people, individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with impaired respiratory function. 
C.  Breathing secondhand smoke has been determined to be a health hazard by increasing the incidence of lung cancer, bronchitis, and respiratory infection while decreasing exercise tolerance and respiratory function. 
D.  Non-smokers who suffer from allergies, respiratory diseases, or the negative effects of breathing secondhand smoke or aerosol emissions from electronic cigarettes may experience a loss of job productivity or may be forced to take periodic sick leave because of adverse reactions. 
E.  Persons, particularly employees and tenants in multi-unit buildings, have a right to a smoke free environment if they desire. 
F.  Secondhand smoke exposure causes as many as three hundred thousand children in the United States to suffer from lower respiratory tract infections, exacerbates childhood asthma, and increases the risk of acute chronic, middle ear infections. 
G.  As aerosol emissions from electronic cigarettes have been found to contain as least ten chemicals that are on California's list of chemicals known to cause cancer, birth defects, or other reproductive harm, including acetaldehyde benzene, cadmium, formaldehyde, isoprene, lead, nickel, nicotine, N-nitrosonornicotine, and toluene, secondhand exposure to e-cigarette aerosol is a health concern. 
H.  People exposed to aerosol emissions from electronic cigarettes absorb nicotine, a substance that can cause cancer, birth defects, or reproductive harm, at levels comparable to secondhand smoke, and are also exposed to volatile organic compounds and other particulate matter that can lead to tissue inflammation. 
I.  It is within the city's authority under its police power to implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 915 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-23-2018)  
8.32.030 - Definitions. 
A.  "Business" means the sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, association, nonprofit or other entity formed for public interest or profit-making purposes or that has an employee as defined in this section. 
B.  "Common area" means any area of a multi-unit building which residents of more than one unit of that multi-unit building are entitled to enter or use, including but not limited to halls, pathways, lobbies, courtyards, elevators, stairwells, community rooms, laundry facilities, picnic areas and other shared eating areas, playgrounds, swimming pools, gym facilities, parking garages, parking lots, shared restrooms and shared cooking areas. 
C.  "Electronic smoking device" means an electronic and/or battery operated device, which can provide an inhalable dose of nicotine, cannabis, whether recreational or medicinal, or other vaporized liquids to the person inhaling the device, including, but not limited to, an electronic cigarette, cigar, pipe, or hookah. "Electronic smoking device" does not include any product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for the use in the mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease. 
D.  "Employee" means any person who is employed; retained as an independent contractor by an employer, as defined in this section; or any person who volunteers his or her services for any employer, association, business, nonprofit or volunteer entity. 
E.  "Employer" means any person, partnership, corporation, association, nonprofit, or other entity who employs or retains the services of one or more persons or supervises volunteers. 
F.  "Enclosed area" means closed in by a roof and four walls (with the appropriate openings for egress and ingress). This would include but not be limited to lobbies, lounges, waiting areas, elevators, hallways, restrooms, stairwells, common areas (e.g., laundry and recreation rooms within a multi-unit building), that are a structural part of the building. 
G.  "Existing unit" means a unit that was issued a certificate of occupancy or received a final inspection prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
H.  "Landlord" means any person who owns property let for residential use, any person who lets property, and any person who manages such property, except that "landlord" does not include a master tenant who sublets a unit as long as the master tenant sublets only a single unit of a multi-unit residence. 
I.  "Multi-unit building" means a building or portion thereof that contains two or more units with one or more shared walls, floors or ceilings, including but not limited to apartments, residential cooperatives, residential condominiums, duplexes, residential care facilities for seniors licensed by the state of California and other attached housing. "Multi-unit residence does not include: 
1.  A hotel or motel; 
2.  A mobile home park; 
3.  A campground; 
4.  A single-family detached residence; 
5.  A single-family home with an attached or detached second dwelling unit as defined by Government Code Section 6582.2 when permitted pursuant to local ordinance and/or applicable state law. 
J.  "New unit" means a unit within a multi-unit building that is issued a certificate of occupancy or final inspection on or after January 12, 2018, and a unit that is leased or rented for the first time on or after January 12, 2018. 
K.  "Nonprofit entity" means any entity that meets the requirements of California Corporations Code Section 5003 as well as any corporation, unincorporated association or other entity created for charitable, religious, philanthropic, educational, political, social or similar purposes, the net proceeds of which are committed to the promotion of the objectives or purposes of the entity and not to private gain. A public agency is not a nonprofit within the meaning of this section. 
L.  "Outdoor dining area" means any outdoor area, including streets and sidewalks, which is available to or customarily used by the general public or an employee, and which is designed, established, or regularly used for consuming food or drink. 
M.  "Place of employment" means any area under the control of an employer or business where an employee can be found to frequent during the course of a work day. For example, cafeterias, conference rooms, lobbies, lounges (break rooms), elevators, hallways, restrooms, stairwells, vehicles and work areas. 
N.  "Playground" means any park designed in part to be used by children that has play or sports equipment installed or has been designated or landscaped for play or sports activities, or any similar facility located on public or private school grounds, or on city grounds. 
O.  "Private smokers' lounge" means an area that is attached to and incidental to a tobacco store that may be occupied by persons eighteen years of age or older who intend to ingest or inhale any electronic cigarette, smoking tobacco or tobacco product by means of a pipe, cigar, cigarette or any other method. Private smokers' lounges do not include hookah bars which are prohibited in the city of Rohnert Park pursuant to Municipal Code, Chapter 8.33 (prohibition of head shops, hookah bars, tobacco vending machines and self-service displays). 
P.  "Public place" means any area, publicly or privately owned, which is open to the general public regardless of any fee or age requirement, including but not limited to streets, sidewalks, plazas, and courtyards; clubhouses, meeting halls, and community centers; elevators, restrooms, lobbies, public hallways, and waiting rooms; banks, retail stores, galleries, aquariums, libraries and museums; bars, restaurants, and clubs; and taxis and buses. 
Q.  "Reasonable distance" means a distance that ensures that occupants of an area in which smoking is prohibited are not exposed to secondhand smoke created by smokers outside the area. The distance shall be a minimum of twenty-five horizontal feet. 
R.  "Recreational area" means any area, publicly or privately owned, which is open to the public for recreational purposes regardless of any fee or age requirement, including but not limited to parks, picnic areas, playgrounds, sports fields, golf courses, walking paths, gardens, hiking trails, bike paths, swimming pools, sporting facilities, stadiums, roller and ice skating rinks, skateboard parks, and amusement parks. 
S.  "Service line" means any publicly or privately owned area, including streets and sidewalks, that is designed to be used or is regularly used by one or more persons to receive a service, wait to receive a service, or make a transaction, whether or not such service or transaction involves the exchange of money. The term "service line" includes, but is not limited to, information kiosks, automatic teller machines (ATMs), ticket lines, bus stops or shelters, mobile vendor lines or taxi stands. 
T.  "Smoking" means and includes inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, or pipe, or any other lighted or heated tobacco, cannabis, or any other weed or plant product intended for inhalation, whether natural or synthetic, in any manner or in any form. "Smoking" includes the use of an electronic cigarette, electronic smoking device that creates an aerosol or vapor, in any manner or in any form, or the use of any oral smoking device for the purpose of circumventing the prohibition of smoking. 
U.  "Tobacco product" means any of the following: (i) a product containing, made, or derived from tobacco that is intended for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, or snuff; (ii) an electronic cigarette; or (iii) any component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product, whether or not sold separately. 
V.  "Tobacco store" means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and tobacco accessories and for which the sale of other products is merely incidental. A retail establishment that devotes more than fifty percent of the floor area and/or derives over fifty percent of revenue from tobacco products and tobacco accessories is considered a tobacco store. 
W.  "Unenclosed area" means any area which is not an enclosed area. 
X.  "Unit" means a personal dwelling space within a multi-unit building, even where lacking cooking facilities or private plumbing facilities, including but not limited to a "dwelling unit" as defined in Chapter 17.04 of the Rohnert Park Municipal Code. "Unit" includes but is not limited to an apartment; a common interest development such as a condominium, townhouse or tenant-in-common; a room in a dormitory; a room in a senior citizen residence, nursing home, assisted living facility, or long-term health care facility; a room in a single room occupancy ("SRO") facility; and a room in a homeless shelter. "Unit" also includes any associated exclusive use enclosed area or unenclosed area, such as a private balcony, porch, deck, or patio. 
( Ord. No. 915 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-23-2018)  
8.32.040 - Secondhand smoke—Declaration of a nuisance. 
Secondhand smoke produced in violation of this chapter constitutes a nuisance. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, a private citizen may bring a legal action to abate conduct in violation of this chapter resulting in exposure to secondhand smoke. 
( Ord. No. 915 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-23-2018)  
8.32.050 - Places where smoking is prohibited. 
A.  Enclosed Areas. Smoking shall be prohibited in the following enclosed areas within the city unless specifically exempted pursuant to Section 8.32.060 of this chapter (exceptions) and except in such places in which smoking is already prohibited by state or federal law, in which case the state or federal law shall apply. 
1.  Any place of employment; 
2.  Public places, whether publically or privately operated; 
3.  Recreational areas; 
4.  All buildings and vehicles owned, leased, operated or controlled by the city; 
5.  Multi-unit buildings and enclosed common areas; 
6.  Any elevator, public restroom, service line (i.e. ATM), bus, limousine, taxi cab, train, or other public transportation vehicle; 
7.  Any vehicle that is occupied by a minor (person under the age of eighteen years of age); 
8.  On the premises of a licensed day care center and in a licensed family day care home; and 
9.  On the premises of a licensed, long-term, health care facility. 
B.  Unenclosed Areas. Smoking shall be prohibited in the following unenclosed areas within the city unless regulated by more restrictive state or federal law, in which case the state or federal law applies, or specifically exempted under Section 8.32.060 of this chapter. 
1.  The strip of land which is located approximately one hundred feet south of the boundary of University Park Subdivision, immediately adjacent to the north boundary of Rancho Cotati High School, and within the strip from between the eastern most curb of Snyder Lane to the western most property line of Sonoma State University and better known by the Sonoma County Assessor's Office as: APN's 158-230-065; -066, -069 and 158-220-074 and -075; 
2.  Multi-unit building common areas; except that a person with legal control over a multi-unit building common area, such as a landlord or homeowners' association, may designate a portion of the multi-unit building common area as a smoking area provided that at all times the designated smoking area meets the reasonable distance criteria set out in Section 8.32.050(C) and in Section 8.32.060(D); 
3.  Exclusive-use areas associated with a unit of a multi-unit building, such as a private balcony, porch, deck, or patio; 
4.  Any service line (i.e., ATM), bus stop, taxi stand or phone booth; 
5.  Property owned or controlled by the city; provided, that smoking is permitted on streets, alleys and abutting sidewalks being used in a traditional capacity as pedestrian or vehicular thoroughfares, unless otherwise prohibited by this chapter or other law; 
6.  Any private building or structure that is posted as nonsmoking, except while actively passing on the way to another destination; 
7.  Recreational areas; 
8.  Any business or place of employment in which food is being consumed or where setup, service, and cleanup functions are occurring, including but not limited to: outdoor dining areas, farmers markets, concerts, fairs and other such events; 
9.  Public places, when being used for a public event, including a farmers' market, parade, fair, festival, or any other event which may be attended by the general public; and 
10.  On the premises of a licensed day care center or licensed family day care home. 
C.  Smoking shall be prohibited within twenty-five feet of any entrance, doorway, window, opening, crack, or vent into an enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited under subsection A of this section, and within twenty-five feet of an unenclosed area where smoking is prohibited under subsection B of this section, except while actively passing on the way to another destination and provided smoke does not enter any area in which smoking is prohibited. 
D.  Nothing in this chapter prohibits any person, employer, or nonprofit entity with legal control over any property from prohibiting smoking on any part of such property, even if smoking is not otherwise prohibited in that area. 
( Ord. No. 915 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-23-2018)  
8.32.060 - Exceptions. 
Notwithstanding Section 8.32.050, the following are exceptions to the smoking prohibitions for enclosed and unenclosed areas. 
A.  A private smokers' lounge attached to a tobacco store, subject to the following: 
1.  The tobacco store must have a conditional use permit and be located on a site that is zoned for "C-R" - Regional Commercial land uses; 
2.  The tobacco store shall have a minimum separation of five hundred feet between the use and a school, religious assembly, public facility, multi-unit residential development or another tobacco store; and 
3.  The tobacco store shall not include a head shop or hookah bar. The city of Rohnert Park prohibits head shops and hookah bars pursuant to Municipal Code, Chapter 8.33 (prohibition of head shops, hookah bars, tobacco vending machines and self-service displays). 
B.  Medical research or treatment sites, if smoking is integral to the research and treatment being conducted. 
C.  A private residence, unless expressly prohibited by Sections 8.32.050 (prohibition on smoking in enclosed areas and unenclosed areas) e.g., licensed day care facility, licensed health care facility or multi-unit residential development. 
D.  As stipulated in Section 8.32.050(B)(2), a portion of the common area of a multi-unit building may be designated as a smoking area subject to the following provisions: 
1.  Must be located at least twenty-five feet from any enclosed area where smoking is prohibited; 
2.  Must not include, and must be at least twenty-five feet from any unenclosed area primarily used by children including, but not limited to, areas improved or designated for play or swimming; 
3.  Must have a clearly marked perimeter; 
4.  Must be identified by conspicuous signs; and 
5.  Must not overlap with any area in which smoking is otherwise prohibited by this chapter 
E.  Public streets, alleys and abutting sidewalks, unless otherwise prohibited, and only when the streets, alleys or abutting sidewalks are being used in their traditional capacity as pedestrian or vehicular thoroughfares to travel from one destination to another. 
F.  Private automobiles. 
( Ord. No. 915 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-23-2018)  
8.32.070 - Duty of employer, business, nonprofit entity, or landlord. 
A.  No employer, business, nonprofit entity, or landlord shall knowingly or intentionally permit smoking in an area that is under the control of an employer, business, nonprofit entity, or landlord and in which smoking is prohibited. 
B.  No employer, business, nonprofit entity, or landlord shall knowingly or intentionally permit the presence or placement of ash receptacles, such as, without limitation, ash trays or cans, within an area which is under the control of the employer, business, nonprofit entity, or landlord, and in which smoking is prohibited, including, without limitation, inside the perimeter of any reasonable distance required by this chapter. 
C.  Any employer or business entity that permits a nonemployee access to its place of employment or business on a regular basis has not acted knowingly or intentionally if it has taken the following reasonable steps to prevent smoking by a nonemployee: 
1.  Posted clear and prominent signs, as follows: 
a.  Where smoking is prohibited throughout the building or structure, a sign stating "No Smoking" shall be posted. The "No Smoking" sign shall be of letters that are a minimum of one inch in height or the international "no smoking" symbol. The sign shall be clearly and conspicuously posted on the exterior of every building or other place where smoking is controlled by this chapter, by the owner, operator, manager, or other person having control of such building or other place. The sign shall include the distance limitations contained in Sections 8.32.050(A)(4) and (5) of this chapter as applicable; and 
b.  Where smoking is permitted in designated areas of the building or structure, a sign stating "Smoking Is Prohibited Except in Designated Areas" shall be posted at each entrance to the building or structure. 
2.  Has requested, when appropriate, that a nonemployee who is smoking refrain from smoking. 
D.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any employer, business entity or person who controls any area may declare that any part of such area in which smoking would otherwise be permitted to be a nonsmoking area. 
E.  Every landlord of a multi-unit building, as defined in this chapter, in order to demonstrate compliance with the applicable provisions in this chapter, shall at a minimum include in every lease or rental agreement a provision prohibiting any smoking within any such unit, including any exclusive use areas such as patios, balconies and porches, as well as in common areas and on the property, as a whole. Such provision, which may be incorporated by amendment to house rules applicable to the property, shall (1) state that any violation of the smoking prohibition by, through or under control of the tenant be construed as a material breach of the lease or rental agreement, and (2) be included in any rental or lease agreement at the soonest date possible for those units already in existence and occupied pursuant to a lease other than a month-to-month lease as of the effective date of the ordinance. Units rented or leased on a month-to-month basis, and owner-occupied multi-unit building residences shall be converted to nonsmoking no later than 60 days from the effective date of this ordinance [from which this section derived]. 
F.  Compliance with the requirement set forth in subsection E of this section shall not excuse the landlord of a multi-unit building from taking appropriate steps to ensure tenant compliance with this chapter, landlord shall be prepared to respond to and address complaints from other tenants on the property of violations of the smoking prohibitions. 
G.  For purposes of this chapter, appropriate steps shall include the following 
1.  Posting signs in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
2.  Sending every tenant written information on an annual basis for the first three years following the adoption of this ordinance about the requirements of this chapter, to include no smoking requirements and the location, if any, of a designated smoking area on the property. 
3.  Notifying each tenant who is the subject of a smoking complaint of the requirements of this chapter as well as the fact that a compliant was lodged against the tenant and encouraging compliance. 
H.  So long as the landlord can demonstrate that it has implemented all of the appropriate steps towards compliance with this ordinance, landlord shall not be found in violation of the ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 915 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-23-2018)  
8.32.080 - Nonretaliation. 
No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner, retaliate against any employee or applicant for employment because such employee or applicant exercises any rights afforded by this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 915 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-23-2018)  
8.32.090 - Violations and penalties. 
A.  Any violation of any prohibition of this chapter is an infraction, punishable by a fine not to exceed that which is set by Municipal Code Chapter 1.16 (general provisions). 
B.  Smoking in any area where smoking is prohibited by this chapter constitutes a public nuisance and may be abated as such including the application of any of the enforcement remedies provided in the city of Rohnert Park's Municipal Code or under any applicable state or federal statute or pursuant to any other lawful power the city may possess. 
C.  Any private person who claims violation of this chapter may bring a civil action for damages or for injunctive relief in accordance with applicable laws governing such civil actions. 
( Ord. No. 915 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-23-2018)  
8.32.100 - Interpretation. 
This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where is it otherwise restricted by state or federal law. 
( Ord. No. 915 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-23-2018)  
8.32.110 - Effective date. 
The provisions of this chapter and any amendments thereto shall be effective thirty days from and after the date of adoption and publication or posting as required by law. 
( Ord. No. 915 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-23-2018)  
8.32.120 - Statutory severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence or clause or phrase of this chapter is, for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the chapter. 
( Ord. No. 915 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-23-2018)  
Chapter 8.33 - PROHIBITION OF HEAD SHOPS, HOOKAH BARS, TOBACCO VENDING MACHINES AND SELF-SERVICE DISPLAYS 
 
8.33.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to detail the prohibition of head shops, hookah bars, tobacco vending machines and tobacco self-service displays within the City of Rohnert Park. 
(Ord. No. 813, § 4C, 4-28-2009)  
8.33.020 - Findings. 
A.  The Surgeon General of the United States and local public health agencies and private health organizations have found that cigarettes and other tobacco products are easily available to minors from vending machines, tobacco retailers, and shoplifting. 
B.  The U.S. Centers for Disease Control have found that at least four hundred and thirty-four thousand Americans die each year from tobacco-caused diseases. The Surgeon General of the United States and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services have found that a majority of those Americans who die of tobacco caused diseases became addicted to nicotine in tobacco products as minors. 
C.  The National Institute on Drug Abuse has concluded that there is a strong correlation between drug use and violence and that head shops promote the use of illegal or illicit drugs. 
D.  Strong legislative action is needed to curtail the wide availability of all types of paraphernalia, tobacco and tobacco products. 
(Ord. No. 813, § 4C, 4-28-2009)  
8.33.030 - Definitions. 
A.  "Head shop" means a retail outlet that receives ninety percent or more of its gross revenues from the sale of paraphernalia related to the consumption of cannabis, other recreational drugs and/or new age herbs. Products typically include but are not limited to, water pipes, bongs, roach clips, pipes, rolling papers, rolling machines, and whipped cream chargers containing nitrous oxide. 
B.  "Hookah bar" means a business location that provides for the ingestion, inhalation or consumption of tobacco or tobacco products by way of an apparatus which includes, but is not limited to the following parts: a water vessel, a bowl for holding combustible tobacco or tobacco products and an inhalation hose or tube. Hookah bar does not include a private smokers' lounge attached to a tobacco shop. 
C.  "Self-service display" means the open display of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia in a manner that is accessible to the general public without the assistance of the retailer or employee of the retailer. 
D.  "Tobacco paraphernalia" means cigarette papers or wrappers, blunt wrap, pipes, holders of smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines or other instruments or things designed for the smoking or ingestion of tobacco products. 
E.  "Tobacco product" means any product containing tobacco leaf, including but not limited to, bidis, chewing tobacco, cigarettes, cigars, dipping tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff, or any other preparation of tobacco. 
F.  "Vending machine" means a machine, appliance, or other mechanical device operated by currency, token, debt card, credit card, or any other form of payment that is designed or used for vending purposes. 
(Ord. No. 813, § 4C, 4-28-2009)  
8.33.040 - Distribution and uses. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person, business or other entity to operate a head shop or hookah bar. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person, business or other entity to sell, offer to sell, or permit to be sold any cigarette or other tobacco product or paraphernalia from a vending machine. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person, business, or other entity to display tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia by means of a self-service display or to engage in tobacco retailing by means of a self-service display. 
(Ord. No. 813, § 4C, 4-28-2009)  
8.33.050 - Violations and penalties. 
A.  Every act prohibited or declared unlawful by the provisions of this chapter shall constitute an infraction, and each day or portion thereof that such violation is in existence shall be a new and separate offense as set forth in Chapter 1.25. The fourth and any additional violations within any twelve consecutive month period may be charged as a misdemeanor pursuant to Chapter 1.16 of the Rohnert Park Municipal Code. 
B.  Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by administrative penalties as prescribed in Chapter 1.25 of the Rohnert Park Municipal Code. 
C.  In addition to any other remedy provided by the Rohnert Park Municipal Code or by state law or any other law, the city may commence action or proceedings for the abatement, removal and enjoinment of any violation of this chapter in the manner provided by law. 
D.  In addition to the penalties and remedies set forth above, anyone violating a provision(s) of this chapter shall be subject to having any other related permits or licenses revoked by the City of Rohnert Park for said violation. 
(Ord. No. 813, § 4C, 4-28-2009)  
8.33.060 - Nonretaliation. 
No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner, retaliate against any employee or applicant for employment because such employee or applicant exercises any rights afforded by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 813, § 4C, 4-28-2009)  
8.33.070 - Interpretation. 
This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where is it otherwise restricted by state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 813, § 4C, 4-28-2009)  
8.33.080 - Effective date. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be effective thirty days from and after the date of its adoption and publication or posting as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 813, § 4C, 4-28-2009)  
8.33.090 - Statutory severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence or clause or phrase of this chapter is, for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the chapter. 
(Ord. No. 813, § 4C, 4-28-2009)  
Chapter 8.34 - USE PERMITS FOR ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
8.34.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Alcoholic beverage" means any beverage fit for consumption which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume. 
"Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC)" means the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. 
"Alcoholic beverage establishment" means any off-sale or on-sale alcoholic beverage establishment. 
"Alcoholic beverage establishment, off-sale" means any business where alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption off of the establishment's premises including, but not limited to, any business that has obtained or intends to obtain an ABC license type 20 or 21. 
"Alcoholic beverage establishment, on-sale" means any business where alcoholic beverages are sold or served for consumption on the premises and which is applying for or has obtained an ABC license type 40, 41, 42, 47, 48, 51, 52, 61, 63 and/or 75. 
"City manager" means the city manager or his or her designee. 
"Deemed approved establishment" means any licensed, legal nonconforming alcoholic beverage establishment in existence and lawfully operating in the city immediately prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
"Director of administrative services" means the director of administrative services or his or her designee. 
"Director of public safety" means the director of public safety or his or her designee. 
"Enforcement officer" means the city of Rohnert Park director of public safety or his or her designee. 
"Licensee" means any person or business licensed by the State of California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control actively conducting retail alcohol sales. In any case where a person or business maintains duplicate licenses or catering licenses at a location, such person or business shall be deemed a single "Licensee." 
(Ord. 780 § 1 (part), 2007)  
8.34.020 - Administration. 
The director of public safety is responsible for issuing the use permits required by this chapter, and for carrying out such other responsibilities contained in this chapter. 
The director of public safety is also responsible for monitoring compliance by the owners, operators and employees of an alcoholic beverage establishment with conditions imposed on any use permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, including deemed approved uses, and for initiating appropriate enforcement action in the event of noncompliance. 
The director of administrative services is responsible for collecting all annual permit fees imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 780 § 1 (part), 2007)  
8.34.030 - Use permit required for new or modified alcoholic beverage establishments. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall establish a new on-sale or off-sale licensed alcoholic beverage establishment or substantially modify an existing alcoholic beverage establishment without first obtaining a use permit in the manner provided by this chapter. 
(Ord. 780 § 1 (part), 2007)  
8.34.040 - Application for use permit—Form and content. 
An application for a use permit required by this chapter must be in the form prescribed by the director of public safety and shall contain all of the following information: 
A.  The address of the establishment selling alcoholic beverages; 
B.  The type of ABC license the applicant is seeking for the alcoholic beverage establishment; 
C.  The true and complete name and address of each lender or share holder with a five percent or more financial interest in the proposed business or any other person to whom a share or percentage of the income of the establishment is to be paid; 
D.  For off-sale establishments eleven thousand square feet or less in size, a verification that the establishment is not located within five hundred feet of any existing schools, places of worship, hospitals, parks, playgrounds or other off-sale alcoholic beverage establishments of eleven thousand square feet or less in size; and 
E.  For on-sale establishments with ABC license types 40, 42 and 48 (bars, nightclubs), a verification that the establishment is not located within one thousand feet of any existing schools, places of worship, hospitals, parks, playgrounds or other alcoholic beverage establishments with ABC license type 40, 42 or 48. (Ord. 780 § 1 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 841, § 1, 12-13-2011)  
8.34.050 - Application for use permit—Application fees. 
An application for a use permit required by this chapter shall be accompanied by an application fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council, based on the estimated costs of reviewing and acting on such applications and compliance monitoring and public education. 
(Ord. 780 § 1 (part), 2007)  
8.34.060 - Action on application for a use permit. 
The director of public safety will consider each complete application for a use permit required by this chapter within thirty business days of submittal, and may consider the following prior to making a decision whether to issue the permit. 
A.  The proposed alcoholic beverage establishment is located in a zoning district in which the establishment is a permitted use; 
B.  The proposed establishment will not contribute to an undue concentration of alcohol establishments in the area as defined by Business and Professions Code Section 23958.4(a) or is an establishment for whom the city has made a finding of public convenience or necessity; 
C.  The proposed off-sale establishment is eleven thousand square feet or less in size and is not located within five hundred feet of any existing schools, hospitals, parks, playgrounds or other off-sale alcoholic beverage establishments of eleven thousand square feet or less in size; 
D.  The proposed on-sale establishment with either ABC license type 40, 42 or 48 (bars, nightclubs), a verification that the establishment is not located within one thousand feet of any existing schools, places of worship, hospitals, parks, playgrounds or other alcoholic beverage establishment with ABC license type 40, 42 or 48; 
E.  The proposed establishment is not located in a high-crime area as defined in Business and Professions Code Section 23958.5(a), or where a disproportionate number of police service calls occur. (Ord. 780 § 1 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 841, § 2, 12-13-2011)  
8.34.070 - Conditions of approval. 
When approving an application for a use permit for an alcoholic beverage establishment, the director of public safety shall issue the permit subject to the operational standards and training requirements set forth in Sections 8.34.130 and 8.34.140 of this chapter. 
When approving an application for a use permit for an alcoholic beverage establishment, the planning commission may also impose additional conditions that it determines to be necessary or desirable to insure that the particular use authorized by the permit will be established, operated, and maintained in a way that will prevent nuisances, including but not limited to, premises design conditions that: 
A.  Require the exterior areas of the premises and adjoining parking lots to be illuminated in a manner that provides lighting sufficient to illuminate and make easily discernable the appearance of all persons on or about the premises while not disturbing surrounding residential and commercial areas; 
B.  Require litter and trash receptacles that are placed at accessible locations both within and outside the establishment and that are emptied on a daily basis; 
C.  Prohibit fixtures or furnishings that encourage loitering and nuisance behavior; 
D.  Reduce opportunities for patrons to congregate and obstruct neighboring properties and public rights-of-way; 
E.  Otherwise maximize opportunities for surveillance and control of the premises and areas around the perimeter of the premises, including but not limited to cameras or security guards; and 
F.  Any other conditions deemed appropriate by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 780 § 1 (part), 2007)  
8.34.080 - Appeals from a determination on an application for use permit. 
Any applicant or other person aggrieved by a decision of the director of public safety on an application for a use permit required by this chapter, may appeal the decision of the director of public safety to the city manager within the time and in the manner required by Section 8.34.230 of this chapter. The decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(Ord. 780 § 1 (part), 2007)  
8.34.090 - Posting of conditions of approval. 
Every owner of an alcoholic beverage establishment issued a use permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall post a copy of all operational standards, training requirements and any special conditions of the permit in at least one prominent place within the interior of the establishment where it will be readily visible and legible to the employees and patrons of the establishment. 
(Ord. 780 § 1 (part), 2007)  
8.34.100 - Existing uses deemed approved. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any alcoholic beverage establishment lawfully operating prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter pursuant to an ABC license that authorizes the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for on-site or off-site consumption shall be deemed approved and may continue to lawfully operate without a use permit provided the operation is conducted in compliance with the standards and training requirements set forth in this chapter and has paid the annual permit fee required by Section 8.34.150. 
The continued operation of a deemed approved alcoholic beverage establishment shall require approval of a new use permit in the manner provided by this chapter upon the occurrence of any of the following: 
A.  The establishment changes its type of retail liquor license with the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control; 
B.  There is a substantial modification to the mode or character of operation. As used herein, the phrase "substantial change of mode or character of operation" shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
1.  The off-sale alcoholic beverage establishment increases the floor area or shelf space principally devoted to alcohol sales by twenty-five percent or more; or 
2.  The on-sale alcoholic beverage establishment increases the floor area principally devoted to the alcohol sales by more than two hundred fifty square feet; or 
3.  The alcoholic beverage establishment proposes to reinstate alcohol sales after the ABC license has been either revoked or suspended for a period greater than thirty days by the ABC; or 
4.  The alcoholic beverage establishment proposes to reinstate alcohol sales after a cessation of use for a period of six months or more. 
(Ord. 780 § 1 (part), 2007)  
8.34.110 - Notification to owners. 
Within sixty days following the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the director of public safety shall: 
A.  Notify the owner of each deemed approved alcoholic beverage establishment within the city of the establishment's deemed approved status, authorizing the establishment to lawfully continue its operation in the manner required by this chapter; 
B.  Provide the owner of the establishment with a copy of the provisions of this chapter and call the owner's attention to the requirement that the establishment be operated in accordance with the operational standards set forth in Section 8.34.130; and 
C.  Provide the owner of the establishment with a copy of the permit fees adopted by the city council in accordance with Section 8.34.150 and advise the owner of the amount and due date of the establishment's annual permit fee. 
(Ord. 780 § 1 (part), 2007)  
8.34.120 - Posting of operational standards by deemed approved establishments. 
Every owner of a deemed approved alcoholic beverage establishment shall post a copy of all of the operational standards set forth in this chapter in at least one prominent place within the interior of the establishment where it will be readily visible and legible to the employees and patrons of the establishment. 
(Ord. 780 § 1 (part), 2007)  
8.34.130 - Operational standards for all alcoholic beverage establishments. 
All new and existing alcoholic beverage establishments shall be operated in conformance with the following operational standards: 
A.  Compliance with the state's Alcohol Beverage Control Act. All alcoholic beverage establishments shall be operated in strict compliance with the state's Alcohol Beverage Control Act, together with the conditions of any license issued by ABC to the establishment pursuant to that Act. 
B.  Performance Standards for Outlets. All alcoholic beverage establishments shall take reasonable steps to discourage and correct objectionable conditions that constitute a nuisance, as defined in Chapter 1.24 of this code, and adhere to the following performance standards in parking areas, sidewalks, alleys and areas surrounding the alcoholic beverage establishments and adjacent properties under the control of the subject alcoholic beverage establishment. "Reasonable steps" shall include calling the police in a timely manner, preventive design features, and requesting those engaging in such activities to cease those activities, unless personal safety would be threatened in making that request. Failure to correct these conditions may result in revocation of the "deemed approved" status, thereby requiring approval of a new use permit in the manner provided by this chapter. 
1.  It does not result in adverse effects to the health, peace or safety of persons residing or working in the surrounding area. 
2.  It does not result in jeopardizing or endangering the public health or safety of persons residing or working in the surrounding area. 
3.  It does not result in repeated nuisance activities within the premises or in close proximity to the premises, including but not limited to disturbance of the peace, illegal drug activity, public drunkenness, drinking in public, harassment of passersby, gambling, prostitution, sexual harassment or sexual battery, sale of stolen goods, public urination, theft, assaults, batteries, acts of vandalism, excessive littering, loitering, graffiti, illegal parking, excessive loud noises, especially in the late night or early morning hours, traffic violations, curfew violations, lewd sexual conduct in public, or police detentions and arrests. 
4.  It does not result in violations to any applicable provision of any other city, county, state, or federal regulation, ordinance, or statute including but not limited to sale or service of alcohol to minors, service of intoxicated patrons, failure to adhere to state ABC license conditions or local conditional use permit restrictions. 
5.  Its upkeep and operating characteristics are compatible with and will not adversely affect the livability or appropriate development of abutting properties and the surrounding area. 
6.  A copy of the performance standards shall be posted in a conspicuous and unobstructed place visible from the entrance of the establishment for public review. 
(Ord. 780 § 1 (part), 2007)  
8.34.140 - Training requirements for all alcoholic beverage establishments. 
A.  Training. All sellers/servers of alcoholic beverages shall complete an approved course in "Responsible Beverage Sales" (RBS) within sixty days of hire for employees hired after the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter or within six months of the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter for existing employees. 
B.  Certified Programs. To satisfy the requirements of this section, a certified program must meet the standards of the California Coordinating Council on Responsible Beverage Service (CCC/RBS) or other certifying/licensing body designated by the state of California. 
(Ord. 780 § 1 (part), 2007)  
8.34.150 - Annual permit fees. 
The city council shall establish by resolution an annual use permit fee that shall be imposed on each alcoholic beverage establishment issued a use permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, including any new or modified establishment or deemed approved establishment issued a permit pursuant to this chapter. The annual use permit fee shall be assessed for each alcoholic beverage establishment on a sliding scale based on: 
A.  The hours of operation that alcohol is sold at the establishment; 
B.  The volume of alcohol sales at the establishment; 
C.  The number of police calls for service at the establishment; 
D.  The estimated annual costs of the police services necessary to monitor and enforce the operational standards and other use permit conditions and requirements for all establishments within that license category; and 
E.  The estimated staff costs to bill and collect the annual permit fee. 
(Ord. 780 § 1 (part), 2007)  
8.34.160 - Billing and payment. 
All annual permit fees imposed on an alcoholic beverage establishment operating under a use permit issued in the manner provided for by this chapter including "deemed approved" establishments shall be billed by the administrative services department on or before the first day of January of each year. The fee is due and payable immediately upon receipt, and will be delinquent if not paid within thirty days of the bill's mailing. 
(Ord. 780 § 1 (part), 2007)  
8.34.170 - Administrative review of fee. 
Licensee may to challenge the amount of the annual use permit fee in accordance with Section 3.32.060 of this code. 
(Ord. 780 § 1 (part), 2007)  
8.34.180 - Establishment of alcohol permit fee account. 
A.  The city shall establish an "Alcohol Permit Fee Account" for the collection of the fees described in this chapter. 
B.  Funds from the "Alcohol Permit Fee Account" shall be used only to recover the cost of the services including education, inspections, enforcement operations and administrative hearings, related to the monitoring and enforcement of the performance standards, conditions of operation and regulations established for licensed alcohol establishments in this chapter. 
(Ord. 780 § 1 (part), 2007)  
8.34.190 - Report of expenditure of fees to be collected. 
A.  Not later than the last meeting of October in each calendar year, the enforcement officer shall submit to the city council a report on the expenditures of the total of annual alcohol permit fees collected. 
B.  The report shall set forth such matters as: 
1.  The prioritization of problems regarding enforcement of the performance standards, conditions and regulations as set forth in this chapter related to the operation of licensed alcohol establishments in the city of Rohnert Park. 
2.  Methods of mitigating such problems, through prevention, education and enforcement of the performance standards, conditions and regulations. 
3.  The specific allocation of the fees to be collected to activities described in the report. 
(Ord. 780 § 1 (part), 2007)  
8.34.200 - Violations. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to operate a new or modified alcoholic beverage establishment: 
1.  Without a valid use permit issued in the manner provided by this chapter; or 
2.  In violation of any requirements and conditions of any applicable use permit issued pursuant to this chapter, including, but not limited to, any operational standards and training requirements. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to operate a deemed approved alcoholic establishment in violation of the operational standards set forth in this chapter and incorporated into a permit issued to the establishment pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 780 § 1 (part), 2007)  
8.34.210 - Penalties. 
A person shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1.16 of this code if: 
A.  The person operates a new or modified alcoholic beverage establishment without a use permit required by this chapter. 
B.  The person has been issued a use permit for an alcoholic beverage establishment in the manner provided by this chapter, and causes or permits the establishment to be operated in violation of the requirements or conditions of the use permit. 
(Ord. 780 § 1 (part), 2007)  
8.34.220 - Inspections. 
All alcoholic beverage establishments within the city shall be regularly inspected by the public safety department to determine whether the establishments are being operated in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 780 § 1 (part), 2007)  
8.34.230 - Preliminary notice of violation and hearing. 
A.  Preliminary Notice. Where the public safety department determines that an alcoholic beverage establishment is operating in violation of the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, any of the requirements and conditions of the use permit issued to such establishment in the manner provided by this chapter, the department will issue a notice to the permittee that describes the nature of the violation, the corrective action to be taken, and the time within the corrective action must be completed. 
B.  Notice of Hearing. If the licensee has not taken corrective action with the time specified, the public safety director shall provide the licensee with notice of a hearing. The notice shall specify the facts which constitute the violation, specify the time, date, and place of the hearing, and state that the licensee may be represented by counsel or other interested persons. Said notice shall be served at least fifteen days prior to the hearing by mailing by certified mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the licensee's residence as indicated in the most recent use permit application on file. 
C.  Hearing. At the hearing, the licensee, his or her counsel, and any other interested person(s) shall have the right to present evidence as to the facts upon which the public safety director proposes to revoke the use permit. 
D.  Notice of Decision. If after said hearing, the public safety director finds that any of the grounds for revocation exist, he or she shall within ten days after the hearing serve by certified mail, postage prepaid, a notice of decision upon the licensee and all interested persons participating in the hearing. Said notice shall specify the findings of the public safety director, the ground or grounds for his decision, and shall indicate the appeal procedure. 
E.  Effective Date of Decision. The decision of the public safety director shall be final and binding on all interested parties ten days after the notice of decision is mailed, unless an appeal is filed. 
F.  Appeal. The decision of the public safety director to revoke a use permit may be appealed in writing to the city manager within ten days of mailing of the notice of decision. The city manager shall hear the appeal within thirty days of receipt of the written appeal. At the hearing, the appellant may present evidence in support of the contentions stated in the notice of appeal. Any interested person(s), including the public safety director, may be allowed to participate in the hearing and present evidence in support of the decision of the public safety director. The city manager shall render a written decision, including the grounds upon which the revocation is either upheld or overturned, within fifteen days of the date of the appeal hearing. A copy of the city manager's decision shall be served by certified mail, postage prepaid, upon the appellant and all parties to the hearing requesting same. The decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(Ord. 780 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 8.36 - MASSAGE BUSINESSES AND ESTABLISHMENTS, MASSAGE PROVIDERS, AND MASSAGE THERAPISTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ch. 8.36 has been retitled as set out herein, at the editor's discretion, to make "Massage Business" plural in agreement with the rest of the title. 
 
8.36.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases will have the meaning set forth in this section: 
"Approved school" means an institution that provides massage therapy education and training as such term is defined in Section 4601 of the Massage Therapy Act. 
"CAMTC" means the California Massage Therapy Council created under the Massage Therapy Act. 
"CAMTC certificate" means a current and valid certificate issued by the CAMTC to a massage provider or a massage therapist. 
"Employee" includes independent contractors. 
"Massage" or "massage therapy" means the application of various techniques to the muscular structure and soft tissues of the human body, including, but not limited to, any method of pressure or friction against, stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, compressing, pounding, vibrating, rocking or stimulating of external surfaces of the body with hands or the aid of any apparatus or other appliances or devices, with or without supplementary aids such as rubbing alcohol, liniment, antiseptic, oil, powder, cream, lotion, ointment, or other similar preparations for any consideration or compensation. 
"Massage business or establishment" means a business or establishment, including a sole proprietor or independent contractor, that offers massage therapy within the city, whether at a fixed place of business or at a location designated by the patron, and also includes all businesses or establishments where massage therapy is provided as an ancillary service such as clubs, gyms, day spas and professional offices where such massage therapy is not otherwise exempt under this chapter. 
"Massage provider" means any person who has been certified as a massage provider and maintains a current and valid CAMTC certificate under the Massage Therapy Act. 
"Massage therapist" means any person who has been certified as a massage therapist and maintains a current and valid CAMTC certificate under the Massage Therapy Act. 
"Massage Therapy Act" means Chapter 10.5 of Division 2 of the California Business and Professions Code (beginning at Section 4600). 
"Outcall massage therapy" means the performance of massage therapy at a location designated by the patron and not at a fixed location massage business or establishment. 
"Owner" means (1) a sole proprietor of, (2) a general partner of, or (3) each individual person who holds a twenty percent or greater ownership interest in, a massage business or establishment. 
"Specified criminal offense" means: 
1.  Within five years of the date of the filing of the application has pleaded guilty or nolo contendere to, or been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of a misdemeanor or felony crime involving sexual misconduct, including but not limited to (1) Chapter 1 of Title 9 of the Penal Code (Sections 261—269) relating to sexual crimes; (2) Chapter 8 of Title 9 of the Penal Code (Sections 314—318.6) relating to indecent exposure, obscenity and disorderly establishments; or (3) Penal Code Section 647(a) or (b) relating to prostitution; 
2.  Any similar offenses under the criminal code or penal of this state or any other states or countries; or 
3.  Having permitted, through an act of omission or commission, an employee or agent to engage in any type of moral turpitude or sexual misconduct offense listed in subsection 1 or 2 above (the conduct of the employee or agent, if such resulted in a conviction or a plea of nolo contendere or guilty, will be considered imputed to the principal). 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. B), 5-26-2015)  
8.36.020 - Required CAMTC certificate and business license. 
A.  Massage Businesses and Establishments. 
1.  No person may engage in, conduct or carry on, or permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on in any location within the city, a massage business or establishment unless all persons providing massage therapy at or on behalf of the massage business or establishment obtain and maintain a valid CAMTC certificate except as provided in subsection C below. 
2.  Each massage business or establishment operating within the city must obtain and maintain a massage business license as provided in Section 8.36.040. 
B.  Massage Therapy. No person may engage in, conduct, carry on, or perform massage therapy within the city unless such person obtains and maintains a valid CAMTC certificate, except as provided in subsection C below. 
C.  Grace Period. Any person previously licensed, pursuant to Chapter 9.80 of this code, to provide massage services within the city as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter but not holding a CAMTC certificate may continue to practice massage therapy within the city until July 9, 2016. Following this date, no person may engage in, conduct, carry on, or perform massage therapy within the city unless such person has obtained and maintains a valid CAMTC certificate. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. B), 5-26-2015)  
8.36.030 - Exceptions. 
The requirements of this chapter do not apply to: 
A.  Any physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, naturopath, podiatrist, acupuncturist, physical therapist, registered nurse or vocational nurse duly licensed to practice their respective profession in the state. 
B.  Any treatment administered in good faith in the course of the practice of any healing art or profession by any person licensed to practice any such art or profession under the California Business and Professions Code or any other law of the state. 
C.  Barbers, cosmetologists, estheticians, and manicurists licensed to practice their respective profession under the laws of the state while performing activities within the scope of their license, provided that such massage is limited solely to the neck, face, scalp, feet, hands, arms, and lower limbs up to the knees, of their patrons. 
D.  State-licensed hospitals, nursing homes, and other state-licensed physical or mental health facilities and their employees. 
E.  Persons who provide massage therapy to athletes or athletic teams, facilities or events, so long as such persons do not practice massage therapy as their primary occupation within the city. 
F.  Registered schools and their employees that provide massage therapy education or training and their students in training, provided that such students perform massage therapy only under the direct personal supervision of an instructor. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. B), 5-26-2015)  
8.36.040 - Massage business license. 
A.  License Required. The owner of each massage business or establishment, and any massage provider or massage therapist that desires to work as an independent contractor at a fixed location massage business or establishment or who desires to provide outcall massage therapy as an independent contractor, must obtain a massage business license prior to commencing operation or providing any massage therapy and must thereafter maintain a valid massage business license. 
B.  License Application. The application for a massage business license will be made in conjunction with the application for a business license and tax under Title 5 of this code. Each applicant for a massage business license must provide the following additional information with the application: 
1.  Business, occupation or employment history of the owner for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
2.  The business license history of the owner, including whether such person, in previously operating in this city or another city or state under license, has had such license revoked or suspended, and the reason for such action. 
3.  Whether the owner has been convicted of or permitted any specified criminal offense. If an owner does not have a CAMTC certificate, then the owner must obtain a Live Scan background check. 
4.  The names and addresses of each massage provider and massage therapist providing massage therapy at or on behalf of the business or establishment and proof that each such provider or therapist has a CAMTC certificate or equivalent as set forth in Section 8.36.020(C). 
5.  Such other reasonable identification and information as the chief of police may require in order to discover the truth of the matters required to be set forth in the application. 
C.  Issuance or Denial of License. 
1.  Upon receipt of a complete application, the chief of police will cause: (a) the inspection of the proposed premises of any fixed location massage business or establishment, and (b) the massage business license to be issued if all applicable requirements of this chapter and this code are satisfied. 
2.  If the chief of police finds that any of the applicable requirements of this chapter or this code are not satisfied, including any conviction for or the permitting of a specified criminal offense, or that the applicant has provided materially false information, the application will be denied. 
3.  The decision of the chief of police denying the massage business license application may be appealed pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 8.36.090 of this code. 
D.  License Renewal. 
1.  A massage business license will automatically renew with the renewal of the business's or establishment's annual business license and tax renewal under Title 5 of this code, provided that all applicable requirements of this chapter and this code remain satisfied, and the applicable business license renewal fee is paid. 
2.  For persons who are massage therapy sole providers or independent contractors, their massage business license will expire at the time of expiration of their CAMTC certificate unless they renew their massage business license by providing proof of the renewal of their CAMTC certificate and pay the applicable massage business license renewal fee. 
E.  Transfer of License Prohibited. Upon the sale or transfer of any interest in a massage business or establishment, the business license will become void. The person acquiring the interest in a massage business or establishment must submit a new massage business license application and receive approval of such license in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
F.  Notification of Changes in Registered Massage Providers and Therapists. Each licensee must submit to the Finance Department the names and applicable CAMTC certificate of any new massage providers or massage therapists not previously included in the list required under subsection B.4 above who are hired or retained to provide massage therapy at or on behalf of the business or establishment prior to such person commencing the provision of any massage therapy services. In addition, any discharge or termination of the services of a massage provider or massage therapist must be reported to the finance department within five business days of such event. 
G.  Revocation of License. A massage business license may be revoked pursuant the procedures set forth in this chapter. 
H.  Effect of License Denial or Revocation. No person may apply for a license under this chapter within at least one year from the date of denial or revocation of such license. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. B), 5-26-2015)  
8.36.050 - Massage facilities and operational regulations. 
A.  Facility Requirements. Each fixed location massage business or establishment must comply with the following facility requirements: 
1.  A recognizable and legible sign complying with the requirements of this code posted at the main entrance identifying the location as a massage business or establishment. 
2.  In addition to the minimum lighting required by the provisions of Title 15 of this code, at least one artificial light of not less than forty watts must be provided in each room or enclosure where massage therapy is to be performed on patrons. 
3.  Closed cabinets must be provided and utilized for the storage of clean linen and towels. Appropriate receptacles must also be provided for the storage of all soiled linen and towels. 
4.  Adequate dressing, locker and toilet facilities must be provided for patrons. A minimum of one dressing room containing a separate locker for each patron to be served, which locker must be capable of being locked, and a minimum of one toilet and one wash basin must be provided by every massage establishment. Such basin must provide soap or detergent, hot and cold running water, and sanitary towels placed in permanently installed dispensers at all times. 
5.  Massage table or chair. A massage table or chair must be provided in each massage room and the massage must be performed on this massage table or chair with the exception of "Thai," "Shiatsu" or similar forms of massage therapy, which may be provided on a padded mat on the floor. The massage tables must be positioned so that there is at least three feet from the nearest wall to each side to allow access to the table on all sides. Foam pads at least two inches thick with a minimum width of two feet and a maximum width of four feet may be used on a massage table or floor pad, as provided above, and must be covered with durable, washable plastic or other waterproof material. Beds and floor mattresses are not permitted on the premises. 
B.  Operational Requirements. Each fixed location massage business or establishment and any massage business or establishment providing outcall massage therapy, must comply with the following operational requirements, as applicable: 
1.  General Cleaning. All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and all other physical facilities for the establishment must be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments, and toilet facilities must be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation . Bathtubs must be thoroughly cleaned after each use. (Not applicable to outcall massage therapy.) 
2.  Towels and Linen. Clean and sanitary towels, sheets and linens must be provided in sufficient quantity. Towels, sheets and linens must not be used by more than one person. Reuse of such linen is prohibited unless such linen has first been laundered. Heavy white paper may be substituted for sheets, provided that such paper is used once for each person and then discarded into a sanitary receptacle. 
3.  Patron Garments. All bathrobes, bathing suits or other garments provided for the use of patrons must be either disposed of after any use or laundered as provided in subsection B.2 above. 
4.  Locked Doors. All exterior doors (except a rear entrance for staff only) and interior doors must remain unlocked during business hours, except in the case of a sole proprietorships with no employees. (Not applicable to outcall massage therapy.) 
5.  Service List and Prices. Each massage therapy service offered, the price of the service and the minimum length of time such service will be performed must be posted in a conspicuous public location in each massage business or establishment. The services must be described in readily understandable terms, all letters and numbers must be not less than one inch in height, and must be in English and such other languages as may be convenient to communicate such services. No services may be performed and no sums may be charged for such services other than those posted. All arrangements for services to be performed must be made in a room in the massage business or establishment that is not used for massage therapy unless no other room exists in the business or establishment. (Not applicable to outcall massage therapy.) 
6.  Register of Employees. Every massage business or establishment must maintain a register of all employees. The register must contain the names of all employees, their home address, age, birth date, gender, height, weight, color of hair, eyes, telephone number, social security number, date of employment and termination, if any, and the duties of each employee. All such information must be maintained in the register for a period of two years following such employee's termination. Such employee register must be available for inspection at the massage business or establishment to representatives of the city during regular business hours. 
7.  Provider and Therapist Attire and Hygiene. To protect patrons from potential health and sanitary hazards, all massage providers and therapists must be clean and must perform all services in full, clean outer garments. Clothing must be of non-transparent material and must provide complete covering from mid-thigh to three inches below the collarbone. 
8.  CAMTC Certificate. All massage providers and therapists must have on his or her person or maintain on the premises their CAMTC certificate identification card or equivalent document showing eligibility to practice under the provisions of Section 8.36.020.C. Such identification card must be provided to city officials upon demand. At least one person who has a CAMTC certificate or Section 8.36.020.C document must be on the premises at all times while the business or establishment is open for business. 
9.  Patron Attire. The patron's genitals, pubic area, anus and a female patron's breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola must be fully draped at all times while any massage provider or therapist is in the massage therapy room or cubicle with the patron. 
10.  Improper Solicitation or Performance of Services. Except to the extent required, in writing, by a state-licensed medical provider, no massage therapy may be provided to a patron that results in intentional contact, or occasional and repetitive contact with the genitals, anus or areola of any patron. No massage provider, therapist, or other person may offer to or perform any act of prostitution as such term is defined in the California Penal Code. No massage provider, therapist or other person may, after the commencement of any service for any patron, advise, suggest or otherwise indicate to such patron that any additional service is available or ask or inquire of such patron whether such patron desires any additional service to be performed at that time, except with respect to services that are publicly posted. (This regulation does not preclude the discussion with a patron in the lobby or public area of additional or alternative massage services that are not posted upon completion of the massage.) No massage provider or massage therapist may perform any service for any patron that was not ordered by such patron prior to the commencement of performance of any service requested. 
11.  Records of Treatments. Each massage business or establishment must keep a record of the date and hour of each treatment, the name and address of the patron, and the name of the massage provider or therapist administering such treatment. Such records must be available for inspection by city representatives for the purposes of law enforcement and for no other purpose. Identical records must be kept for outcall massage therapy services and, in addition, must describe the address where such services were rendered. The records must be maintained for a period of at least two years. 
12.  Access. The following persons may be allowed beyond the front lobby, located directly inside the front door entrance during hours of operation: (i) massage providers and massage therapists; (ii) patrons, who may be accompanied by no more than one family member; and (iii) visitors of massage providers and therapists; provided that such visitor's access is limited to the designated office of the massage business or establishment. Any other persons found beyond the first interior door leading to the inside of the premises, including, but not limited to, hallways, massage rooms, reception/business offices or lounge area will be a violation of this chapter. Nothing contained in this subsection prohibits any employee from being present in hallways, reception/business offices or other areas necessary or relating to such person's employment duties, nor prohibit any authorized repair, maintenance or service personnel from being present in areas necessary to the performance of such person's services, except that no such employee or service personnel may be permitted in any massage room or cubicle while a patron is present in such room or space. 
13.  Licensee Responsibility. Each owner and holder of a massage business license is responsible for the conduct of all employees, agents, independent contractors or other representatives, while on the premises of the massage business or establishment and while providing any massage therapy on behalf of such business of establishment. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. B), 5-26-2015)  
8.36.060 - Inspections. 
Representatives of the city's development services department and public safety department may, from time to time, make an inspection of each fixed location massage business or establishment in the city during regular business hours for the purpose of determining that all applicable laws are met. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. B), 5-26-2015)  
8.36.070 - Coordination with California Massage Therapy Council. 
The chief of police is authorized to report any violations of the Massage Therapy Act or unprofessional conduct by CAMTC certificate holders to the CAMTC. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. B), 5-26-2015)  
8.36.080 - Revocation of business license for massage business. 
A.  Action of Chief of Police. Whenever the chief of police is advised that a permittee is conducting operations under a massage business license in a manner which is contrary to the provisions of this code, in a manner which constitutes a public nuisance, in a manner which is detrimental to the public peace, health, safety or welfare of the city or its inhabitants, or whenever the chief of police is advised that a permittee supplied false information on the permit application, the chief of police shall give notice to such permittee of the violation(s) involved and set forth a period of time allowed for the correction of the violation(s) by the permittee if correction is possible. If the chief of police finds that the violation(s) continue without correction, or if correction is not possible, then the chief of police shall issue an order of revocation. 
B.  Orders of Revocation. An order or revocation issued by the chief of police shall contain a statement of the violation(s) which constitute the basis for the order of revocation. The chief of police shall serve the order of revocation on the permittee, as well as any other interested person requesting a copy of the same. The order of revocation issued by the chief of police shall be final and conclusive in the absence of a timely appeal taken in the time and manner set forth in Section 8.36.090. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. B), 5-26-2015)  
8.36.090 - Appeals. 
A.  Right and Timing of Appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the chief of police to deny, revoke or refuse to renew a massage business license may appeal such decision to the city manager by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk no later than fifteen days following the date the chief of police gives notice of the decision. 
B.  Payment of Appeal Fee. The notice of appeal must be accompanied by the applicable administrative appeal fee established by city council resolution. 
C.  Setting Appeal Hearing. Upon receipt of a timely filed appeal, the city manager will fix a time and place for hearing the appeal. The appeal may be heard by the city manager or a hearing officer designated by the city manager. All references in this section to the city manager include a designated hearing officer. 
D.  Notice of Appeal Hearing. The city clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of the appeal hearing to the appellant, and any other person requesting notice, at least five days prior to the hearing date. 
E.  Appeal Hearing Procedure. At the hearing, the city manager will review the records and files of the chief of police relating to the decision. The city manager shall permit any interested person, including the chief of police and the appellant, to present any relevant evidence bearing on the issues involved in the matter. In conducting the hearing, the city manager is not bound by formal rules of evidence and may accept all reasonably reliable evidentiary material. 
F.  Decision Following Appeal Hearing. Based upon the evidence presented at the hearing, the city manager must determine whether the decision by the chief of police should be affirmed, modified or reversed. The city manager's decision shall be communicated in writing to the appellant within five business days after the hearing is completed and shall state the reasons for the decision. 
G.  Judicial Review. The determination of the city manager will be final. The written notice of decision shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, including a certificate of mailing. The notice shall advise that any action challenging the decision of the city manager must be filed with the superior court of the state pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5, and must further advise that the time period within which judicial review must be sought is ninety days following the date of the city manager's written notice under Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. B), 5-26-2015)  
Chapter 8.37 - ADULT BUSINESS PERMIT 
 
8.37.010 - Intent. 
The intent of this chapter is to regulate adult businesses which, unless closely regulated, may have serious secondary effects on the community. These secondary effects include, but are not limited to: depreciation of property values, increases in vacancy rates in residential and commercial areas, increases in incidences of criminal activity and police service calls, increases in noise, litter and vandalism and the interference with property owners' enjoyment of their property in the vicinity of such businesses. 
It is neither the intent nor effect of this chapter to impose limitations or restrictions on the content of any communicative material. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials, or to deny access by the distributors or exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. 
Nothing in this chapter is intended to authorize, legalize or permit the establishment, operation or maintenance of any business, building or use which violates any city ordinance or any law of the state of California regarding public nuisances, unlawful exposure, sexual conduct, lewdness or obscene or harmful matter or the exhibition or public display thereof. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. B), 5-26-2015)  
8.37.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Adult arcade" means any business establishment or concern containing coin or slug operated or manually or electronically controlled still, motion picture or video machines, projectors, or other image producing devices that are maintained to display images to an individual when those images are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. Such devices are referred to as "adult arcade devices." 
"Adult booth/individual viewing area" means a partitioned or partially enclosed portion of an adult business used for any of the following purposes: 
1.  Where a live or taped performance is presented or viewed, where the performances or images displayed or presented are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; 
2.  Where adult arcade devices are located. 
"Adult business" means any business establishment or concern which as a regular and substantial course of conduct performs or operates as an adult arcade, adult cabaret, adult model studio, adult store, or adult theater, or any combination thereof. It also means any business establishment or concern which as a regular and substantial course of conduct sells or distributes sexually oriented merchandise or sexually oriented material; or any other business establishment or concern which as a regular and substantial course of conduct offers to its patrons products, merchandise, services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. "Adult business" does not include those uses or activities, the regulation of which is preempted by state law. 
"Adult cabaret" means a business establishment that features adult live entertainment. 
"Adult live entertainment" means any physical human body activity, whether performed or engaged in, alone or with other persons, including but not limited to singing, walking, speaking, dancing, acting, posing, simulating, wrestling or pantomiming, in which: 
1.  The performer exposes to public view, with opaque covering (e.g., pasties and g-string), specified anatomical areas; or 
2.  The performance or physical human body activity depicts, describes, or relates to specified sexual activities so long as the specified anatomical areas are covered. 
"Adult model studio" means a business establishment which provides for any form of consideration, the services of a live human model, who, for the purposes of sexual stimulation of patrons, displays specified anatomical areas to be observed, sketched, photographed, filmed, painted, sculpted, or otherwise depicted by persons paying for such services. "Adult model studio" does not include any live art class or any studio or classroom which is operated by any public agency, or any private educational institution that is maintained pursuant to standards set by the board of education of the state of California. 
"Adult store" means any establishment which, as a regular and substantial course of conduct, displays or distributes sexually oriented merchandise or sexually oriented material. 
"Adult theater" means a business establishment or concern which, as a regular and substantial course of conduct, presents adult live entertainment, or motion pictures, videos, digital video disks, slide photographs, or other pictures or electronically generated visual reproductions which is distinguished or characterized by the emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
"Applicant" means all owners of a proposed adult business applying for an adult business permit under this chapter. 
"Code enforcement officer" means a person authorized to enforce certain provisions of this chapter. 
"Director" means the director of the city's development services department or the director's designee. 
"Establishment of an adult business" means any of the following: 
1.  The opening or commencement of any adult business as a new business; 
2.  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult business, to any adult business; 
3.  The addition of any of the adult businesses defined herein to any other existing adult business; or 
4.  The relocation of any such adult business. 
"Hearing officer" means the person designated to hear appeals under Section 8.37.120 or 8.38.060. 
"Lap dance" includes chair dancing, couch dancing, straddle dancing, table dancing, and means an employee or independent contractor of an adult business intentionally touching any patron while engaged in adult live entertainment. 
"On-site manager" means any person designated by the owner as responsible for the day-to-day on-site operation of the adult business. 
"Operate an adult business" means the supervising, managing, overseeing, directing, organizing, controlling or in any way being responsible for or in charge of the premises of an adult business or the conduct or activities occurring on such premises. 
"Operator" means a person who supervises, manages, oversees, directs, organizes, controls or in any other way is responsible for or in charge of the premises of an adult business or the conduct or activities occurring on such premises. 
"Owner" means all persons having a direct or indirect investment in an adult business; provided, however, where such investment is held by a corporation, for the purposes of this chapter, each officer and director of a corporation and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock of such corporation is deemed to be an owner. 
"Performer" means a person who is an employee or independent contractor of an adult business or any other person who, with or without any compensation or other form of consideration, provides adult live entertainment for patrons of an adult business. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, association, partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other form of legal entity. 
"Police chief" means the director of the department of public safety or his or her designee. 
"Sexually oriented material" means any element of sexually oriented merchandise, or any book, periodical, magazine, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film, video, or other written, oral or visual representation which, for purposes of sexual arousal, provides depictions which are characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
"Sexually oriented merchandise" means sexually oriented implements and paraphernalia, including but not limited to: dildos, auto sucks, sexually oriented vibrators, edible underwear, ben wa balls, inflatable orifices, anatomical balloons with orifices, simulated and battery operated vaginas, and similar sexually oriented devices which are designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or sado-masochistic activity or which are characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
"Specified anatomical areas" means: 
1.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals; pubic region; buttocks, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
2.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
"Specified sexual activities" means: 
1.  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 
2.  Human sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; 
3.  Acts of human masturbation, sexual stimulation or arousal, actual or simulated; 
4.  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
5.  Use of human or animal ejaculation; 
6.  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating, or the infliction of pain, or bondage, or restraints; or 
7.  Excretory functions as part of, or in connection with, any of the activities listed in subsections 1 to 6 of this definition. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. B), 5-26-2015)  
8.37.030 - Permit required. 
No person may establish or operate an adult business within the city without first obtaining, and continuing to maintain in full force and effect, an adult business permit and a business license from the city. Every adult business permit is subject to the development and operational standards of this chapter and the regulations of the zoning district in which the business is located. 
The fact that an applicant may possess other types of state or city licenses does not exempt the applicant from the requirement of obtaining an adult business permit pursuant to this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. B), 5-26-2015)  
8.37.040 - Application submittals. 
A.  Application. Any person desiring to obtain an adult business permit must submit an application to the director on the form provided by the city. The application must list all owners of the proposed adult business who are collectively referred to sometimes as the applicant. The application must also list each designated operator and on-site manager if such persons are not owners. The application must contain the following information regarding the owners, operators and on-site managers, as applicable, and the following items: 
1.  Name and address. 
2.  The previous residential addresses of all individuals, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of filing the application and the dates of residence at each. 
3.  Written proof that all individuals are at least eighteen years of age. 
4.  The history of the applicant as to the operation of any adult business or similar business or occupation within five years of the filing of the application. Such information must include a statement as to whether or not each such person, in operating an adult business under a permit or license, has had such permit or license revoked or suspended and the reasons therefore. 
5.  All criminal convictions or offenses described in Section 8.37.060.B.11; and whether any individual is required to register under the provisions of Section 290 of California Penal Code or Section 11590 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
6.  Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the individuals. 
7.  The height, weight, and color of eyes and hair of each individual. 
8.  Fingerprints and two prints of a recent passport size photograph of each individual. 
9.  Business, occupation or employment history of each individual for the five years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
10.  A nonrefundable deposit or fee as set forth by city resolution. 
11.  A narrative description of the proposed business explaining how such business complies or will comply with the applicable development and operational standards specified in Section 8.37.060. 
12.  A site plan designating the building or unit proposed for the adult business and a dimensional interior floor plan depicting how the business complies or will comply with the applicable development and operational standards specified in Section 8.37.060. The site plan and interior floor plan need not be professionally prepared, but must be drawn to a designated scale or to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. 
13.  A lighting plan for all outdoor areas including parking areas. 
14.  If the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company or corporation, documentary proof that such entity was duly formed, and is authorized to do business and is in good standing in the state of California. 
15.  The fictitious name, if any, of the adult business, together with documentary proof of registration of the fictitious name. 
16.  If the applicant does not own the lot or parcel on which the adult business will operate, the property owner or lessor of the premises, or their legally authorized representative, as applicable, must consent to the filing of the application by signing and dating the application. 
17.  A list of all employees and independent contractors, whether they are performers or non-performers, which includes the employee or independent contractor's legal name, mailing address, and satisfactory proof that each person is at least eighteen years of age. 
18.  A statement in writing and dated by the applicant certifying under penalty of perjury that the information contained in the application is true and correct. If the applicant is one or more natural persons, one such person must sign the application under penalty of perjury. If the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company or corporation, a general partner, officer, director or member of the entity must sign the application under penalty of perjury. 
19.  Such other information as the director may reasonably deem necessary. 
B.  Determination of Completeness. The director will determine whether the application contains all the information and items required by the provisions of this chapter. If it is determined that the application is not complete, the applicant will be notified in writing within five business days of the date of receipt of the application that the application is not complete and the reasons for such determination, including any additional information necessary to render the application complete. Within five business days following the receipt of an amended application or supplemental information, the director will again determine whether the application is complete in accordance with the procedures set forth in this subsection. Evaluation and notification will occur as provided above until such time as the application is found to be complete or the application is withdrawn. The applicant will be notified within five days of the date of the application is found to be complete (hereafter "application date"). All notices required by this chapter will be deemed given upon the date any such notice is either deposited in the United States mail or the date upon which personal service of such notice is provided. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. B), 5-26-2015)  
8.37.050 - Review of application. 
A.  The director will promptly cause the investigation of the application and within thirty days of the application date, either issue the permit or send by certified mail a written statement to the applicant setting forth the reasons for denial of the permit. If the director has not issued a decision on the application within thirty days of the application date, the application will be deemed approved, subject to an appeal under Section 8.37.120. 
B.  The director may deny a permit for any of the following reasons: 
1.  An applicant has made one or more material misstatements in the application; 
2.  That the adult business, if permitted, will not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the building, development, fire, health, housing and zoning codes of the city; 
3.  An applicant or any designated operator or on-site manager has pled guilty, nolo contendere or been convicted within three years of the application date of an offense specified in Section 8.37.060.B.11; 
4.  An applicant or any operator has had a permit or license for an adult business denied, revoked or suspended for cause by any city, county or state within three years of the application date; 
5.  An applicant is under eighteen years of age; 
6.  The applicant failed to pay the filing fee required by this chapter. 
If the permit is denied, the director must state in writing the reasons for the denial and in the notice to the applicant must reference the applicant's right to an appeal under Section 8.37.120. 
C.  The decision of the director to issue or deny a permit will be final unless an appeal is timely filed under Section 8.37.120. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. B), 5-26-2015)  
8.37.060 - Development and operational standards. 
A.  Development Standards. 
1.  Zoning Compliance. The building in which an adult business is located must comply with all applicable setbacks and parking requirements of the applicable zoning district. 
2.  Exterior Lighting. All exterior areas, including parking lots, of the adult business must be illuminated at a minimum of 1.0 to 2.0 foot-candles, maintained and evenly distributed at ground level with appropriate devices to screen, deflect or diffuse the lighting in such manner as to prevent glare or reflected light from creating adverse impacts on adjoining and nearby public and private properties. Inoperable or broken lights must be replaced within twenty-four hours. 
3.  Sound. The premises within which the adult business is located must provide sufficient sound-absorbing insulation so that noise generated inside such premises will not be audible anywhere on any adjacent property or public right-of-way or within any other building or other separate unit within the same building. 
4.  No Minors. The building entrance to an adult business must be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that persons under eighteen years of age are precluded from entering the premises. Such notice must be constructed and posted to the satisfaction of the director. No person under the age of eighteen years may be permitted within the premises at any time. 
5.  Open Indoor Areas. All indoor areas within which patrons are permitted, except restrooms, must be open to view at all times. Adult booths and individual viewing areas are prohibited. 
6.  Restrooms. Separate restroom facilities must be provided for male patrons and employees, and female patrons and employees. Male patrons and employees are prohibited from using any restroom for females, and female patrons and employees are prohibited from using any restroom for males, except to carry out duties of repair, maintenance and cleaning of the restroom facilities. The restrooms must be free from any sexually oriented material. Restrooms may not contain television monitors or other motion picture or video projection, recording or reproduction equipment. This subsection does not apply to an adult business which deals exclusively with the sale or rental of sexually oriented material which is not used or viewed on the premises, such as an adult store or adult video store, and which does not provide restroom facilities to its patrons or the general public. 
7.  Residential Conversions Prohibited. No residential structure may be converted for use as an adult business. 
8.  Portable Structures Prohibited. No adult business may be located in any temporary or portable structure. 
B.  Operational Standards. 
1.  Hours. No adult business may operate or be open for business between the hours of midnight to ten a.m. 
2.  Employment of Minors Prohibited. No owner or operator of any adult business may employ or permit to be employed any person who is not at least eighteen years of age. 
3.  Presence of Minors on Premises Prohibited. No owner or operator of an adult business may allow or permit any person under the age of eighteen years to enter, be in or remain in any such business. Operators must determine the age of persons who enter the premises by posting an employee at the entrance to check the driver's license or other authorized identification of each person entering the premises. 
4.  Screening of Interior of Premises and Display of Sexually Oriented Materials or Adult Live Entertainment. No adult business may be operated in any manner that permits the observation of any material or activities depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or adult live entertainment, from any public way or from any location outside the building or area of such establishment. This provision applies to any display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening. No exterior door or window on the premises may be propped or kept open at any time while the business is open, and any exterior windows must be covered with opaque covering at all times or otherwise screened to prevent a view of the interior in a manner approved by the director. 
5.  Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited. No alcoholic beverages may be served, consumed or sold on the premises of an adult business. 
6.  Illumination. All areas of the adult business must be illuminated at a minimum of the following foot-candles, minimally maintained and evenly distributed at ground level: 
Area 	Foot-Candles 
Stores and other retail establishments 	20 
Theaters and cabarets 	5 (except during performances, at which times lighting must be at least 1.25 foot-candles) 
Arcades 	10 
Modeling studios 	20 
 
7.  Security Measures. 
a.  On-site manager. All adult businesses must have a responsible person who is over the age of eighteen and is on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open and be given by the owner or operator the responsibility and duty to address and immediately resolve all violations of law taking place on the premises. No performer may serve as an on-site manager. If the on-site manager is not an owner, then the owners must provide the director with the individual background information for such on-site manager set forth in items A.1 to 9 of Section 8.37.040 and receive approval for each such on-site manager utilizing the application process under Section 8.37.050 prior to such individual commencing any managerial duties at the premises. 
b.  Adult businesses must employ state-licensed uniformed security guards in order to maintain the public peace and safety, based upon the following standards: 
i.  Adult businesses featuring adult live entertainment and performers must provide at least two uniformed security guards at all times while the business is open, irrespective of the number of customers. One such guard must be on duty inside the premises, and one such guard must be on duty in the business's parking facility and exterior proximity until at least thirty minutes after the established closing time of the facility. In addition, a minimum of one uniformed security guard must be on premises for each fifty patrons in attendance. 
ii.  Security guards for other adult businesses may be required if it is determined by the police chief that their presence is necessary in order to prevent any of the conduct prohibited in this chapter from occurring on the premises. 
c.  Security guards have a duty to prevent violations of law and enforce compliance by patrons of the requirements of this chapter. Security guards must be uniformed in such a manner so as to be readily identifiable as a security guard by the public and must be duly licensed as a security guard as required under state law. No security guard required under this section may act as a door person, ticket seller, ticket taker, admittance person, performer or on-site manager while acting as a security guard. 
d.  All off-street parking areas and building entries serving an adult business featuring adult live entertainment must be illuminated during all hours of operation with a lighting system designed to provide at least an average maintained horizontal illumination of 1.5 foot-candle of light on the parking surface and walkway. This required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the adult business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and theft. The lighting must be shown on the required site or plot plan. The required lighting must remain on for at least thirty minutes after the closing time of the adult business to promote safety for employees thereof. 
e.  All off-street parking areas serving an adult business featuring adult live entertainment must have a security system that visually records and retains images of the entire parking area for at least a seventy-two-hour period for the purposes of promoting safety and identifying illegal activity. 
8.  [Reserved.] 
9.  Adult Live Entertainment—Additional Operating Regulations. The following additional requirements apply to adult businesses providing adult live entertainment: 
a.  No person may perform adult live entertainment for patrons of an adult business except upon a permanently fixed stage at least eighteen inches above the level of the floor, and surrounded by a three-foot-high barrier or by a fixed rail at least thirty inches in height. A distance of at least ten feet, measured horizontally, must be maintained between patrons and performers at all times during a performance. No patron may be permitted on the stage while the stage is occupied by a performer. This provision does not apply to an individual viewing area where the performer is completely separated from the area in which the performer is viewed by an individual by a permanent floor-to-ceiling solid barrier. 
b.  No performer may have physical contact with any patron, and no patron may have physical contact with any performer, while the performer is performing on the premises. This prohibition does not extend to incidental touching. Patrons must be advised of the no touching requirements by signs conspicuously displayed and placed on the barrier between patrons and performers and utilizing red or black printing of letters not less than one inch in size. If necessary, patrons must also be advised of the no touching requirements by employees or independent contractors of the establishment. 
c.  All employees and independent contractors of the adult business, including performers, must wear at a minimum an opaque covering which covers their specified anatomical areas while on or about the premises. 
d.  If patrons wish to pay or tip performers, payment or tips may be placed in containers placed at least ten feet from the stage used by the performers. Patrons may not throw money to performers, place monies in the performers' costumes or otherwise place or throw monies on the stage. Patrons must be advised of this requirement by signs conspicuously displayed and placed on the barrier between patrons and performers and utilizing red or black printing of letters not less than one inch in size. 
e.  The adult business must provide dressing rooms for performers that are separated by gender and exclusively dedicated to the performers' use and which the performers must use. Same gender performers may share a dressing room. Patrons are not permitted in dressing rooms. 
f.  The adult business must provide an entrance/exit to the establishment for performers that is separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons, and the performers must use this entrance/exit at all times. 
g.  The adult business must provide access for performers between the stage and the dressing rooms that is completely separated from the patrons. If such separate access is not physically feasible, the adult business must provide a minimum three-foot-wide walk aisle for performers between the dressing room area and the stage, with a railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons and the performers capable of (and which actually results in) preventing any physical contact between patrons and performers. The patrons must remain at least three feet away from the walk aisle. Nothing in this section is intended to exempt the adult business from compliance with the provisions of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations pertaining to handicapped accessibility. 
10.  Adult Theater—Additional Operating Requirements. The following additional requirements apply to adult theaters: 
a.  If the theater contains a hall or auditorium area, the area must comply with each of the following provisions: 
i.  Have individual, separate seats, not couches, benches, or the like, to accommodate the maximum number of persons who may occupy the hall or auditorium area; 
ii.  Have a continuous main aisle alongside the seating areas in order that each person seated in the hall or auditorium area is visible from the aisle at all times; 
iii.  Have a sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near each entrance to the hall or auditorium area which lists the maximum number of persons who may occupy the hall or auditorium area, which number may not exceed the number of seats within the hall or auditorium area. 
11.  No owner, operator, or on-site manager of any adult business may have pled guilty, nolo contendere or been convicted within the past three years of any of the following offenses or convicted of an offense outside the state of California that would have constituted any of the following offenses if committed within the state of California: Sections 243.4, 261, 266a through 266j, inclusive, 267, 314, 315, 316, 318, or subdivisions (a), (b) and (d) of Section 647 of the California Penal Code; any offense requiring registration under provisions of either Section 290 of the California Penal Code or Section 11590 of the California Health and Safety Code; or any felony offense involving the possession, possession for sale, sale, transportation, furnishing, giving away, of a controlled substance specified in Section 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058 of the California Health and Safety Code, as those sections may hereafter be amended. 
12.  No owner, operator, employee or performer of an adult business may personally solicit, or permit the personal solicitation of, motorists or pedestrians in the vicinity of the adult business. 
13.  Every adult business must display at all times during business hours the permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for such adult business in a conspicuous place so that the permit may be readily seen by all persons entering the adult business. 
14.  No owner, operator, or on-site manager may permit any person on the premises of the adult business to engage in, nor may any performer perform at such premises, a live showing of any of the following: (a) the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, (b) the female breasts with less than a fully opaque covering over any part of the nipple or areola, or (c) covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. This provision may not be complied with by applying an opaque covering simulating the appearance of the specific anatomical part required to be covered. 
15.  No performer may be employed, hired, engaged, or otherwise retained by an adult business to participate in or give any live performance without first having a valid adult business performer license issued by the city. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. B), 5-26-2015)  
8.37.065 - Prohibited conduct at adult businesses. 
A.  No person may operate or manage or cause to be operated or managed an adult business knowingly, or with reason to know, permitting, suffering, or allowing any employee or independent contractor: 
1.  To engage in a lap dance with a patron at the business. 
2.  To contract or otherwise agree with a patron to engage in a lap dance with a person at the business. 
3.  To intentionally touch any patron at an adult business while performing adult live entertainment. 
4.  To voluntarily be within ten feet of any patron while performing adult live entertainment. 
5.  To solicit or request any gratuity, payment, or any other form of consideration from a patron on the premises of the adult business while performing adult live entertainment. 
B.  No person at any adult business may intentionally touch an employee or independent contractor who is performing adult live entertainment at the adult business. 
C.  No person at any adult business may engage in a lap dance with an employee or independent contractor at the adult business. 
D.  No person may directly pay, offer to pay, or otherwise seek to provide a gratuity, pay, or any other form of consideration to a performer at an adult business. No person may use an intermediary, such as an employee or independent contractor to offer, provide, or otherwise pay a gratuity or other form of consideration to a performer at an adult business. 
E.  No performer may engage in a performance or solicit a performance between the hours of midnight and ten a.m. 
F.  No employee or independent contractor at an adult business may appear on the premises of the adult business in the nude, seminude, or display or expose specified anatomical areas. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. B), 5-26-2015)  
8.37.070 - Permit requirements—Effect of noncompliance. 
The requirements described in Sections 8.37.060 and 8.37.065 are conditions of an adult business permit, and the failure to comply with any applicable requirement is grounds for revocation of the permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. B), 5-26-2015)  
8.37.080 - Permit duration. 
An adult business permit is valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. B), 5-26-2015)  
8.37.090 - Permit renewal. 
An adult business permit must be renewed on an annual basis, provided that the owner and the adult business continues to meet all applicable requirements set forth in this chapter. A request for permit renewal must be accompanied by an adult business permit application, completed in full detail with current information. The application and appropriate fee must be received by the city at least forty-five calendar days prior to the expiration of the existing permit. The city will process a request for a permit renewal in the same manner as the original application. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. B), 5-26-2015)  
8.37.100 - Permit transferability. 
No adult business permit may be sold, transferred, or assigned by any owner, or by operation of law, to any other person unless and until the transferee obtains an amendment to the permit from the director stating that the transferee is now the owner. Such an amendment may be obtained only if the transferee files an application with the director in accordance with Section 8.37.040 (including payment of the applicable application fee), and the director determines in accordance with Section 8.37.050 that the transferee would be entitled to the issuance of the original permit. Without such amendment to the permit, any other purported sale, transfer, or assignment or attempted sale, transfer, or assignment will be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of the permit and thereafter the permit will be null and void. An adult business permit held by a corporation, partnership or limited liability company is subject to the same rules of transferability. An adult business permit will be valid only for the exact location specified in the permit. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. B), 5-26-2015)  
8.37.110 - Enforcement and revocation. 
A.  Inspections. All law enforcement and code enforcement officers have the right to enter the premises of an adult business from time to time during regular business hours to make reasonable inspections, to observe and enforce compliance with building, fire, electrical, plumbing or health regulations, and to ascertain whether there is compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Revocation Grounds. The director may revoke an adult business permit when: 
1.  Any of the applicable requirements of this chapter ceases to be satisfied; 
2.  The application is discovered to contain incorrect, false or misleading information; 
3.  An owner has pled guilty, nolo contendere or been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor occurring upon, or relating to the premises or lot upon which the adult business is located, which offense is one of those listed in Section 8.37.060.B.11; 
4.  On two or more occasions within a twelve-month period, any operator, employee, agent or contractor of the owner has pled guilty, nolo contendere or been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor occurring upon, or relating to the premises or lot upon which the adult business is located, which offense is one of those listed in Section 8.37.060.B.11; 
5.  The owner, operator or any employee, agent or contractor of the owner has knowingly allowed prostitution, or solicitation for prostitution, on the premises; 
6.  The owner, operator or any employee, agent or contractor of the owner has knowingly allowed the premises to be used as a place where a controlled substance has been illegally consumed, sold or exchanged; or 
7.  The adult business has been operated in violation of any of the requirements of this chapter; and 
a.  If the violation is of a continuous nature, the business continues to be operated in violation of such provision for more than ten days following the date written notice of such violation is mailed or delivered to the owner or operator; or 
b.  If the violation is of a noncontinuous nature, one or more additional violations of the same provision, or two or more violations of any other of the provisions, of this chapter occur (regardless of whether notice of each individual violation is given to the owner or operator) within any twelve-month period. 
C.  Revocation Notice. Upon determining that grounds for permit revocation exist, the director will furnish written notice of the proposed revocation to the owner. Such notice must summarize the principal reasons for the proposed revocation and state that the revocation will become effective on the thirtieth day after the notice was deposited in the U.S. mail, unless the owner files an appeal under Section 8.37.120. The notice must be delivered both by posting the notice at the location of the adult business and by sending the same, certified mail to the owner as that name and address appears on the permit. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. B), 5-26-2015)  
8.37.120 - Appeals. 
A.  Any interested person may appeal a decision of the director regarding an application for revocation of an adult business permit by filing with the city clerk a complete notice of appeal within fifteen days from the date notice of such decision is mailed. To be deemed complete, the appeal must be in writing, state the grounds for disagreement with the director's stated decision, include the address to which notice is to be mailed, be signed under penalty of perjury, and be accompanied by the filing fee established by city council resolution. 
B.  If an appeal is timely filed, the city clerk will cause to be set a date for the hearing of the appeal not more than thirty days from the date the appeal is received. The hearing will be a de novo hearing on the action appealed from. At the hearing, the appellant will have the right to offer testimonial, documentary, and tangible evidence bearing upon the issues. The hearing officer will not be bound by the formal rules of evidence. Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness. 
C.  The hearing officer will issue written findings and a decision within ten days of the conclusion of the hearing, and send notice of the decision by certified mail to the appellant. The notice of the decision must include reference to the appellant's right to prompt judicial review under California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. 
D.  The action by the hearing officer will be final unless timely judicial review is sought pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. B), 5-26-2015)  
8.37.130 - Reapplication after denial or revocation. 
A.  Reapplication After Denial. An applicant for a permit under this chapter whose application for such permit has been denied may not reapply for a permit for a period of one year from the date such notice of denial may be deposited in the mail or received by the permittee, whichever occurs first. However, a reapplication prior to the termination of three years may be made if accompanied by evidence that the ground or grounds for denial of the application no longer exists. 
B.  Reapplication After Revocation. No person may obtain an adult business permit for three years from the date any order of permit revocation affecting such person has become final. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. B), 5-26-2015)  
8.37.140 - Violations. 
A.  Any owner, operator, permitee, employee or independent contractor of an adult business violating or permitting the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter regulating adult businesses will be subject to any and all civil remedies, including license or permit revocation. All remedies provided herein are cumulative and not exclusive. 
B.  In addition to the remedies set forth in subsection A, any adult business that is operating in violation of these provisions regulating adult businesses is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance and, as such, may be abated or enjoined from further operation. 
C.  The regulations imposed under this chapter are part of a regulatory permitting process, and any violation of this chapter does not constitute a criminal offense. Notwithstanding any other provision of the Rohnert Park Municipal Code, the city does not impose a criminal penalty for violations of this chapter related to expressive activities. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. B), 5-26-2015)  
8.37.150 - Regulations nonexclusive. 
The provisions of this chapter regulating adult businesses are not intended to be exclusive and compliance therewith will not excuse noncompliance with any other applicable regulations pertaining to the operation of businesses adopted by the city. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. B), 5-26-2015)  
Chapter 8.38 - ADULT BUSINESS PERFORMER LICENSE 
 
8.38.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the licensing of adult business performers in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the city. The intent of the performer licensing provisions are (1) to protect minors by requiring that all performers be over the age of eighteen years; (2) to assure the correct identification of persons performing in adult businesses; (3) to enable the city to deploy law enforcement resources effectively; and (4) to detect and discourage the involvement of crime in adult businesses by precluding the licensing of performers with certain sex-related convictions within a prescribed time period. 
It is neither the intent nor the effect of these regulations to invade the privacy of performers or to impose limitations or restrictions on the content of any communicative material. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor the effect of these regulations to restrict or deny access by adults to communicative materials or to deny access by the distributors or exhibitors of adult businesses to their intended lawful market. 
Nothing in these regulations is intended to authorize, legalize, or permit the establishment, operation, or maintenance of any business, building, or use which violates any city ordinance or any statute of the state of California regarding public nuisances, unlawful or indecent exposure, sexual conduct, lewdness, obscene or harmful matter, or the exhibition or public display thereof. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. B), 5-26-2015)  
8.38.020 - Definitions. 
The definitions contained in the Chapter 8.37 of this code also apply to this chapter, with the following additions: 
"Licensee" means a person who is issued an adult business performer license under this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. B), 5-26-2015)  
8.38.030 - Adult business performer license required. 
A.  No performer may be employed, hired, engaged, or otherwise retained by an adult business to participate in or give any performance of adult live entertainment without first having a valid adult business performer license issued by the city. 
B.  The director is responsible for the processing, investigation and issuance of adult business performer licenses in accordance with this chapter. 
C.  License applicants must file a license application or renewal application on a form provided by the city. At minimum, this application form will contain the following information: 
1.  The applicant's legal name and any other names (including "stage names" and aliases) used by the applicant. 
2.  Principal place of residence. 
3.  Age, date and place of birth. 
4.  Height, weight, hair and eye color and tattoo descriptions and locations. 
5.  Each present or proposed business address and telephone number of the establishments at which the applicant intends to work. 
6.  Driver's license or identification number and state of issuance. 
7.  Social security number. 
8.  Satisfactory written proof that the license applicant is at least eighteen years of age. 
9.  The license applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the city and two passport size photographs clearly showing the applicant's face. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints will be paid by the applicant. Fingerprints and photographs must be taken within six months of the date of application. 
10.  Whether the applicant has pled guilty, nolo contendere or been convicted of an offense classified by this or any other state as a sex-related offense within five years since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement of conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date. 
11.  If the application is made for the purpose of renewing a license, the applicant must attach a copy of the license to be renewed. 
D.  The information provided above in subsection C which is personal, private, confidential or the disclosure of which could expose the applicant to the risk of harm, including, but not limited to, the applicant's residence address, telephone number, date of birth and age, driver's license and social security number will not be disclosed provided such nondisclosure is in accordance with the California Public Records Act. 
E.  The completed application must be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee and annual license fee. The amount of such fees will be as set forth in the schedule of fees established by city council resolution. 
F.  The director will determine whether the application is complete within two business days. If the director determines that the application is incomplete, the director must immediately inform the applicant of such fact and the reasons therefor, including any additional information necessary to render the application complete. Upon receipt of a completed adult business performer application, the director will, within two business days, issue a temporary license that will automatically expire thirty business days from the date of issuance unless extended as provided in Section 8.38.040.D. This temporary adult business performer license authorizes a performer to commence performance at an adult business that possesses a valid adult business permit authorized to provide adult live entertainment. 
G.  The fact that a license applicant possesses other types of state or city permits or licenses does not exempt the license applicant from the requirement of obtaining an adult business performer license. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. B), 5-26-2015)  
8.38.040 - Investigation and action on license application. 
A.  Upon submission of a completed application and issuance of a temporary adult business performer license, the director will promptly cause the investigation of the information contained in the application to determine whether the applicant should be issued an adult business performer license. 
B.  The director's decision to grant or deny the adult business performer license must be made within thirty business days from the date the temporary license was issued. If the application is denied, the director must include a written statement of the reasons for the denial. Such notice must also advise the applicant of the right to appeal the denial under Section 8.38.060. If the application is granted, the director will attach the adult business performer license to the notice. The decision will be mailed or personally delivered to the applicant at the address provided in the application. 
C.  The director may deny the application based on any of the following grounds: 
1.  The applicant has made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for an adult business performer license. 
2.  The applicant is under eighteen years of age. 
3.  The adult business performer license is to be used for performing in a business prohibited by laws of the state or city or at a business that does not have a valid adult business permit. 
4.  The occurrence of any of the events set forth in Section 8.38.030.C.10. 
D.  If the director fails to render a decision on the license within the time frame established by this section, the application will be deemed approved, subject to an appeal under Section 8.38.060. 
E.  Each adult business performer license, other than the temporary license described in Section 8.38.030.F, will expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by filing with the director a written request for renewal, accompanied by the annual license fee and a copy of the license to be renewed at least thirty days prior to the expiration of the license. If the application conforms to the previously approved application and there has been no change with respect to the licensee being convicted of any crime classified by this or any other state as a sex-related offense, and no evidence that the licensee has failed to comply with any of the operating standards of Chapter 8.37 applicable to a performer or the requirements of this chapter, the director will renew the license for one year. An application for renewal will be acted upon in the same manner as the application for the original license. If the director denies renewal of the application, that decision is also appealable under Section 8.38.060. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. B), 5-26-2015)  
8.38.050 - Revocation of license. 
A.  A license may be revoked, based on any of the following causes arising from the acts or omissions of the licensee: 
1.  The licensee has made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a performer license. 
2.  The licensee has pled guilty, nolo contendere or been convicted of an offense as set forth in Section 8.38.030.C.10. 
3.  The licensee has failed to comply with any of the operating standards of Chapter 8.37 applicable to a performer or the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  On determining that grounds for license revocation or suspension exist, the director will furnish written notice of the proposed action to the licensee. Such notice will set forth the time and place of a hearing before the director or a hearing officer, the grounds, including the factual matters, in support of such proposed action, and the pertinent code sections. The notice will be mailed, postage prepaid, to the last known address of the licensee, or personally delivered to the licensee, at least ten days prior to the hearing date. 
C.  At the hearing, the licensee will have the right to offer testimonial, documentary, and tangible evidence bearing upon the issues. The director or hearing officer will not be bound by the formal rules of evidence. Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness at the request of the licensee. 
D.  After the hearing, the director or hearing officer will either sustain or overrule the decision of the director and render a written decision within two business days of the hearing. The decision will be sent by certified mail to the applicant or licensee. The decision of the director or hearing officer must include reference to the right to prompt judicial review under California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. 
E.  The action by the director or hearing officer will be final unless timely judicial review is sought pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. B), 5-26-2015)  
8.38.060 - Appeals. 
A.  Any interested person may appeal a decision of the director regarding an application for an adult business performer license by filing with the city clerk a complete notice of appeal within fifteen days from the date notice of such decision is mailed. To be deemed complete, the appeal must be in writing, state the grounds for disagreement with the director's stated decision, include the address to which notice is to be mailed, be signed under penalty of perjury, and be accompanied by the filing fee established by city council resolution. 
B.  If an appeal is timely filed, a hearing officer will hear the appeal. 
C.  The hearing officer must set a hearing date not more than twenty-one days from the date of the filing of the appeal. The hearing may be continued for good cause. 
D.  The hearing officer will issue findings in writing within five days of the conclusion of the hearing. The written findings and decision will be sent by certified mail to the appellant. The notice of the decision must include reference to the appellant's right to prompt judicial review under California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. 
E.  The action by the hearing officer will be final unless timely judicial review is sought pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. B), 5-26-2015)  
8.38.070 - License identification cards. 
The director will provide each adult business performer whose application is approved with an identification card containing the name, address, photograph, and license number of such performer. Every performer must have such card available for inspection at all times during which the performer is on the premises of the adult business at which he or she performs. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. B), 5-26-2015)  
8.38.080 - Adult business performer license nontransferable. 
No adult business performer license may be sold, transferred, or assigned by any licensee or by operation of law, to any other person. Any such sale, transfer, or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer, or assignment will be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of the adult business performer license, and the license thereafter will be void. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. B), 5-26-2015)  
8.38.090 - Violations. 
A.  Any licensee violating any of the provisions of this chapter or the provisions of Chapter 8.37 regulating adult business performers will be subject to license revocation, and any and all other civil remedies. All remedies provided herein are cumulative and not exclusive. Any such violation will constitute a separate violation for each and every day during which such violation is committed or continued. 
B.  The regulations imposed under this chapter are part of a regulatory licensing process, and violations of this chapter do not constitute a criminal offense. Notwithstanding any other provision of the Rohnert Park Municipal Code, the city does not impose a criminal penalty for violations of the provisions of this chapter related to "expressive activities." 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. B), 5-26-2015)  
Chapter 8.39 - ADULT BUSINESS LOCATIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ch. 8.39 has been retitled as set out herein, at the editor's discretion, from "Adult Businesses - Locations" as given in Exh. B to § 4 of Ord. No. 887 , adopted May 26, 2015, for purposes of clarity and consistency with related chapter titles. 
 
8.39.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations applicable to the location of adult businesses within the city. The words and phrases used in this chapter are governed by the definitions contained in Chapter 8.37 of this code. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. B), 5-26-2015)  
8.39.020 - Locational requirements. 
A.  Permitted Districts. Adult businesses are permitted in the limited industrial (I-L) district described in Section 17.06.090 of this code. 
B.  Locational Standards. Adult businesses may not be located: 
1.  Within one thousand feet of any publicly recognized place of religious worship, whether inside or outside of the city limits; 
2.  Within one thousand feet of any public or private school (grades K—12) or child care establishment, whether inside or outside the city limits; 
3.  Within one thousand feet of any public park, golf course, playground, or similar recreational facility. 
The distances specified in this subsection will be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the nearest point of the parcel on which the proposed adult business is to be established to the nearest property line of a use or zoning classification listed above. 
C.  [Permit Required.] Adult businesses must obtain and maintain an adult business permit in compliance with all applicable requirements of Chapter 8.37 of this code. 
( Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. B), 5-26-2015)  
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE  
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY  
Chapter 9.28 - MECHANICAL AND ELECTRONIC PLAY DEVICES 
 
9.28.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Mechanical play device" or "electronic play device" means any machine, device or apparatus whether mechanically or electronically operated, including pool and billiard tables, the operation of which is made possible by the deposit or placement of any coin, slug, disk, card, key or any other article or device, into any slot, crevice, or opening, or by the payment of any fee or consideration for its use or operation and which involves the manipulation of hand levers, electronic releases or other buttons or levers in the conduct of the game. 
B.  "Mechanical rocking horses" or other simulated animals or vehicles upon which young children are seated or which are ridden are not "mechanical play devices" or "electronic play devices" for the purposes of this chapter. 
C.  "Operator" means the owner or lessee of the mechanical or electronic play device(s) who install(s), maintain(s), or service(s) them. 
D.  "Owner" means the record titleholder of real property as disclosed by the latest assessment roll in the office of the county treasurer. 
E.  "Person" means any corporation, association, syndicate, partnership, joint venture, club, society or individual. 
F.  "Proprietor" means the owner, lessee or operator of the business, or operation in which any mechanical or electronic play device is placed for use. Proprietor shall also include the officers, employees and agents of the proprietor. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1982)  
9.28.020 - Mechanical and electronic play devices—Limited to certain zones. 
Except as provided in Section 9.28.150, no mechanical or electronic play devices shall be allowed in any residential district. Mechanical or electronic play devices may be added as a permitted or conditional use in any commercial districts. 
(Ord. 565 § 1, 1992: Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1982)  
9.28.030 - Mechanical and electronic play devices—Permitted only by conditional use permit. 
For those locations qualifying for the installation of a mechanical or electronic play device, no devices shall be allowed in any location without the issuance of a conditional use permit under the procedure, notice and hearing, as required in Chapter 17.52 governing the issuance of conditional use permits. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1982)  
9.28.040 - Mechanical and electronic play devices—Standards for five or less devices. 
The following standards shall apply to any C-L, C-N, C-R, C-S, C-Rec and C-G Districts: 
A.  Except where a conditional use permit is required as provided in Section 9.28.050, five or less mechanical or electronic devices shall be subject to the review and approval of the planning director as specified in Section 17.16.030, subsection F and Section 17.16.040, subsection E; Section 17.16.050, subsection E; Section 17.16.060 subsection F and Section 17.16.070, subsection C. 
B.  That the applicant(s) obtain the appropriate business license for the mechanical or electronic play devices. 
C.  No business license shall be issued or allowed to remain outstanding in any building or location that does not comply with all applicable city codes. 
D.  No mechanical or electronic play device shall provide or accrue payoffs or prizes as a condition of playing. In addition, no mechanical play device or electronic play device which offers or awards free games as a condition of play, shall erase or otherwise eliminate free games awarded. 
(Ord. 565 § 2, 1992: Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1982)  
9.28.050 - Mechanical and electronic play devices—Conditional use permit required for locations or building having six machines or more. 
For those locations that request permission to install six or more devices, in addition to the standards set forth in Section 9.28.04, the applicant shall satisfy the following conditions: 
A.  That the applicant shall apply for a conditional use permit as prescribed in Chapter 17.52 of the Rohnert Park Municipal Code. 
B.  The proposed location shall be reviewed to determine if there is adequate parking for the use. 
C.  The proposed location shall be reviewed to insure that the use is compatible with adjacent uses and that its location at the site proposed will not be detrimental to surrounding uses, nor will the surrounding uses be detrimental to the proposed location. 
D.  The spacing of the machines within the building shall be reviewed so that there is ample space for players, for spectators and for ingress and egress during play. 
(Ord. 565 § 3, 1992: Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1982)  
9.28.060 - Installation of mechanical or electronic play device(s), obligation of operator(s).* 
No operator(s) shall install or allow any mechanical or electronic play device(s) to be installed in any proprietors' place of business or other place or location until the applicant for the operation of the mechanical or electronic play device(s) secures appropriate city licenses, a conditional use permit and any other license or permits required. 
(Ord. 565 § 4, 1992: Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1982) 
*  Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 565 deleted former Section 9.28.060 containing portions of Ordinance No. 403 and renumbered former Sections 9.28.070 through 9.28.140.  
9.28.070 - Permit—Posting. 
The license or permit required by this chapter shall be permanently and prominently posted at any location of mechanical or electronic play devices and shall not be covered or removed from the location during the period for which the license is issued or the devices are operated. 
(Ord. 565 § 4, 1992: Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1982)  
9.28.080 - Permit—Prohibition of transfer. 
No license or permit required by this chapter shall be transferable, nor shall it apply to any premises other than one to which it is issued. 
(Ord. 565 § 5, 1992: Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1982)  
9.28.090 - Revocation of conditional use permits or licenses. 
Conditional use permits may be revoked or suspended as provided in Chapter 17.52. Licenses or permits may be revoked or suspended for cause. 
(Ord. 565 § 6, 1992: Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1982)  
9.28.100 - Compliance with other laws. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall exempt any operator, owner, proprietor or person from complying with the Penal Code of the state or any other law, ordinance, regulation or lawful requirement of the United States Government, the state, the county, or the city. 
(Ord. 565 § 7, 1992: Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1982)  
9.28.110 - Severability. 
If any part of this chapter should be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of any other portion of this chapter. 
(Ord. 565 § 8, 1992: Ord. 403 § 1 (part) 1982)  
9.28.120 - Mechanical and electronic play devices—Public nuisance. 
In addition to any and all violations of this code, a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or any condition of a use permit or license issued pursuant to this chapter, or any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is deemed and declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated as such by the city. 
(Ord. 565 § 9, 1992: Ord. 403 § 1 (part) 1982)  
9.28.130 - Mechanical and electronic play devices—Exceptions and nonapplicability of this chapter. 
The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to mechanical play devices or electronic play devices which are used in a residence for the amusement of the occupants and/or their guests and which are not used for commercial purposes or for the purpose of receiving revenue or income therefrom. 
(Ord. 565 § 10, 1992: Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1982)  
Chapter 9.32 - VENDING MACHINES 
 
9.32.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section. 
"Vending machine" means any device within the city which accepts money, either paper money or coins, and dispenses a product, material, food, information or any other form of service or property whatsoever. 
(Ord. 370 § 1 (part), 1980)  
9.32.020 - Vending machines—Identification of owner. 
The owner of each vending machine located within the limits of the city shall file with the city treasurer a list of all vending machines owned, which shall disclose the type of machine, the location of the machine by street address and building location and the name, address and telephone number of the owner. 
(Ord. 370 § l (part), 1980)  
9.32.030 - Vending machines—Posting of name, address and telephone number of owner thereon. 
Each vending machine located within the city shall have prominently displayed on the front of said machine within six inches of the place where money is inserted in the machine, a notice of the name, address and telephone number of the owner of said vending machine. 
(Ord. 370 § l (part), 1980)  
9.32.040 - Same—Form of notice. 
The notice posted on the vending machine in accordance with Section 9.32.030 shall be at least two inches by two inches and shall contain the following letters, equal to or greater in size than capital letters of elite type, the following: 
The name, address and telephone number of the owner of this vending machine is: 
(Ord. 370 § l (part), 1980)  
9.32.050 - Replacement of lost or destroyed notices. 
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the vending machine to check the machine no less than quarterly to insure that the notice remains in place. Any notices not in place shall be promptly replaced by the owner. 
(Ord. 370 § l (part), 1980)  
Chapter 9.34 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
 
9.34.010 - Definitions. 
"Alcoholic beverage" means and includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is capable of human consumption either alone, when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances. 
"Special event" means any event or gathering that serves to educate, inform or entertain the public. 
(Ord. 796 § 1, 2008: Ord. 492 § 1, 1987)  
9.34.020 - Alcoholic beverages; drinking and possession prohibited in certain locations. 
No person shall drink or have in his or her possession an open container of any alcoholic beverage: 
A.  On any public street, sidewalk, or other public way or parking lot owned by the city of Rohnert Park; 
B.  On private property which is intended for public use and open to the public view without first having secured the express permission of the owner, the owner's agent, or the person in lawful possession of the property; 
C.  On the posted premises of, including the posted parking lot immediately adjacent to, any retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensee licensed pursuant to Division 9 (commencing with Section 23000) of the Business and Professions Code of California, or on any public sidewalk immediately adjacent to the licensed and posted premises. Visible notices shall be posted on the premises of each retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensee and on the parking lot and the public sidewalk immediately adjacent to the licensed premises indicating that the provisions of this subsection are applicable; or 
D.  In any public park, parkway, playground, recreation center, recreation area, or any parking lot adjacent to any of the foregoing recreation facilities owned, leased or under the control of the city of Rohnert Park, unless such person has obtained a permit for possession and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages for a special event from the director of public safety or his/her designee. 
(Ord. 796 § 2, 2008: Ord. 708 § 1, 2004; Ord. 698 § 1, 2003; Ord. 492 § 1, 1987)  
9.34.030 - Exception. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A. of Section 9.34.020, the city manager or his or her designee may grant a permit to an organization or group to use any public street, sidewalk, or other public way or parking lot owned by the city of Rohnert Park in conjunction with a special event, festival, program or promotional gathering. The city manager may grant such a permit subject to the permittee named therein: 
A.  Conforming to specified hours of operation on the specified date or dates; 
B.  Agreeing to retain special police protection if deemed necessary by the director of public safety; 
C.  Agreeing to maintain in effect liability insurance in an amount acceptable to the city of Rohnert Park, the coverage of which is extended to include the city of Rohnert Park; 
D.  Agreeing to such other conditions as the city manager deems necessary to protect the health and safety of the community; and 
E.  Producing prior to issuance of such permit evidence indicating permittee's license issued by the state of California to sell alcoholic beverages if the sale of alcoholic beverage is contemplated. 
(Ord. 492 § 1, 1987)  
9.34.040 - Penalties. 
A.  Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction. 
B.  Any person, firm or corporation convicted of a fourth or any subsequent violation of this chapter within a twelve-month period shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
C.  Each separate day or any portion thereof during which any violation of this chapter occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as herein provided. 
(Ord. 492 § 1, 1987)  
Chapter 9.36 - PUBLIC URINATION, DEFECATION AND EXPOSURE 
 
9.36.010 - Public urination in public places prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any persons over the age of ten years to wilfully urinate or defecate in a public place or in a place exposed to public view. A violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor unless the citing officer is able to make one of the findings contained in subsections 1.16.010 B (1) through (4) of this code and elects to issue a citation for an infraction. 
(Ord. 743 § 3, 2005: Ord. 373 § 2, 1980)  
9.36.020 - Public exposure in public places prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person over the age of ten years to wilfully expose his person or private parts for the purpose of urination or defecation in a public place or in a place exposed to public view in such a manner that the genitals, vulva, pubis, pubic symphysis, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anus, anal region or pubic hair region is exposed to public view. 
(Ord. 373 § 3, 1980)  
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE  
Chapter 9.40 - LOITERING 
 
9.40.010 - Obstructing public way prohibited. 
No person shall stand in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public way open for pedestrian travel, or otherwise occupy any portion thereof in such manner as to annoy or molest any person thereon, or so as to obstruct or unreasonably interfere with the free passage of persons and vehicles. 
(Ord. 116 § 1, 1969)  
9.40.020 - Loitering—Places of vehicular traffic. 
No person shall loiter in any tunnel, pedestrian subway, or on any bridge, overpass, or at or near the entrance thereto or exit therefrom, or at or near any abutment or retaining wall adjacent to such entrance or exit, or any retaining wall or abutment adjacent to any freeway, street, or highway open and used for vehicular traffic, or adjacent to that portion thereof used for vehicular traffic, or on any public property, in the proximity of such bridge, overpass, or retaining wall or abutment. 
(Ord. 116 § 2, 1969)  
9.40.030 - Hindering free passage—Exception. 
No person shall sit, lie, or sleep in or upon any street, sidewalk, or other public way in a manner calculated or with the intent to prevent, delay, hinder or interfere with the free passage there along or thereto of any other person. 
The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons sitting on the curb portion of any sidewalk or street while attending or viewing any lawfully conducted parade; nor shall the provisions of this section apply to persons sitting upon benches or other seating facilities lawfully provided for such purpose. 
(Ord. 116 § 3, 1969)  
9.40.040 - Blocking public and business places. 
No person shall unreasonably block, impede or obstruct any entrance, exit, or approach to any hall, church, school, or other public place or to any place of business in a manner calculated or with the intent to prevent, delay, hinder, or interfere with the free passage of any other person who is entering, occupying, or leaving any of the aforesaid places, or who is performing any service, or labor, or who is seeking or obtaining employment, or who is purchasing, selling, using, delivering, transporting, or receiving any goods, wares, merchandise, services, entertainment, accommodation, or articles, or who is attempting or seeking to do any of the foregoing; provided that nothing contained herein shall apply to lawful picketing. 
(Ord. 116 § 4, 1969)  
9.40.050 - Applicability. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to encroachments under permits issued pursuant to ordinances of this city. 
(Ord. 116 § 5, 1969)  
9.40.060 - Violation—Penalty. 
Every violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor. Any person, whether principal, agent, employee, or otherwise, who violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Such person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and is punishable as herein provided. 
(Ord. 116 § 6, 1969)  
Chapter 9.41 - CAMPING ON PRIVATE AND PUBLIC PROPERTY 
 
9.41.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
A.  "Camper" means a structure designed to be mounted upon a motor vehicle and to provide facilities for human habitation or camping purposes. 
B.  "Camping" means sleeping, setting up housekeeping, cooking. 
C.  "Vehicle" is defined by Section 670 of the California Vehicle Code as it exists as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or as it may be amended, and includes but is not limited to, passenger cars, trucks, motor homes, trailer coaches and trailers. 
(Ord. 468 § 1, 1986)  
9.41.020 - Use of vehicles or campers for human habitation prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any vehicle or camper for human habitation, including but not limited to sleeping, eating or resting, either singly or in groups, on any public street, park, square, avenue, alley, public way or parking area, or any privately owned parking area used for the parking of any customers or employees of any business on any day. A violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor unless the citing officer is able to make one of the findings contained in subsections 1.16.010 B (1) through (4) of this code and elects to issue a citation for an infraction. 
(Ord. 743 § 4, 2005: Ord. 468 § 1, 1986)  
9.41.030 - Camping on public property. 
It is unlawful for any person to camp in any public park, on any public street or on any public property, except in a designated public campground or by authority of a written permit issued by the city. 
(Ord. 468 § 1, 1986)  
9.41.040 - Camping on private property. 
It is unlawful for any person to camp on private property without first obtaining the written permission of the owner and a written permit issued by the city. 
(Ord. 468 § 1, 1986)  
Chapter 9.44 - NOISE  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
9.44.010 - Declaration of policy. 
It is the policy of the city to prohibit unnecessary, excessive, and annoying noises from all sources subject to its policy power. At certain levels noises are detrimental to the health and welfare of the citizenry and in the public interest shall be systematically proscribed. 
(Ord. 152 § 1.1, 1971)  
9.44.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise clearly indicates, the words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
A.  "Ambient noise" is the all-encompassing noise associated with a given environment, being usually a composite of sounds from many sources near and far. For the purpose of this chapter, ambient noise level is the level obtained when the noise level is averaged over a period of fifteen minutes without inclusion of noise from isolated identifiable sources, at the location and time of day near that at which a comparison is to be made. 
B.  "Commercial purpose" means and includes the use, operation, or maintenance of any sound-amplifying equipment for the purpose of advertising any business, or any goods, or any services, or for the purpose of attracting the attention of the public to, or advertising for, or soliciting patronage or customers to or for any performance, show, entertainment, exhibition, or event, or for the purpose of demonstrating such sound equipment. 
C.  "Decibel" means a unit of level when the base of the logarithm is the tenth root of ten and the quantities concerned are proportional to power. 
D.  "Emergency work" means work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity or work required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility service. 
E.  "Frequency" of a function periodic in time means the reciprocal of the primitive period. The unit is the hertz and shall be specified,. 
F.  "Hertz" means the complete sequence of values of a periodic quantity which occurs during a period. 
G.  "Microbar" means a unit of pressure commonly used in acoustics and is equal to one dyna per square centimeter. 
H.  "Motor vehicles" includes, but is not limited to, mini-bikes and go-carts. 
I.  "Noncommercial purpose" means the use, operation, or maintenance of any sound equipment for other than a "commercial purpose." "Noncommercial purpose" means and includes but is not limited to, philanthropic, political, patriotic, and charitable purposes. 
J.  "Period" of a periodic quantity means the smallest increment of time for which the function repeats itself. 
K.  "Periodic quantity" means oscillating quantity, the values of which recur for equal increments of time. 
L.  "Person" means a person, firm, association, copartnership, joint venture, corporation or any entity, public or private in nature. 
M.  "Sound amplifying equipment" means any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music, or any other sound. "Sound amplifying equipment" does not include standard automobile radios when used and heard only by the occupants of the vehicle in which the automobile radio is installed. "Sound amplifying equipment" as used in this chapter, does not include warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on any vehicle used only for traffic safety purposes. 
N.  "Sound level" (noise level), in decibels (dB) is the sound measured with the "A" weighting and slow response by a sound level meter. 
O.  "Sound level meter" means an instrument including a microphone, an amplifier, an output meter, and frequency weighting networks for the measurement of sound levels which satisfies the pertinent requirements in American Standard Specifications for sound level meters Sl.4.1971 or the most recent revision thereof. 
P.  "Sound truck" means any motor vehicle or any other vehicle regardless of motive power, whether in motion or stationary, having mounted thereon or attached thereto any sound amplifying equipment. 
(Ord. 152 § 1.2, 1971)  
9.44.030 - Sound level measurement criteria. 
Any sound level measurement made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be measured with a sound level meter using the "A" weighting. 
(Ord. 152 § 1.3, 1971)  
9.44.040 - Ambient base noise level. 
Where the ambient noise level is less than designated in this section the respective noise level in this section shall govern. 
Zone 	Time 	Sound Level A, Decibels Community 
Environment Classification 
Rl and R2 	10 p.m. to 7 a.m. 	45 
R1 and R2 	7 p.m. to 10 p.m. 	40 
Rl and R2 	7 a.m. to 7 p.m. 	55 
R3 and R4 	10 p.m. to 7 a.m. 	50 
R3 and R4 	7 a.m. to 10 p.m. 	55 
Commercial 	10 p.m. to 7 a.m. 	55 
Commercial 	7 a.m. to 10 p.m. 	60 
Limited indust. 	Anytime 	70 
General indust. 	Anytime 	75 
 
(Ord. 152 § 1.4, 1971)  
ARTICLE II. - SPECIAL NOISE SOURCES 
 
9.44.050 - Radios, television sets, and similar devices—Use restricted. 
It is unlawful for any person within any residential zone of the city to use or operate any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, television set or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the neighboring residents or any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area. 
(Ord. 152 § 2.1(a), 1971)  
9.44.060 - Prima facie evidence of violation of Section 9.44.050. 
Any noise level exceeding the ambient base level at the property line of any property, or, if a condominium or apartment house, within any adjoining apartment by more than five decibels shall be deemed to be prima facie evidence of a violation of the provision of Section 9.44.050. 
(Ord. 152 § 2.1(b), 1971)  
9.44.070 - Hawkers and peddlers. 
It is unlawful for any person within the city to sell anything by outcry within any area of the city zoned for residential uses. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the selling by outcry of merchandise, food, and beverages at licensed sporting events, parades, fairs, circuses, and other similar licensed public entertainment events. 
(Ord. 299 § 2, 1975: Ord. 152 § 2.2, 1971)  
9.44.080 - Drums—Use restricted. 
It is unlawful for any person to use any drum or other instrument or device of any kind for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of noise within the city. This section shall not apply to any person who is a participant in a school band or duly licensed parade or who has been otherwise duly authorized to engage in such conduct. 
(Ord. 152 § 2.3, 1971)  
9.44.090 - Schools, hospitals and churches. 
It is unlawful for any person to create any noise on any street, sidewalk, or public place adjacent to any school, institution of learning, or church while the same is in use or adjacent to any hospital, which noise unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets, sidewalk or public place indicating the presence of a school, church or hospital. 
(Ord. 152 § 2.4, 1971)  
9.44.100 - Animals and fowl. 
No person shall keep or maintain, or permit the keeping of upon any premises owned, occupied, or controlled by such person any animal or fowl otherwise permitted to be kept which, by any sound, cry, or behavior, shall cause annoyance or discomfort to a reasonable person of normal sensitiveness in any residential neighborhood. 
(Ord. 152 § 2.5, 1971)  
9.44.110 - Machinery, equipment pump, fans, and air conditioning. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate any machinery, equipment pump, fan, air conditioning apparatus, or similar mechanical device in any manner so as to create any noise which would cause the noise level at the property line of any property to exceed the ambient base noise level by more than five decibels. 
(Ord. 152 § 2.6, 1971)  
9.44.115 - Leaf blowers, lawn brooms, vacuum apparatuses and similar devices—Limitation on hours of use. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate any gas or electric powered leaf blower, lawn broom or related devices in any residential or commercial district, including parks, schools and golf courses, between the hours of eight o'clock p.m. and eight o'clock a.m. on weekdays or between the hours of eight o'clock p.m. and nine o'clock a.m. on Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays. 
Any violation of this section shall constitute an infraction with a maximum penalty consisting of a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars. 
(Ord. 602 § 1, 1995)  
ARTICLE III. - CONSTRUCTION 
 
9.44.120 - Construction of buildings and projects. 
It is unlawful for any person within a residential zone, or within a radius of five hundred feet therefrom, to operate equipment or perform any outside construction or repair work on buildings, structures, or projects or to operate any pile driver, power shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, power hoist, or any other construction type device between the hours of six p.m. of one day and eight a.m. of the next day in such a manner that a reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area is caused discomfort or annoyance unless beforehand a permit therefor has been duly obtained from the superintendent of public works. No permit shall be required to perform emergency work as defined in Section 9.44.020 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 152 § 3.1, 1971)  
ARTICLE IV. - VEHICLES 
 
9.44.130 - Vehicle repairs. 
It is unlawful for any person within any residential area of the city to repair, rebuild, or test any motor vehicle in such a manner that a reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area is caused discomfort or annoyance. 
(Ord. 152 § 4.1, 1971)  
9.44.140 - Motor-driven vehicles. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate any motor-driven vehicle within the city in such a manner that a reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area is caused discomfort or annoyance; provided, however any such vehicle that is operated upon any public highway, street, or right-of-way shall be excluded from the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 152 § 4.2, 1971)  
ARTICLE V. - AMPLIFIED SOUND 
 
9.44.150 - Purpose. 
The council enacts this legislation for the sole purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, safety, and welfare of its citizenry. While recognizing that the use of sound-amplifying equipment is protected by the constitutional rights of freedom of speech and assembly, the council nevertheless feels obligated to reasonably regulate the use of sound amplifying equipment in order to protect the correlative constitutional rights of the citizens of this community to privacy and freedom from public nuisance of loud and unnecessary noise. 
(Ord. 152 § 5.1, 1971)  
9.44.160 - Registration—Required. 
It is unlawful for any person, other than personnel of law enforcement or governmental agencies, to install, use, or operate within the city a loudspeaker or sound-amplifying equipment in a fixed or movable position or mounted upon any sound truck for the purpose of giving instructions, directions, talks, addresses, lectures, or transmitting music to any persons or assemblages of persons in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, park, place, or public property without first obtaining a permit as set forth in Sections 9.44.150 through 9.44.200. 
(Ord. 570 § 1, 1992: Ord. 152 § 5.2, 1971)  
9.44.170 - Permit application—Filing. 
Every user of sound-amplifying equipment shall file an application for permit to use such equipment with the director of public safety seven days in advance of the date on which the sound-amplifying equipment is intended to be used to allow adequate review of the application and equipment, which application shall contain the following information: 
A.  The name, address, and telephone number of both the owner and user of the sound-amplifying equipment; 
B.  The maximum sound-producing power of the sound-amplifying equipment which shall include the wattage to be used, the volume in decibels of sound which will be produced, and the approximate distance for which sound will be audible from the sound-amplifying equipment; 
C.  The license and motor number if a sound truck is to be used; 
D.  A general description of the sound-amplifying equipment which is to be used; and 
E.  For what purpose the sound-amplifying equipment will be used. 
(Ord. 570 § 2, 1992: Ord. 152 § 5.3(a), 1971)  
9.44.180 - Permit—Approval or disapproval. 
A.  Approval. The director of public safety shall return to the applicant an approved certified copy of a permit unless he finds that: 
1.  The conditions of the motor vehicle movement are such that in the opinion of the director of public safety, use of the equipment would constitute a detriment to traffic safety; or 
2.  The conditions of pedestrian movement are such that use of the equipment would constitute a detriment to traffic safety; or 
3.  The application reveals that the applicant would violate a provision set forth in Section 9.44.200, or any other provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Disapproval. In the event the permit is disapproved, the director of public safety shall endorse upon the application his reasons for disapproval and return it forthwith to applicant. 
(Ord. 570 § 3, 1992: Ord. 152 § 5.3(b), 1971)  
9.44.190 - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by disapproval of an application may appeal in writing within ten days to the city manager setting forth the reasons for the appeal. The city manager shall consider the appeal within ten days. Failure of the city manager to act on the appeal within ten days shall be deemed denial of the appeal. 
(Ord. 570 § 4, 1992: Ord. 152 § 5.4, 1971)  
9.44.200 - Regulations. 
The use of sound-amplifying equipment for commercial purposes within the city is totally prohibited. The noncommercial use of sound-amplifying equipment shall be subject to the following regulations: 
A.  The operation of sound-amplifying equipment shall be as stated in the permit. 
B.  The volume of sound shall be so controlled that it will not be unreasonably audible in excess of two hundred feet from the amplifying equipment as determined by the director of public safety. 
C.  Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-section B of this section, sound-amplifying equipment shall not be operated within two hundred feet of the buildings of churches, schools, or hospitals. 
D.  The volume of sound shall be controlled as determined by the director of public safety. 
(Ord. 570 § 5, 1992: Ord. 299 § 3, 1975: Ord. 152 § 5.5, 1971)  
9.44.205 - Amplified warning devices. 
It is unlawful for any person to activate a legally required amplified warning device on a vehicle being used in construction, daily maintenance or on-site business activities that can be detected without the aid of instruments beyond five hundred feet of the vehicle. 
(Ord. 692 § 1, 2002)  
ARTICLE VI. - TRAINS 
 
9.44.210 - Horns and whistles—Excessive sound prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate or sound or cause to be operated or sounded, a train horn or train whistle which creates a noise level in excess of eighty-nine decibels at any place or point three hundred feet or more distant from the source of such sound. 
(Ord. 152 § 6.1, 1971)  
ARTICLE VII. - REGULATIONS—VIOLATIONS 
 
9.44.220 - Generally. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter and in addition thereto, it is unlawful for any person to willfully make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary, or unusual noise which disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area. 
The standards which shall be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this section exists shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
A.  The level of the noise; 
B.  The intensity of the noise; 
C.  Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual; 
D.  Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural; 
E.  The level and intensity of the background noise, if any; 
F.  The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities; 
G.  The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates; 
H.  The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates; 
I.  The time of the day or night the noise occurs; 
J.  The duration of the noise; 
K.  Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant; and 
L.  Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity. 
(Ord. 152 § 7, 1971)  
9.44.222 - Exceptions. 
A.  Notwithstanding any of the prohibitions of Section 9.44.040 relative to ambient noise levels, the ambient noise levels set forth in Section 9.44.040 shall not apply provided the source of the amplified sound meets all of the following criteria. 
1.  The sound emanates from a facility owned by the city of Rohnert Park. 
2.  The facility is located on the west side of U.S. Highway No. 101. 
3.  The property upon which the sound emanates is public property. 
4.  The surrounding properties are zoned limited industrial district, (ML) and are developed with commercial and industrial uses. 
5.  The site from which the sound emanates is located no less than eight hundred feet from a residential zone as measured from the source as located on the site. 
6.  The sound emanating from the source is oriented toward the area least populated and the fewest properties that will be disturbed by the noise. 
7.  The concert or event shall end by eleven p.m. 
B.  For sites other than those specified in Subsection A., above, as herein designated, the prohibition of Section 9.44.040 relative to ambient noise levels shall not apply provided the amplified sound meets all of the following criteria: 
1.  The source of the sound is located at least one hundred feet from any residential district. 
2.  The activity does not extend beyond ten p.m. on weekdays (Sunday through Thursday) and beyond eleven p.m. on Friday and Saturday. 
3.  The sound emanating from the sound source is directed toward the least populated area that is located as far from the source as possible. 
4.  The source of the sound is located on "A" Park or the Medical Hospital site. 
(Ord. 570 § 2, 1993)  
9.44.230 - Violation—Misdemeanors. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding five hundred dollars or be imprisoned in the city or county jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue constitutes a separate offense and is punishable as such. 
(Ord. 152 § 1.5, 1971)  
9.44.240 - Violation—Additional remedies—Injunctions. 
As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of any device, instrument, vehicle, or machinery in violation of any provision of this chapter, which operation or maintenance causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitiveness or which endangers the comfort, repose, health, or peace of residents in the area, is a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 152 § 1.6, 1971)  
Chapter 9.46 - COSTS OF EMERGENCY RESPONSE 
 
9.46.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section: 
A.  "Appeal" means an appeal to the city council. The word includes the process which commences the appeal as well as the hearing itself. 
B.  "Expense of an emergency response" means reasonable costs incurred by a public agency in making an appropriate emergency response to the incident, but shall only include those costs directly arising because of the response to the particular incident. Reasonable costs shall include the costs of providing police, firefighting, rescue, the emergency medical services at the scene of the incident, as well as the salaries of the personnel responding to the incident. 
C.  "Intentionally wrongful conduct" means conduct intended to injure another person or property. 
D.  "Public agency" means the state and any city, county, municipal corporation, district, or public authority located, in whole or in part within this state which provides or may provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services. 
E.  "Under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or any drug, or under the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage and any drug" means when as a result of drinking an alcoholic beverage or using a drug, or both, a person's physical or mental abilities are impaired to a degree that he or she no longer has the ability to operate a motor vehicle, boat or vessel, or aircraft with the caution characteristic of a sober person of ordinary prudence under the same or similar circumstances. For purposes of this article, the presumptions described in Sections 23152, 23155 and 23103.5 of the California Vehicle Code shall apply. A person convicted of, or pleading guilty or nolo contendere to Section 23103.5 of the California Vehicle Code will be considered to have been determined by the courts to be "under the influence" for purposes of civil cost recovery under this article. 
(Ord. 582 § 1: Ord. 521, 1990)  
9.46.020 - Liability of operator of motor vehicle. 
Any person who is under the influence of an alcoholic beverage and any drug, whose negligent operation of a motor vehicle caused by that influence proximately causes any incident resulting in appropriate emergency response, and any person whose intentionally wrongful conduct proximately causes any incident resulting in an appropriate emergency response, upon filing of a complaint thereof, is liable for the expense of an emergency response by a public agency to the incident. 
(Ord. 521, 1990)  
9.46.030 - Liability of operator of civil aircraft. 
Any person who is under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or any drug, or the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage and any drug, whose negligent operation of a civil aircraft caused by that influence proximately causes any incident resulting in an appropriate emergency response, and person whose intentionally wrongful conduct proximately causes an incident resulting in an appropriate emergency response, upon filing of a complaint thereof, is liable for the expense of an emergency response by a public agency to the incident. 
(Ord. 582 § 2, 1993: Ord. 521, 1990)  
9.46.040 - Collection of expenses; effect of insurance. 
The expense of an emergency response shall be a charge against the person liable for expenses under this chapter. The charge constitutes a debt of that person and is collectible by the public agency incurring those costs in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under a contract, expressed or implied, except that liability for the expenses provided for in this chapter shall not be insurable and no insurance policy shall provide or pay for the expenses. 
(Ord. 521, 1990)  
9.46.050 - Imposition of charges upon filing of complaint, petition for wardship or any other accusation or information. 
The charges imposed under this chapter shall not be due and payable to the city unless and until the complaint, the petition for wardship or any other accusation or information is filed against the accused assessee by the Sonoma County District Attorney. The filing referred to herein shall apply to matters filed in juvenile court as well as complaints filed in the municipal or Superior Court. Upon such filing as referred to herein, the city will bill the assessee for costs of the emergency response. The debt is due and payable to the city in full by the assessee upon such billing. 
If the accused assessee is subsequently not convicted of the offense of driving under the influence or of "wet reckless" (Section 23103.5 of the California Vehicle Code) as defined in Rohnert Park Municipal Code Section 9.46.010, or in the case of a minor, if the court does not adjudicate the matter and establish the wardship or make a finding that the minor was unlawfully driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, then any and all amounts collected by the city under this chapter shall be returned to the accused assessee upon receipt of written proof, such as a copy of the court docket, of the final disposition of charges by the court. 
(Ord. 582 § 3, 1993: Ord. 530 § I, 1990: Ord. 521, 1990)  
9.46.060 - Amount of fees imposed. 
The amount of the fees imposed under this section shall be the department of public safety officer pay rate with benefits, times the number of all public safety staff hours required to handle the entire incident from time of dispatch to completion of all reports, plus thirty-three percent overhead, and any other direct city costs. 
(Ord. 582 § 4, 1993: Ord. 521, 1990)  
9.46.070 - Limit of liability. 
In no event shall a person's liability under this chapter for the expense of an emergency response exceed the amount provided in California Government Code Section 53155, as that section may be amended or recodified from time to time. 
(Ord. 521, 1990) 
( Ord. No. 891 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-27-2015)  
9.46.080 - Changes in fees charged by resolution. 
Any changes in the fees charged under Section 9.46.060 may be made by Resolution duly passed and adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. 521, 1990)  
Chapter 9.48 - ALCOHOL OFFENSE/LOUD PARTIES 
 
9.48.010 - Title. 
The title of this chapter shall be "Alcohol Offense/ Loud Parties." 
(Ord. 745 § 1 (part), 2005; Ord. 581 § 1, 1993)  
9.48.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
A.  "Party, gathering, or event" means a group of persons who have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or a social activity. 
B.  "Police services" means and includes the salaries and benefits of public safety department officers for the amount of time actually spent in responding to, or in remaining at, the party, gathering, or event and the administrative costs attributed to the incident; the actual cost of any medical treatment to injured officers; the cost of repairing any damaged city equipment or property; and the costs arising from the use of any city equipment and supplies in responding to or remaining at a party, gathering, or event. 
C.  "Responsible person" means and includes, but is not limited to: (1) the person who owns, rents, leases, or otherwise has control of the premises where the party, gathering, or event takes place; (2) the person in charge of the premises; or (3) the person who organized the event. If the person responsible for the event is a juvenile, then the parents or guardians of that juvenile and the juvenile will be jointly and severally liable for the costs incurred for police services pursuant to this chapter. 
D.  "Juvenile" means and includes any minor child under the age of eighteen years old. 
E.  "Minor" means and includes any person under the age of twenty-one years old. 
(Ord. 745 § 1 (part), 2005; Ord. 581 § 1, 1993)  
9.48.030 - Unlawful gatherings on private property when alcohol is served. 
Except as permitted by Article I, Section 4 of the California Constitution, no person shall permit, allow, or host a party, gathering, or event at his or her place of residence or other private property, place, or premises under his or her control where minors are present and alcoholic beverages are in the possession of or being consumed by same. 
(Ord. 745 § 1 (part), 2005; Ord. 581 § 1, 1993)  
9.48.050 - Unsupervised possession of alcohol unlawful. 
Except as permitted by state law, no minor shall have in his or her possession or control any alcoholic beverage at any place not open to the public, unless that person is being supervised by his or her parent or legal guardian. 
(Ord. 745 § 1 (part), 2005; Ord. 581 § 1, 1993)  
9.48.060 - Loud or unruly gatherings—Public nuisance. 
It shall be unlawful and constitute a public nuisance, as defined in Chapter 1.24 of this code, to conduct a gathering of ten or more persons on any private property in a manner which constitutes a substantial disturbance of the quiet enjoyment of private or public property in a significant segment of a neighborhood, as a result of conduct constituting a violation of law. Illustrative of such unlawful conduct is excessive noise or traffic, obstruction of public streets by crowds or vehicles, public drunkenness, the service of alcohol to minors, fights, disturbances of the peace, and litter. A gathering constituting a public nuisance may be abated by the city by all reasonable means including, but not limited to, an order requiring the gathering to be disbanded and citation and/or arrest of any law violators under any applicable local laws and state statutes such as: Penal Code Sections 415 and 416 (Breach of the Peace); Penal Code Section 374 et seq. (Litter); Penal Code Section 647 (Public Intoxication/Obstruction of Public Way); Bus. & Prof. Code Section 25658 (Selling Alcohol to Minors), Vehicle Code Section 23224 (Possession of alcoholic beverage in vehicle, persons under 21); Penal Code Section 12020 et seq. (Unlawful Carrying and Possession of Concealed Weapons). 
(Ord. 745 § 1 (part), 2005)  
9.48.070 - Notice of unruly gathering—Posting, mail. 
A.  Posting of Premises. When the city intervenes at a gathering which constitutes a nuisance under this chapter, the premises at which such nuisance occurred shall be posted with a notice stating that the intervention of the city has been necessitated as a result of a public nuisance under this chapter caused by an event at the premises, the date of the police intervention, and that any subsequent event within a one hundred twenty-day period therefrom on the same premises, which necessitates city intervention, shall result in the joint and several liability of any guests causing the public nuisance, or any persons who own or are residents of the property at which the public nuisance occurred, or who sponsored the event constituting the public nuisance as more fully set forth in Section 9.48.080 of this chapter. The residents of such property shall be responsible for ensuring that such notice is not removed or defaced within the one hundred twenty-day period listed in the notice and shall be liable for a civil penalty of one hundred dollars in addition to any other penalties which may be due under this section if such notice is removed or defaced; provided, however, that the residents of the house of sponsor of the event, if present, shall be consulted as to the location in which such notice is posted in order to achieve both the security of the notice and its prominent display. 
B.  Mailing of Notice to Property Owner. Notice of the event shall also be mailed to any property owner at the address shown on the city's property tax assessment records and shall advise the property owner that any subsequent event within one hundred twenty days on the same premises necessitating city intervention shall result in liability of the property owner for all penalties associated with such intervention as more particularly set forth below. 
(Ord. 745 § 1 (part), 2005) 
(Ord. No. 863, § 2, 8-27-2013)  
9.48.080 - Persons liable for a subsequent response to a gathering constituting a nuisance. 
If the city is required to respond to a gathering constituting a public nuisance on the same premises more than once in any one hundred twenty-day period, the following persons shall be jointly and severally liable for civil penalties as set forth in Section 9.48.090 of this chapter, in addition to liability for any injuries to city personnel or damage to city property: 
A.  The person or persons who own the property where the gathering constituting a public nuisance took place, provided that notice has been mailed to the owner of the property as set forth herein and the gathering occurs at least two weeks after the mailing of such notice. 
B.  The person or persons residing on or otherwise in control of the property where such gathering took place. 
C.  The person or persons who organized or sponsored such gathering. 
D.  All persons attending such gathering who engaged in any activity resulting in the public nuisance. 
E.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to impose liability on the resident or owners of the premises or sponsor of the gathering, for the conduct of persons who are present without the express or implied consent of the resident or sponsor, as long as the resident and sponsor have taken reasonable steps to exclude such uninvited participants from the premises. Where an invited guest engages in conduct which the sponsor or resident could not reasonably foresee and the conduct is an isolated instance of a guest at the event violating the law which the sponsor is unable to reasonably control without the intervention of the police, the unlawful conduct of the individual guest shall not be attributable to the sponsor or resident for the purposes of determining whether the event constitutes a public nuisance under this section. 
F.  Any property owner who has demonstrated due diligence in abating unmanageable tenants and is waiting the prescribed time period prior to eviction actions shall not be held liable for purposes of this section. 
(Ord. 745 § 1 (part), 2005) 
(Ord. No. 863, § 3, 8-27-2013)  
9.48.090 - Schedule of civil penalties. 
A.  If an administrative citation is issued in accordance with Section 1.24.100, "Violation," of this code, civil penalties shall be assessed against all persons liable for the city's intervention to abate a gathering constituting a nuisance. Any administrative citation issued in accordance with Chapter 1.25 may be contested in accordance with Section 1.25.090 and following sections of this code. If a second, third, or further investigation is required within a one hundred twenty-day period, the civil penalties will be as shown below: 
1.  For the second response in any one hundred twenty-day period, the penalty shall be the total sum of five hundred dollars. 
2.  For the third response in any one hundred twenty-day period, the penalty shall be the total sum of seven hundred and fifty dollars. 
3.  For any further response in any one hundred twenty-day period, the penalty shall be the total sum of one thousand dollars for each such further response. 
4.  The administrative citation penalties provided herein shall be in addition to any other penalties imposed by law for particular violations of law committed during the course of an event which is a nuisance under this ordinance, including those remedies set forth in Chapter 1.24, "Nuisance Abatement," of this code. 
B.  Collection of penalties shall be pursuant to Chapter 1.27, "Collection Procedures," of this code. 
(Ord. 745 § 1 (part), 2005) 
(Ord. No. 852, § E, 12-11-2012; Ord. No. 863, § 4, 8-27-2013)  
9.48.100 - Collection of delinquent costs. 
The civil penalties assessed as a result of a subsequent city response to a loud or unruly gathering shall constitute a debt of all persons liable for the penalties in favor of the city and may be collected in any manner authorized by Chapter 1.27, "Collection Procedures," of this code. 
(Ord. 745 § 1 (part), 2005) 
(Ord. No. 852, § F, 12-11-2012)  
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY  
Chapter 9.56 - MUNICIPAL GOLF COURSE 
Sections: 
 
9.56.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as defined in this section: 
A.  "Facilities" means any banquet room, clubhouse, driving range, pro shop, locker room and lounge building, maintenance yard and soil conditioning building, rest rooms and any and all other buildings and rooms of, and appurtenances to any golf course owned and operated by the city for the playing of golf. 
B.  "Golf course" or "municipal golf course" means any golf links owned and operated by the city for the playing of golf. 
C.  "Starter" shall mean the city's golf professional or any of his assistants or employees. 
(Ord. 329 § l (part), 1977)  
9.56.020 - Entry on golf course. 
No person shall play golf on the municipal golf course, or enter thereupon for any purpose whatsoever other than to perform work ordered by the city, without first registering with the starter. The city manager may, by express written permission or by the promulgation of appropriate rules and regulations, authorize spectators to be admitted to the golf course without registering, when tournaments, exhibitions or special events are held thereon. This section shall not prohibit use of the golf course by residents or their guests for walking, jogging or other forms of exercise or recreation provided such use, as determined by the city, is not detrimental to the golf course. 
(Ord. 329 § l (part), 1977)  
9.56.030 - Payment of fees. 
No person shall play golf upon the municipal golf course, or use the facilities thereof, without first paying the prescribed fees therefor. 
(Ord. 329 § 1 (part), 1977)  
9.56.040 - Green fees, etc. 
The green fees, season ticket fees, and other special fees to be paid for the use of the golf course, or the facilities thereof, shall be prescribed by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. 329 § l (part), 1977)  
9.56.050 - Tickets. 
Every person paying a green fee, season ticket fee, or special fee shall be issued a ticket. The ticket shall be valid only during the season for which issued or on the date when issued and for the number of holes of play provided thereon. It shall be unlawful for any person to play golf on the municipal golf course without having a valid ticket in his possession at all times while using the course. Such ticket shall be shown to the starter or other authorized employee or agent of the city upon demand. 
(Ord. 329 § l (part), 1977)  
9.56.060 - Ticket—Nontransferable. 
All tickets shall be nontransferable. Any person who transfers or receives a ticket in violation of this section shall be subject to being barred from further use of the golf course by the city manager. 
(Ord. 329 § 1 (part), 1977)  
9.56.070 - Rules and regulations. 
The city manager may establish such supplemental rules and regulations as may from time to time be required for the proper administration of the golf course, including, but not limited to, the limiting of advance registrations at the golf course to residents of the city on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
(Ord. 329 § 1 (part), 1977)  
9.56.080 - Posting of rules—Violations. 
Such rules and regulations as are promulgated in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.56.070 shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the golf course and any person failing to comply with such rules and regulations shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 329 § l (part), 1977)  
9.56.090 - Authority to eject unauthorized persons from course. 
Any person who enters upon the municipal golf course in violation of any provision of this section, and who persists in remaining thereon after being requested to leave by the starter or other authorized employee of the city, may be ejected therefrom forthwith, and it shall be the duty of any public safety officer (police officer) of the city to carry out this provision. 
(Ord. 329 § l (part), 1977)  
9.56.100 - Start of play. 
Each player shall start playing golf at the point designated by the starter. The starter shall have the right and discretion to require players to tee off in groups of four, but no more. 
(Ord. 329 § l (part), 1977)  
9.56.110 - Equipment. 
Each player shall have a bag or holder in which to carry his clubs and a putter for his individual use. 
(Ord. 329 § l (part), 1977)  
9.56.120 - Use of putter on green. 
No club, other than a putter, shall be used on any of the greens. 
(Ord. 329 § 1 (part), 1977)  
9.56.130 - Decorum and dress. 
Every player or spectator shall conduct himself properly and be properly attired while on the municipal golf course. Proper attire includes wearing of shoes, shirt or blouse, and pants or skirt or shorts. 
(Ord. 329 § l (part), 1977)  
9.56.140 - Damage to course. 
Every player or spectator on the municipal golf course shall at all times use diligence and care to protect the course from damage. Any player or spectator who wilfully or negligently damages or destroys any part of the golf course or who litters shall be subject to be barred from future play thereon by the city manager. 
(Ord. 329 § l (part), 1977)  
9.56.150 - Practicing on golf course proper. 
No player shall practice on the municipal golf course by driving or putting more than one ball. This section shall not apply to practice areas such as driving ranges and putting greens. 
(Ord. 329 § l (part), 1977)  
9.56.160 - Stray balls. 
No person shall hunt for golf balls on the municipal golf course unless he is looking for a ball which he or another player with whom he is playing has lost. 
(Ord. 329 § 1 (part), 1977)  
9.56.170 - Taking lost balls—Public property. 
No person shall knowingly take or carry away from the municipal golf course any lost golf ball without the consent of the owner thereof. 
(Ord. 329 § l (part), 1977)  
9.56.180 - Taking lost balls—Private property—Trespass. 
No person shall trespass or enter upon any private property to recover any golf ball or for any other purpose whatsoever without the consent of the owner. 
(Ord. 329 § l (part), 1977)  
9.56.190 - Sale of golf supplies. 
No person shall sell, or offer to sell, golf balls or other golf supplies or accessories in or about the municipal golf course unless authorized to do so by the city manager. 
(Ord. 329 § l (part), 1977)  
9.56.200 - Bringing domestic animals on course. 
No person shall bring any dog or other domestic animal onto the municipal golf course. 
(Ord. 329 § l (part), 1977)  
9.56.210 - Molesting wild animals, etc. 
No person shall tease, hunt, shoot, trap, chase, molest or wilfully frighten, harm, or kill any wild animal or bird while on the municipal golf course. 
(Ord. 329 § l (part), 1977)  
9.56.220 - Vehicles on course. 
Caddy carts may be operated on the fairways. However, no person shall operate any other vehicle on the municipal golf course, including the service roads thereof, except to perform work ordered by the city. 
(Ord. 329 § l (part), 1977)  
9.56.230 - Alcoholic beverages. 
No person shall use, consume, or have in his possession any alcoholic beverage while on the municipal golf course without the approval of the golf professional. This provision shall not apply to alcoholic beverages sold under authority of the council for consumption in the clubhouse or other facility operated in conjunction with the golf course. 
(Ord. 329 § l (part), 1977)  
9.56.240 - Advertising, etc. 
No person shall post or display any sign, banner or advertisement, or write upon, cut, mutilate, deface, or otherwise disturb any building, bench, ornament, or flower on the municipal golf course unless authorized to do so by the city manager. 
(Ord. 329 § 1 (part), 1977)  
9.56.250 - Minors. 
No person under ten years of age shall enter upon the municipal golf course for any purpose whatsoever unless accompanied by an adult person. 
(Ord. 329 § 1 (part), 1977)  
Chapter 9.58 - LITTERING 
 
9.58.010 - City council findings—Deemed nuisance when. 
A.  The city council finds and determines that the distribution of unsolicited printed matter upon private property can be a nuisance and that the continued distribution of such unsolicited printed matter after a request by a property owner or occupant constitutes an annoyance and an invasion of privacy. 
B.  The city council further finds and determines that printed matter that is indiscriminately distributed upon private property when it is not requested by the owner, after notice to the distributor to cease and desist such distribution, can be a source of litter and debris in the community. 
C.  The city council further finds and deter-mines that the continued distribution of printed matter upon private property after notice from the owner or occupant of the private property constitutes a public nuisance. 
D.  In order to control the unsolicited distribution of printed matter upon private property after notice from the owner or occupant, the Rohnert Park city council does ordain the provisions set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 381 § l (part), 1981)  
9.58.020 - Unsolicited littering prohibited. 
No person shall throw, distribute, deposit, place or attach or in any other way leave any handbill, circular, newspaper, paper, booklet, poster or any other printed matter on private property after notice from the owner or occupant of the private property to cease and desist from such activity. 
(Ord. 381 § 1 (part), 1981)  
9.58.030 - Notice by owner or occupant defined. 
In the event the lawful owner or occupant of the private property upon which the printed matter has been deposited does not desire further deposits of the material, the owner or occupant shall give written notice to the distributor of the printed matter. The term distributor means the person or entity who causes and for whose benefit the distribution is made. 
(Ord. 381 § l (part), 1981)  
Chapter 9.60 - PLACEMENT OF ADVERTISING MATERIALS 
 
9.60.010 - City council findings. 
The Rohnert Park city council finds: 
A.  The unsolicited placement of advertising material, political advertising, religious material and any other printed matter upon motor vehicles and other private property without the knowledge and consent of the owner, constitutes a nuisance and is a source of substantial litter and debris within the community. 
B.  A substantial amount of such printed matter is not wanted by the owner of the motor vehicle or of the private property and, when the property owner returns to his or her motor vehicle or property, the printed material is removed from the motor vehicle or private property and cast aside upon either public or private property. The additional debris on public or private property is a source of public and private annoyance, costs, additional funds to supervise and police, is a source of refuse for rodents, insects and other vermin, and is not aesthetically pleasing or compatible with surrounding property, especially in instances where the adjacent property owner is attempting to police his or her property. 
C.  The city is attempting to control costs of public street-sweeping and other costs incidental to the control of waste and debris, and is also attempting to educate and encourage private citizens to participate in waste management. 
D.  The city has no intention or desire to interfere with rights of a citizen to petition the government, or to freely advocate ideas and proposals under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. The city council finds that First Amendment rights can be exercised in a manner consistent with this chapter, in that no restriction is placed on the distribution of printed material that is personally handed or personally delivered to the public so that the recipient of the material personally accepts it from the distributor. Under such circumstances, the city council finds that less litter and debris will result in the city, since some members of the public, not interested in the material, will refuse it and other members of the public who accept the material personally, presumably will do so because they desire to read it and will later dispose of it in a proper receptacle. 
(Ord. 384 § l (part), 1981)  
9.60.020 - Placement of printed matter upon motor vehicles or other private property prohibited. 
The placement of printed matter upon motor vehicles or other private property located in public streets, public parks, public or private parking lots, private shopping centers and other public or private sites of public congregation is prohibited. 
(Ord. 384 § l (part), 1981)  
9.60.030 - Distribution of printed matter by personal delivery. 
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the distribution of printed matter by personal delivery or by handing the material directly to the recipient thereof. 
(Ord. 384 § 1 (part), 1981)  
9.60.040 - Solicitation of signatures to petition excepted. 
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the personal solicitation of signatures to a petition to redress grievances addressed to any governmental agency nor the distribution of any printed material which accompanies the solicitation provided the solicitations are made in person and the printed material that is given is personally handed to the person whose signature or whose support is being solicited. 
(Ord. 384 § 1 (part), 1981)  
Chapter 9.62 - PUBLIC PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES 
 
9.62.010 - Unlawful acts in public parks and recreation facilities. 
It is unlawful for any person, entity, firm or corporation to do or commit any of the acts enumerated below in any city park or recreation facility: 
A.  To damage, by any means whatsoever, any public property planted, placed, located or otherwise situated in a public park or recreation facility. 
B.  To cut or remove any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand or gravel or any found object, whether above or below ground. 
C.  To release any livestock of any kind on park property with the exception of dogs which shall be permitted pursuant to posted regulations or if under leash in accordance with Section 6.14.030 of the Municipal Code. 
D.  To distribute any handbills or circulars, or to post, place or erect any bills, notice, paper or advertising device of any kind. 
E.  To sell or offer for sale any merchandise, article or thing whatsoever without written permission from the city. Such permit shall be carried by the vendor at all times that he or she is selling within the city park. 
F.  To willfully tamper with or damage any water or gas pipes, hydrant, stopcock, sewer, basin or other construction in any park. 
G.  To carry any weapon, including, but not limited to, firearms, airguns, paintball markers, or slingshots. 
H.  To make or kindle a fire except in picnic stoves or other fixtures provided for that purpose, or to camp, except in places designated as such by official action of the city. 
I.  To ride or drive any horse or other animal or any motorized vehicle, cycle or scooter elsewhere other than on the roads or drives provided for such purpose, or to drive a motor vehicle in an erratic or hazardous manner on any park roads, paths or parking area. 
J.  To indulge in riotous, threatening or indecent conduct, or abusive, threatening, profane or indecent language. 
K.  To enter, remain, stay or loiter in the swimming pools in the public parks or the enclosures surrounding said pools at any time when the pools are not open to the public with a lifeguard on duty. 
L.  To play or engage in model airplane flying, driving of golf balls, archery, hardball or any similar games of a hazardous nature except at such places as shall be especially set apart for such purposes. 
M.  To throw or place on or in any park any paper, rubbish, garbage or refuse matter of any kind, unless in a receptacle designed for the purpose, but no person shall deposit household rubbish and garbage in any city park, rubbish or garbage receptacles. 
N.  To possess any beverage container made of glass or to bring, carry, or transport any beverage container made of glass into a city park. 
O.  To possess food or drink in any city recreation facility where there are signs posted prohibiting such items. 
P.  To disregard or disobey the directives of a lifeguard, city staff member, or posted rules while at a city swimming pool. 
Q.  To deny or otherwise interfere with the use of a field or facility by an organization or individual with a valid reservation permit issued by the recreation department. 
R.  To engage in any activity other than tennis on tennis courts without written permission from the recreation department. 
S.  To be in custody, control, or otherwise responsible for an off-leash or unconfined dog which initiates an unprovoked attack on any person or animal that causes injury or causes a defensive action to prevent serious injury. 
T.  To be in custody, control, or otherwise responsible for a dog that does not exhibit a valid license. 
U.  To be in custody, control, or otherwise responsible for an off-leash or unconfined dog over six months of age that has not been spayed or neutered. 
V.  To have, possess, carry, sell or consume any alcoholic beverage as defined in Section 9.34.010, unless such person has obtained a permit for possession and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages for a special event as defined in Section 9.34.010, from the director of public safety or his/her designee. 
(Ord. 796 § 3, 2008; Ord. 792 § 4, 2007)  
9.62.020 - Unlawful to enter, remain or loiter in posted designated parks during certain hours. 
It is unlawful for any person to enter, remain or loiter within any city park between the hours of ten-thirty p.m. and six a.m. of the next day. A violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor unless the citing officer is able to make one of the findings contained in subsections 1.16.010 B (1) through (4) of this code and elects to issue a citation for an infraction. 
(Ord. 743 § 5, 2005: Ord. 452 § 1, 1985)  
9.62.030 - Method of posting designated parks. 
A.  Each park shall be posted with signs not less than one square foot in area and upon which, in lettering not less than one inch in height, appear the words "ENTERING OR REMAINING IN THIS PARK BETWEEN 10:30 P.M. AND 6:00 A.M. WITHOUT RECREATION DEPARTMENT PERMIT FORBIDDEN. Rohnert Park Municipal Code, Title 9, Section V, Chapter 9.62." 
B.  Posting. 
1.  If the park does not contain any lineal dimension exceeding three hundred fifty feet, by posting signs at each corner of the area and at intervals not exceeding one hundred fifty feet, and, if such property has a definite entrance or entrances, at each such entrance. 
2.  If the park has lineal dimensions exceeding three hundred fifty feet, by posting signs at each corner of the area and at intervals not exceeding three hundred feet, and if such property has a definite entrance or entrances, at each such entrance. 
(Ord. 452 § 1, 1985)  
9.62.040 - Exemption—Peace officers, etc. 
The provisions of Section 9.62.020 shall not apply to the entry upon park property in the course of duty of any peace officer or other duly authorized public employee, nor to any organized events conducted in such parks when authorized by the city manager or his designate. 
(Ord. 452 § 1, 1985)  
ARTICLE VI. - CONSUMER PROTECTION  
Chapter 9.64 - SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS 
 
9.64.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section: 
A.  "License" means the issuance of a business license and the payment of a business license fee as provided by Chapters 5.04 through 5.12. 
B.  "Peddler" includes any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, and merchandise, and personal property of any nature whatever, offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from place to place, sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, railroad car, or other vehicle or conveyance; and further provided, that one who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as a part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this chapter is a peddler subject to the provisions of Sections 9.64.010 through 9.64.040. The word "peddler" includes the words "hawker" and "huckster." 
C.  "Permit" means a permit granted and issued pursuant to the provisions of Sections 9.64.010 through 9.64.040. 
D.  "Solicitor" means any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise and personal property of any nature whatsoever, for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payments of such sales or not; provided, that such definition shall include any person, who, for himself or for any other person, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, railroad car, boat, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop or any other place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. 
(Ord. 34 § 1, 1963)  
9.64.020 - Peddling or soliciting on certain premises prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any peddler or solicitor or any person pretending to be a peddler or solicitor to ring the bell or knock at any building whereon there is printed or affixed or otherwise displayed to public view any sign containing any or all of the following words: "No Peddlers," "No Solicitors," or "No Agents," or which otherwise purports to prohibit peddling or soliciting on such premises. A violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor unless the citing officer is able to make one of the findings contained in subsections 1.16.010 B (1) through (4) of this code and elects to issue a citation for an infraction. 
(Ord. 743 § 6, 2005: Ord. 34 § 2, 1963)  
9.64.030 - Misrepresentation prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to represent by words, writing or action that he is some other peddler or solicitor, that he is a partner, employee or agent of any peddler or solicitor when in fact he is not the partner, agent or employee of such peddler or solicitor, or that he is the employee, representative, agent or partner of any person when in fact he is not the employee, representative, agent or partner of such person. 
(Ord. 34 § 3, 1963)  
9.64.040 - Vehicle stickers required. 
Every vehicle used for peddling shall have a sticker furnished by the tax and license collector of the city attached to such vehicle in a conspicuous place showing that the peddler has a permit as required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 34 § 4, 1963)  
9.64.050 - Permit—Required. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a peddler or solicitor within the corporate limits of the city without first applying for and obtaining a permit as provided by Sections 9.64.060 through 9.64.130. 
(Ord. 34 § 5, 1963)  
9.64.060 - Permit—Application—Contents. 
Applicants for a permit under Sections 9.64.050 through 9.64.130 must file, in duplicate, with the chief of police a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the city, which shall give the following information: 
A.  The name and address of the applicant; 
B.  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold, or for which orders are to be solicited, and, in the case of products of farm or orchard, whether produced or grown by the applicant; 
C.  If employed, the name and address of the employer; 
D.  The names and addresses of at least two reliable residents of the state who will certify the applicant's good character and business responsibility, or, in lieu of the names of references, any other available evidence as to the good character and business responsibility of the applicant as will enable an investigator to properly evaluate such character and business responsibility; 
E.  A statement as to whether or not the applicant had been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance, including the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty as assessed therefor. 
(Ord. 34 § 6, 1963)  
9.64.070 - Permit—Application—Investigation. 
Upon receipt of the application mentioned in Section 9.64.060, the original shall be retained by the chief of police, who shall cause such investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good; provided, however, that the investigation shall be completed within ten days after receipt of the application. As a part of the investigation, the applicant shall submit to his fingerprints being taken. 
If as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on the application his disapproval and his reasons for the same and shall notify the applicant that his application is disapproved. 
(Ord. 34 § 7, 1963)  
9.64.080 - Permit—Issuance. 
If as a result of the investigation mentioned in the preceding section, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on the original and duplicate of the application his approval and deliver the duplicate to the applicant. Thereupon the applicant shall present the approved duplicate of application to the tax and license collector who shall then compute and collect the appropriate business license fee and issue a receipt therefor to the applicant. Upon the exhibition of the receipt to the chief of police, the latter shall issue and sign a permit in triplicate, showing thereon the applicant's name, address, the kind of goods, wares and merchandise to be sold or for which orders are to be solicited and the date of issuance of the permit. The original permit shall be issued to the applicant and a copy thereof delivered to the tax collector and the remaining copy retained by the chief of police. 
(Ord. 34 § 8, 1963)  
9.64.090 - Permit—Suspension. 
Permits issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended by the chief of police for any of the following causes: 
A.  Fraud, misrepresentation or any false statement made to the police department in furnishing the information required by Sections 9.64.050 through 9.64.130; 
B.  Any violation of Sections 9.64.050 through 9.64.130; 
C.  Conviction of the permit holder of any felony or crime involving moral turpitude; 
D.  Conducting the business of soliciting or peddling in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(Ord. 34 § 9, 1963)  
9.64.100 - Permit—Revocation—Generally. 
Five days after notice of suspension has been given to the permit holder as described in the preceding section, such permit shall be automatically revoked, unless within the five-day period the permit holder requests a hearing by the city manager. 
(Ord. 34 § 10, 1963)  
9.64.110 - Permit—Revocation—Hearing. 
Application for the hearing mentioned in the preceding section shall be made upon forms to be furnished by the police department, and such hearing shall be held within fifteen days after the application for hearing is filed. Notice of the time and place of such hearing by the city manager shall be given to the applicant and to the chief of police. Within five days after the hearing, the city manager shall make an order to either revoke or reinstate the permit. 
(Ord. 34 § 11, 1963)  
9.64.120 - Permit—Revocation—Appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by the action of the chief of police in disapproving the application for a permit, or by the action of the city manager in revoking a permit under Sections 9.64.050 through 9.64.130, shall have the right to appeal to the council. The appeal shall be taken by filing with the city clerk a written statement of the grounds for the appeal within fourteen days after notice of the decision by the chief of police or the city manager. The council shall set a time and place for hearing such an appeal and notice of such time and place shall be given by the city clerk to the applicant or permit holder, chief of police, and city manager, at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing. The city council shall act upon such appeal within five days after the hearing and the decision of the council shall be final. 
(Ord. 34 § 12, 1963)  
9.64.130 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor unless by ordinance the violation is made an infraction. Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by any ordinance of the city, any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the ordinances of the city shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Every violation determined to be an infraction is punishable by: 
A.  A fine not exceeding fifty dollars for a first violation; 
B.  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year; 
C.  A fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year. 
Each such person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the ordinances of the city is committed, continued or permitted by any such person, and he shall be punished accordingly. 
(Ord. 293 § 1, 2, 1975: Ord. 255 § 1, 1975: Ord. 34 § 13, 1963)  
Chapter 9.65 - ALARM SYSTEMS 
 
9.65.010 - Declaration of policy. 
It is the policy of the city of Rohnert Park to provide a quick and efficient response to all emergency calls for aid from the police or fire services. In the case of burglary, robbery and fire alarms some businesses and restaurants utilize an alarm system that records the request for aid directly to the police department or some central reporting system. 
In some cases the alarms are false alarms and public resources are diverted to the source of the alarm only to find that they have responded to a false alarm. Because the response by the city results in a considerable expenditure of city employee time and is an expense to the city both in manpower and materials, the city council has determined that the expense of such response should be reimbursed if the number of responses exceed a certain amount annually. 
(Ord. 522 § 2, 1990)  
9.65.020 - Definitions. 
"Alarm" means an alarm signal from a residence or business location in the city of Rohnert Park which ends at the city department of public safety offices, or at a central alarm company office which in turn relays it to the department of public safety offices and which causes city personnel to respond, or through whatever means results in the response of department of public safety personnel. 
"Emergency" means an incident which reasonably requires a response by public safety personnel. A response due to a failure, malfunction or other error, whether human or mechanical, which results in the transmission of an alarm to department of public safety offices is not an emergency. In the event that a question of whether a response by city personnel was a response to an emergency the determination of the director of public safety shall be final. 
"False alarm" means an alarm to which city personnel or equipment have responded because of a report that an emergency existed and which did not require a response because the incident for which the alarm was given did not occur. 
(Ord. 522 § 2, 1990)  
9.65.030 - False alarms, a public nuisance. 
Alarm systems which transmit a false alarm to the department of public safety offices of the city of Rohnert Park and which result in the city dispatching public safety personnel and city equipment to a location are a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 522 § 2,1990)  
9.65.040 - False alarms in excess of four per calendar year, abatement of nuisance by fee schedule. 
All responses to the same location within the city of Rohnert Park in excess of four per calendar year shall be discouraged by billing the owner or occupant of the location under the fee schedule as defined in Rohnert Park Municipal Code Section 9.65.080. 
The fees imposed may be assessed against the property to which the response was made in accordance with California Government Code Section 38773.5. 
(Ord. 522 § 2, 1990)  
9.65.050 - New alarm installations. 
In the case of new alarm installations, there will be a thirty day grace period in which responses will not be monitored for enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. 522 § 2, 1990)  
9.65.060 - Commercial alarms, determining responsibility. 
In determining responsibility for commercial alarms, the persons who contract with the alarm company for service, or the lessee or occupant of the structure which has installed and maintains said alarm shall be ultimately responsible for that alarm system. 
(Ord. 522 § 2, 1990)  
9.65.070 - Residential alarms, determining responsibility. 
Responsibility for the alarm system in multi-family residential dwellings and condominiums shall rest with the persons who contract with the alarm company for service to that system. 
(Ord. 522 § 2, 1990)  
9.65.080 - False alarms in excess of four per calendar year fee for response. 
The city shall also impose a fee for each false alarm in excess of four to which city personnel and equipment respond in a calendar year as follows: 
A.  For the fifth and sixth false alarm an extra charge fee of fifty dollars per response shall be collected. 
B.  For the seventh and eighth false alarm an extra charge fee of seventy-five dollars per response shall be collected. 
C.  For nine or more false alarms an extra charge fee of one hundred dollars per response shall be collected. 
The city council shall have the right to alter or amend the fee by subsequent resolutions of the city council. 
(Ord. 522 § 2, 1990)  
Chapter 9.66 - BINGO GAMES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 892 , § 3, adopted Nov. 24, 2015, repealed the former Ch. 9.66, 9.66.010—9.66.260, and enacted a new Ch. 9.66 as set out herein. The former Ch. 9.66 pertained to similar subject matter. See Ordinance List and Disposition Table for derivation. 
 
9.66.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Bingo" means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols that are marked or covered by the player on a tangible card in the player's possession and that conform to numbers or symbols, selected at random and announced by a live caller. 
B.  "Charitable purpose" means purposes beneficial to the community as a whole or an unascertainable and indefinite portion thereof. Charitable purposes may include, but are not limited to, relief from poverty, and advancement of education, the arts, science or religion. 
C.  "Eligible organization" means one of the following types of organizations: organizations exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by Sections 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g, 23701k, 23701w, and 23701l of the Revenue and Taxation Code; mobile home park associations; senior citizens organizations; charitable organizations affiliated with a school district; or organizations otherwise deemed eligible under California Penal Code Section 326.5(a). 
D.  "Prize" means an award, either in cash or kind, stemming from participation in a bingo game. 
E.  "Proceeds" means income from any source, either in cash or kind, directly related to the operation of a bingo game. 
F.  "Overhead" expenses include bingo equipment, administrative expenses, security equipment, security personnel, and disposable supplies used in the conduct of bingo games, including, but not limited to, paper forms. 
( Ord. No. 892 , § 3, 11-24-2015)  
9.66.020 - Permit required. 
Bingo games may be conducted within the city, provided that the game is conducted by an eligible organization holding a permit issued in accordance with this chapter and, in addition, provided that any such game is conducted in compliance with the terms and conditions of such permit and applicable state law, including, but not limited to, California Penal Code Section 326.5. 
( Ord. No. 892 , § 3, 11-24-2015)  
9.66.030 - Permit application. 
Any eligible organization desiring to obtain a permit for the conduct of any bingo game within the city shall submit a written application to the department of public safety of the city, together with the appropriate fee as established by resolution of the city council. 
( Ord. No. 892 , § 3, 11-24-2015)  
9.66.040 - Application and renewal fee. 
The city council, by resolution, may adopt and revise, from time to time, a schedule of fees for the processing of permit applications for the conduct of bingo games. 
( Ord. No. 892 , § 3, 11-24-2015)  
9.66.050 - Exemption from fee. 
No application or renewal fee shall be required of any eligible organization stating in its application that it will use all proceeds from the bingo games solely for prizes and to cover the costs of conducting the bingo games, and not for any other purpose, including charitable purposes. 
( Ord. No. 892 , § 3, 11-24-2015)  
9.66.060 - Administrative fee for public safety costs. 
An administrative fee for public safety costs may be imposed to cover costs incurred by the city that are directly related to bingo activities and shall be collected monthly by the city; however, the fee shall not exceed the actual costs incurred in providing the service. 
( Ord. No. 892 , § 3, 11-24-2015)  
9.66.070 - Permits issued only to qualified applicants. 
No permit shall be issued to any applicant unless the applicant is an eligible organization and its application conforms to the requirements, terms and conditions of Sections 9.66.020 through 9.66.320. 
( Ord. No. 892 , § 3, 11-24-2015)  
9.66.080 - Contents of application. 
A.  Each application for a permit to conduct bingo games shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name of the applicant; 
2.  The business and mailing address of the applicant; 
3.  The name and signature of at least two officers, including the highest ranking officer of the organization's highest governing body; 
4.  A resolution of the governing body of such organization authorizing the conduct of any and all bingo games proposed by the application and the purpose of the bingo game; 
5.  The street number or other clear and specific identification of the location at which each bingo games proposed in the application would be conducted and, in addition, a statement of the maximum capacity of the place in which such bingo games would be conducted; 
6.  A description of the applicant's non-bingo activities conducted at each location; 
7.  The name and signature of the person who will actually conduct each and every bingo game proposed by the permit; 
8.  A precise description of the bingo activities to be conducted at each bingo game; 
9.  Proposed date, day of week, and hours of day for the conduct of each bingo game; 
10.  Financial information relevant to the application, including but not limited to: (1) the proposed budget of the applicant; (2) the anticipated charitable use of the funds; (3) the estimated receipts and expenses for the year together with such other information relevant to the application as required and approved by the public safety chief; (4) the name and address of the custodian of the financial records of the applicant; 
11.  A completed acknowledgment of responsibilities and restrictions form, provided by the city, enumerating the applicable requirements in Penal Code Section 326.5 and this chapter, as they may be amended from time to time. The applicant shall sign this acknowledgment of responsibilities and restrictions form agreeing to each provision and acknowledging the permit may be revoked by the public safety chief upon violation of any of such provisions; 
12.  Evidence that the applicant is an eligible organization. For organizations claiming to be exempt from the payment of the bank and corporation tax, evidence shall include a certificate or determination of exemption under the Revenue and Taxation Code, or a letter of good standing from the exemption division of the franchise tax board in Sacramento, showing exemption under a qualifying section of Revenue and Taxation Code Section 23701. If an applicant applies as a mobile home park association, senior citizens organization, or charitable organization affiliated with a school district, the public safety chief shall determine what evidence is necessary to establish eligibility; 
13.  Such other information as the public safety chief may require to discover the truth of the matters required to be set forth in the application. 
B.  The contents of the application shall be affirmed and verified by the applicant under penalty of perjury. 
( Ord. No. 892 , § 3, 11-24-2015)  
9.66.090 - Investigation of the application. 
Upon receipt of the completed application and required fee, the department of public safety shall refer the application to affected city departments for verification of the statements in the application, investigation as to whether the property of the applicant qualifies and is fit for hosting bingo games with respect to fire, occupancy, and other applicable restrictions, and for obtaining any and all recommendations as to whether the permit should be granted. Upon receipt of such verification and any recommendations and completion of any further investigation deemed necessary, the public safety chief shall grant, grant with conditions, or deny the permit in accordance with the criteria set forth in Penal Code Section 326.5 and this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 892 , § 3, 11-24-2015)  
9.66.100 - Imposition of conditions and limitations on permits. 
The public safety chief may place upon any permit issued under authority of this chapter such conditions and limitations upon the activities conducted pursuant to such permit as the public safety chief may determine are necessary to protect the health, safety and general welfare of any persons or property at or in the vicinity of said activity. 
( Ord. No. 892 , § 3, 11-24-2015)  
9.66.110 - Issuance of permit. 
A.  Upon a showing that the applicant is fully qualified under the law to conduct bingo games in the city and has satisfied the requirements of this chapter, the public safety chief shall issue a permit to the applicant which shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name and address of the organization to whom the permit is issued and the grounds for the eligibility of such organization to conduct bingo games; 
2.  The location or locations at which the bingo games are authorized to be conducted; 
3.  The name and address of each person who has been authorized to actually conduct the bingo games on behalf of the permit holder; 
4.  The maximum authorized occupancy capacity of each place at which the bingo games are authorized to be conducted; 
5.  The date of the expiration of such permit; 
6.  Such other information, including, but not limited to, the conditions and limitations upon the conduct of bingo games, as may be determined pursuant to Section 9.66.100. 
B.  No permit shall be granted for a period longer than one year. 
C.  If the permit is denied, the public safety chief shall state in writing to the applicant the reasons for the denial. 
D.  During the term of the permit, the permit holder must maintain its eligibility to hold such permit. 
( Ord. No. 892 , § 3, 11-24-2015)  
9.66.120 - Amendment of the permit. 
A.  Upon the change of any of the information required in this section, the permit holder must submit an amendment to the application to the public safety chief within five days. 
B.  The public safety chief may issue an amended permit without charge if the public safety chief determines that such change does not affect the eligibility of the permit holder or the terms of the permit. If the changes affect the eligibility of the permit holder or the terms of the permit and additional conditions or limitations will remedy the changes, the public safety chief may issue an amended permit including such conditions and limitations necessary to remedy the changes. 
C.  Failure to report such change in information shall constitute cause for revocation of the permit. 
( Ord. No. 892 , § 3, 11-24-2015)  
9.66.130 - Permit renewal. 
A permit holder may submit an application to renew an existing permit, together with the fee for such renewal, and an audit opinion or certification as required by Section 9.66.260, to the department of public safety not earlier than forty-five days prior to the expiration date of the existing permit. A renewal application for an existing permit may be submitted on a short form, provided by the city, which verifies and affirms the information contained in the previously approved application and describes any changes that have occurred during the period the permit has been in existence. 
( Ord. No. 892 , § 3, 11-24-2015)  
9.66.140 - Permit to be posted at bingo games. 
The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the site of the bingo games during the operation of the bingo game. 
( Ord. No. 892 , § 3, 11-24-2015)  
9.66.150 - Suspension and revocation of permits. 
A.  The public safety chief may suspend a previously issued bingo permit for any of the following causes: 
1.  The permit holder is ineligible to hold the permit; 
2.  The permit application contains one or more false, misleading or fraudulent statements; 
3.  Bingo games authorized by the permit have been conducted in violation of a condition or requirement of the permit, or this chapter, or Penal Code Section 326.5; 
4.  There has been one or more violations of federal, state or city law committed at the location of the bingo games in conjunction or associated with the operation of the bingo games or the bingo games and the accompanying activities have become detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the residents of the city. 
B.  If the public safety chief decides to suspend a bingo permit, a written order of suspension shall promptly be sent to the permit holder. The written order shall include a summary of the grounds advanced as the basis for suspension and notify the permit holder that he or she has ten days from the date of such order to request a hearing before the public safety chief to determine whether such permit shall be revoked. 
C.  Failure to request, in writing, such hearing within the ten-day period shall result in a revocation of the permit. 
D.  Upon request by the permit holder, whose permit has been suspended under subsection A, for a hearing to determine whether such permit shall be revoked, the public safety chief shall provide a hearing within twenty days after receipt of such request at which hearing the suspended permit holder may appear before the public safety chief for the purpose of presenting evidence why the permit should not be revoked. No permit shall be revoked under this section unless notice of the time and place of such hearing shall have first been given at least five days before the hearing thereof by depositing in the United States mail a notice directed to the suspended permit holder at the address given in the application. Within ten days of the hearing, the public safety chief shall issue and send to the permit holder via United States mail a written decision reinstating the permit, reinstating the permit with any conditions and/or limitations the public safety chief determines are necessary to remedy the change, or revoking the permit. 
E.  Any person who conducts a bingo game under a suspended or revoked permit shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties applicable in this code. 
F.  Any organization whose permit is revoked may not again apply for a permit to conduct bingo games in the city for a period of one year from the date of such revocation; provided, however, that if the ground for revocation is cancellation of the exemption granted under the Revenue and Taxation Code, such organization may again apply for a permit upon proof of reinstatement of said exemption. 
( Ord. No. 892 , § 3, 11-24-2015)  
9.66.160 - Appeal of revocation of permits to city council. 
Any holder of a permit whose permit is revoked under this chapter shall have the right, within ten days from the date of the notice of the revocation, to file a written appeal to the city clerk. Such appeal shall set forth the specific ground or grounds on which it is based. The city council shall hold a hearing on the appeal within forty-five days after its receipt by the city council, or at a time thereafter agreed upon and shall cause the appellant to be given at least ten days written notice of such hearing. At the hearing, the appellant or its authorized representative shall have the right to present evidence and a written or oral argument, or both, in support of its appeal. The determination of the city council on the appeal shall be final. 
( Ord. No. 892 , § 3, 11-24-2015)  
9.66.170 - Maximum Amount of prizes at bingo games. 
The total value of the prize shall not exceed five hundred dollars in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held. 
( Ord. No. 892 , § 3, 11-24-2015)  
9.66.180 - Records and reporting requirements for permit holders. 
The permit holder shall keep full and accurate record of the income and expenses received and disbursed in connection with its operation, conduct, promotion, supervision, and any other phase of bingo games which are authorized by this chapter. On or before the last day of each month, each permit holder shall report to the department of public safety, on a form provided, an accounting of all proceeds, prizes paid, and expenditures for the prior month. 
( Ord. No. 892 , § 3, 11-24-2015)  
9.66.190 - Separate account for proceeds. 
All proceeds derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. 
( Ord. No. 892 , § 3, 11-24-2015)  
9.66.200 - Use of proceeds. 
With respect to organizations exempted by Revenue and Taxation Code Section 23701d, the proceeds shall only be used for charitable purposes. With respect to other organizations authorized to conduct bingo games, the proceeds may be used for charitable purposes, and prizes. In addition, a portion of the proceeds, not to exceed twenty percent of the proceeds before deduction for prizes, or two thousand dollars per month, whichever is less, may be used for rental of property, overhead, and administrative expenses. 
( Ord. No. 892 , § 3, 11-24-2015)  
9.66.210 - Limitations on financial interests. 
No individual, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity except the permit holder shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game. 
( Ord. No. 892 , § 3, 11-24-2015)  
9.66.220 - Exclusive operation of bingo games by permit holder. 
A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the permit holder organization. Such members shall not receive a wage or salary from any bingo games or any other compensation, in cash or kind. Only the permit holder shall operate such game, or participate in the promotion, supervision or any other phase of such game. 
( Ord. No. 892 , § 3, 11-24-2015)  
9.66.230 - Bingo games must be open to public. 
All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the permit holder organization. The permit holder shall not reserve seats or space for any person. 
( Ord. No. 892 , § 3, 11-24-2015)  
9.66.240 - Limitations on participation in bingo games. 
Notwithstanding that bingo games are open to the public, attendance at any bingo game shall be limited to: 
A.  The occupancy capacity of the room in which such game is conducted as determined by the appropriate fire department and the building department of the city in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. 
B.  Persons who are eighteen years of age or older. 
C.  Persons who are not obviously intoxicated. 
D.  Persons physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. 
( Ord. No. 892 , § 3, 11-24-2015)  
9.66.250 - Limitation on venues for bingo games. 
A.  A permit holder shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, and which property is used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. The property owned or leased by the organization need not be used exclusively by the organization. 
B.  Where a property permitted to host a bingo game ceases to comply with subsection A, the permit shall have no further force or effect with respect to bingo games permitted at that location. The permit holder may apply for a permit amendment to move the bingo games to a property compliant with this section pursuant to Section 9.66.120. 
( Ord. No. 892 , § 3, 11-24-2015)  
9.66.260 - Limitations on hours of operation for bingo games. 
No bingo game may be conducted for a duration greater than six hours during any twenty-four-hour period and no bingo game may be conducted between two a.m. and ten a.m. of any day. 
( Ord. No. 892 , § 3, 11-24-2015)  
9.66.270 - Violation of chapter a misdemeanor. 
A violation of any provision of this chapter is a misdemeanor. 
( Ord. No. 892 , § 3, 11-24-2015)  
9.66.280 - Unauthorized receipt of proceeds a misdemeanor. 
It is a misdemeanor for any person to receive or pay a wage or salary or other compensation, in cash or kind, from any bingo game authorized by this chapter. Receipt of such wage, salary, or compensation shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars, which fine shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
( Ord. No. 892 , § 3, 11-24-2015)  
9.66.290 - City may enjoin violations of this chapter. 
The city may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin a violation of Penal Code Section 326.5 or of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 892 , § 3, 11-24-2015)  
9.66.300 - Bingo compliance audits. 
A.  Permit holders with gross receipts in excess of three hundred thousand dollars per year shall provide as a condition for re-licensing, an audit opinion from a certified public accountant which affirms the permit holder's compliance with city and state bingo laws, and that accounting books, procedures and internal controls are adequate to track and safeguard all proceeds and assets. Audits of bingo games shall be conducted at no public expense, with costs being borne by the permit holders. 
1.  The city manager may authorize a permit holder to submit biennial audit opinions instead of annual audits. If a biennial audit is authorized by the city manager, the bingo permit holder will allow city staff full access to all original accounting records to conduct an annual compliance review during non-audit years. Material findings of exceptions or system weaknesses during this review will result in a requirement that the annual audit be conducted and an audit opinion be issued by a certified public accountant after adequate testing to verify compliance and internal controls for the year in question. 
2.  Before commencement of the audits, the auditor selected by each permit holder shall confer with the city auditor or designated city representative to ascertain the required scope and depth of the audits to be conducted. Generally speaking, bingo audits will not require an opinion on the financial statements of the permit holders. 
3.  At least one game observation shall be made by the auditor, and sufficient audit testing shall be conducted as is deemed necessary by the auditor and by the city to meet its monitoring and enforcement responsibilities. 
4.  The audit shall verify the amount of proceeds collected, the allocation or use of the proceeds, and the adequacy of the accounting and control system to monitor and account for cash receipts, start-up cash, inventory and expenditures. 
B.  For permit holders with gross receipts of less than three hundred thousand dollars per year, a certification from their bookkeeper, accountant or treasurer shall be presented to the city as a condition for annual relicensing, in addition to financial documents required to be submitted with their annual permit renewal application, stating that the permit holder is in compliance with all city and state laws. The certification should include a detailed description of the permit holder's current accounting system and internal controls for cash, start-up cash, inventory and expenditures. A schedule summarizing the specific charitable expenditures of all bingo proceeds should be attached to the certification to provide detail verification of charitable expenditures shown in the financial statement. The certification should be approved and signed by the appropriate officers and board of directors as true and correct. The city shall conduct a game observation and a brief review of accounting records to verify legal compliance and adequacy of internal control procedures. 
( Ord. No. 892 , § 3, 11-24-2015)  
9.66.310 - City's authority to inspect games and audit records. 
A.  City public safety and auditing staff may enter, whenever the city deems necessary, any bingo game being operated within the city to observe and monitor game operations as well as cash and inventory control procedures. 
B.  The city retains the right, upon reasonable notice, to examine and audit the accounting records, bank statements and original accounting source documents of any bingo permit holder to determine compliance with this chapter. The permit holder shall fully cooperate with the city by making such records available upon request. Failure to comply with a request for an audit is grounds for revocation of the permit. 
( Ord. No. 892 , § 3, 11-24-2015)  
Chapter 9.70 - MOBILE HOME ORDINANCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 494 contained herein was adopted by Initiative Election held on December 8, 1987. Measure L, passed by the voters on November 8, 1994 amended Section 9.70.132 to allow city council to amend Ordinance No. 494 (Chapter 9.70) after public hearing before the rent appeals board and a four/fifths vote of the city council. Ordinance No. 495 repealed the provisions of Ordinance No. 487 which added Chapter 9.68, entitled Mobile Home Space Rent Adjustment and Registration, to the Code. 
 
9.70.010 - Findings and purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to alleviate the hardship of unreasonable rent increases while still assuring owners' right to a fair return. 
A.  The city council finds the following conclusions to be true and correct: 
1.  In Rohnert Park, there are five mobile home parks containing one thousand three hundred seventeen spaces, of which one thousand three hundred nine spaces are available for rental to mobile home coach owners (in 1995). 
2.  Mobile homes provide an important form of affordable housing for a substantial number of Rohnert Park residents. 
3.  The majority of mobile home park home-owners/residents are age fifty-five or older. 
4.  The majority of mobile home park homeowners/residents own the mobile homes which they occupy and many of these homeowners/residents typically have substantial loan payments to meet in addition to rent payments. 
5.  The Rohnert Park General Plan recommends that the city maintain and preserve its existing stock of affordable housing of which mobile home park spaces are typically an example. 
6.  Studies undertaken in surrounding areas have shown that typical moving costs for mobile homes from one mobile home park to another (if vacant spaces could be located) range from approximately five thousand dollars to nine thousand dollars, depending upon the size of the mobile home. In many instances, removal requires a separation of the mobile home unit from appurtenances which have been made permanent, thus creating severe damage and depreciation in value to the mobile home. 
7.  Mobile homes and manufactured housing have represented an affordable form of shelter to citizens of Rohnert Park with modest incomes. Because mobile homes are often owned by senior citizens, persons on fixed incomes, and persons of low and moderate income, space rent increases can have a significant impact on these families. 
8.  The need for effective and fair mobile home park space rent stabilization continues to exist in Rohnert Park. 
9.  It would be desirable to provide prospective homeowners/residents of mobile home coaches with an option to choose between a long-term lease and a periodic tenancy of less than one year in duration. Such an option furthers a legitimate governmental objective and is not in conflict with or preempted by state law. 
10.  On average, several mobile home coaches are sold or offered for sale each year in Rohnert Park. It would be highly desirable to provide vacancy control in the rent stabilization program as hereunder provided. 
11.  The city further finds that this article is necessary to preserve public health, welfare, and safety. 
12.  There exist substantial differences in space rents within given mobile home parks in Rohnert Park. 
B.  The purpose of this chapter is to stabilize the rate of mobile home park space rental in order to: 
1.  Prevent exploitation of a shortage of vacant mobile home park spaces should it occur; 
2.  Prevent excessive and unreasonable mobile home park space rent increases while still assuring park owners' right to a fair return; 
3.  Provide a process for ensuring mobile home park owners a fair, just and reasonable rate of return on their parks in cases where the guaranteed annual space rent increase provided by this chapter proves insufficient. 
4.  Assist in protecting affordable housing to help provide a variety of housing types within a range of costs affordable to the low and very low income households. 
5.  Rectify the disparity of bargaining power which exists between mobile home park home-owners/residents and/or prospective homeowners/ residents and mobile home park owners. 
(Ord. 612 §§ 2, 3, 1996: Ord. 607, 1995: Ord. 494 § 1, 1987)  
9.70.020 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Base rent ceiling" means the maximum allowable rent established by the rollback of rents described in subsection B. of Section 9.70.040. 
B.  "Board" means the rent appeals board established by Section 9.70.030 of this chapter. 
C.  "Commissioners" means the commissioners of the rent appeals board, as established by Section 9.70.030. 
D.  "Controlled rental spaces" means mobile home spaces, and uses of its club house, pools, sauna, Jacuzzi, and other public areas. 
E.  "Rental housing agreement" means an agreement, verbal, written or implied, between a landlord and homeowner/resident for use or occupancy of a rental space for housing services. 
F.  "Rent ceiling" means the limit on the maximum allowable rent which a landlord may charge on any controlled rental space. 
G.  "Homeowner/resident" means a home-owner, resident, subtenant, lessee, sublessee, or any other person entitled under the terms of the rental housing agreement to the use or occupancy of any rental space. 
H.  "Consumer Price Index" means the Consumer Price Index for urban wage earners and clerical workers in the United States. 
I.  "Management" means the owner of a mobile home park or an agent or representative authorized to act on the owner's behalf. 
J.  "Owner" means any landlord, owner, lessor, or sublessor of a mobile home park in Rohnert Park. 
K.  "Prospective homeowner" means a person who is not currently a resident in a mobile home park but is a prospective mobile home space resident who desires the use of a mobile home space and has presented himself/herself to the park owner/management as such, or who is a current resident in a mobile home park who desires to occupy another mobile home space in that park. 
L.  "In-place transfer" means a mobile home coach transferred by the homeowner/resident to another with the mobile home coach remaining on the space. 
(Ord. 658 § 1, 2000; Ord. 612 §§ 2, 3, 1996: Ord. 607, 1995: Ord. 494 § 2, 1987)  
9.70.030 - Rent appeals board. 
A.  Composition. There shall be in the city a rent appeals board. The board shall consist of five appointed commissioners. The board shall elect annually as chairperson one of its members to serve in that capacity. 
B.  Eligibility. Residents of the city who are duly qualified electors of the city are eligible to serve as commissioners of the rent appeals board. 
C.  Full Disclosure of Holdings. Candidates for the position of commissioner shall submit a verified statement listing all of their interests and dealings in real property, including but not limited to its ownership, sale or management, and investment in and association with partnerships, corporations, joint ventures and syndicates engaged in its ownership, sale or management during the previous three years. 
D.  Appointment of Commissioners. Commissioners shall be appointed by the city council within thirty days after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
E.  Term of Office. Commissioners shall be appointed to serve a four-year term. There shall be no limitation on the number of terms a commissioner may serve. 
F.  Powers and Duties. The board is empowered to set the rent ceiling for all controlled rental spaces. The board is empowered to require registration of all controlled rental spaces under this section. The board is empowered to use city staff, issue orders, rules and regulations, conduct hearings, and charge fees as set forth below. The board may make such studies and investigations, conduct such hearings, and obtain such information as necessary to carry out its powers and duties. The board is empowered to settle civil claims under Section 9.70.110, and seek injunctive relief under Section 9.70.120. 
G.  Rules and Regulations. The rent appeals board shall issue and follow such rules and regulations, including those which are contained in this chapter, as will further the purposes of this chapter. The board shall publish its rules and regulations prior to promulgation in at least one newspaper in general circulation in the city. The board shall hold at least one public hearing to consider the views of interested parties prior to adoption of general rent levels or maximum rent ceilings, or any decision decontrolling or reimposing rent stabilizations on any category or classification of rental spaces. All rules and regulations, internal staff memoranda, and written correspondence explaining the decisions and policies of the board shall be kept in the board's office, and shall be available to the public for inspection and copying. The board shall publicize this chapter through the media of signs, advertisements, fliers, leaflets, announcements on radio, newspapers, and other appropriate means, so that all residents of Rohnert Park will have the opportunity to become informed about their legal rights and duties under rent stabilization in Rohnert Park. 
H.  Meetings. The board shall hold at least one regularly scheduled meeting per month. Special meetings may be called at the request of at least two commissioners. All meetings shall be open to the public. Individual maximum rent adjustment hearings shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of Sections 9.70.060 and 9.70.070. 
I.  Quorum. Three commissioners shall constitute a quorum for the board. 
J.  Voting. The affirmative vote of three commissioners of the board is required for a decision, including all motions, regulations and orders of the board. 
K.  Dockets. The board shall maintain and keep in its office all hearing dockets. 
L.  Vacancies. If a vacancy occurs on the board, the city council shall appoint a qualified person to fill such a vacancy. 
M.  Staff. The board shall employ the existing staff to perform its functions efficiently, in order to fulfill the purposes of this chapter. 
N.  Financing. The board shall finance its reasonable and necessary expenses by charging landlords annual registration fees, as set by the rent board, to cover administrative costs. Such registration fees shall be passed on to the homeowners/residents in the form of rent increases prorated over the year. The board is also empowered to request and receive funding, when and if necessary, from the city and/or any other available source, for its reasonable and necessary expenses. 
O.  Registration. Within thirty days after the initial board meeting, the board shall require the registration of all controlled rental spaces, which shall be re-registered annually, at times deemed appropriate by the board. The initial registration shall include the rent in effect on December 1, 1985, the date of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the address of the rental space, the name and address of the landlord, the housing services provided to the space, a statement indicating all operating-cost increases since the rollback date, and any other information deemed relevant by the board. If the landlord has willfully and knowingly failed to register a controlled rental space, the board may authorize the homeowner/resident of such a nonregistered controlled rental space to withhold all or a portion of the rent for the space until such time as the rental space is properly registered. After a rental space is properly registered, the board and/or a hearing examiner shall determine what portion of the withheld rent is owed to the landlord for the period in which the rental space was not properly registered. Whether or not the board allows such withholding, no landlord who has failed to register properly shall at any time increase rents for controlled rental spaces until such spaces are properly registered. 
(Ord. 622 § 2, 1996: Ord. 607, 1995: Ord. 599 § 3, 1994: Ord. 494 § 3, 1987; Ord. No. 913 , § 1, 11-28-2017)  
9.70.040 - Maximum allowable rents. 
A.  Temporary Freeze. Rents shall not be increased during the period of time between the date of the adoption of this ordinance and the rollback date determined under subsection B. of Section 9.70.040. 
B.  Rollback and Establishment of Base Rent Ceiling. Thirty days after the adoption of this ordinance, no landlord shall charge rent for any controlled rental spaces in an amount greater than the rent in effect on December 1, 1985, until and unless the rent ceiling is adjusted under Sections 9.70.050 and/or 9.70.060. If there was no rent in effect on December 1, 1985, the base rent shall be the rent in effect the last time the space was rented prior to December 1, 1985 adjusted by the percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index (CPI) between the last date of rental and December 1, 1985. 
C.  Posting. As soon as the landlord is aware of the maximum allowable rent, the landlord shall post it for each space, in a prominent place in or about the affected controlled spaces. The board may require that other information it deems relevant also be posted. 
(Ord. 494 § 4, 1987)  
9.70.042 - Vacancy control. 
A park owner is prohibited from raising rent upon re-rental or re-lease of a mobile home on-site to a prospective homeowner/resident or current homeowner/resident. Mobile home spaces that are "new construction" as defined in Civil Code section 798.7 are exempted in accordance with Civil Code section 798.45. 
(Ord. 612 § 3, 1996)  
9.70.044 - Prospective homeowner rights. 
Any person who is a prospective homeowner as defined in Section 9.70.020.K must be offered the option of renting a mobile home space in a manner which will permit the prospective homeowner to receive the benefits of this chapter which includes, but is not limited to, rental of a mobile home space on a month-to-month basis, and a new base rent as set forth in Section 9.70.042. Such a person cannot be denied the option of a tenancy of twelve months or less in duration. The park owner/management shall inform the prospective homeowner of their options under this clause. 
(Ord. 612 § 3, 1996)  
9.70.050 - Annual general adjustment. 
On or after February 1st of each year, the maximum allowable rent for a rental space may be increased without application to the board in an amount not to exceed one-half of one percent less than one hundred percent of the increase in the CPI during the preceding twelve months. Such increase shall be equal to one-half of one percent less than the percentage increase in the CPI last reported as of September of the prior year and the month of September of the current year. 
Such increase shall be annually calculated by the board. The amount of such permitted increase shall be rounded to the nearest one-tenth of one percent. In the event that the CPI decreases, no increase or decrease in rents shall be authorized pursuant to this section. 
Said increase shall be annually calculated by the board. The amount of said permitted increase shall be rounded to the nearest one-tenth of one percent. In the event that the CPI decreases, no increase or decrease in rents shall be authorized pursuant to this section. 
However, in no case shall the annual general adjustment exceed four percent. 
A.  Announcement of amount of annual general adjustments. The amount of the annual general adjustment shall be announced by the board on or before December 15 of each year and there shall be a mailing to homeowners/residents and landlords indicating the amount and conditions for said increase. 
B.  Extra increases for landlords who pay for gas and/or electricity. At the time of the annual adjustment permitted under paragraph B. of this section, a landlord providing electricity and/or gas utilities to a homeowner/resident without charge may increase the rent by an additional one-half of one percent of the rent for each utility provided. 
C.  Banking. Rent increases allowed under this section may be accumulated and implemented by the landlord at any future time. 
D.  Preconditions to the right to take annual general adjustments. A landlord who is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter shall not demand, accept or retain the annual rent increase otherwise permitted by this section. 
No landlord shall increase rent under this section if: 
1.  He/she has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter and/or regulations issued thereunder by the board; or 
2.  He/she has failed to comply substantially with the city health and building codes, and/or any applicable state or local housing, health and safety codes. 
(Ord. 658 § 2, 2000; Ord. 612 § 3, 1996: Ord. 607, 1995: Ord. 599 § 4, 1994: Ord. 494 § 5, 1987)  
9.70.055 - Limits to annual general adjustment formula. 
In the event the vacancy control provision in section 9.70.042, or the prospective homeowner rights in section 9.70.044 is (are) invalidated in any way or by any authority, then the following section shall be enforced: section 9.70.050. Annual general adjustment formula will revert to seventy-five percent of the CPI with a four percent cap. 
(Ord. 612 § 3, 1996)  
9.70.060 - Individual adjustment of ceiling on allowable rents. 
Any landlord or homeowner/resident can appeal for an individual adjustment of the maximum allowable rent. 
A.  Substantive grounds for rent adjustment applied for by landlords. A rent adjustment shall be approved in order to provide a just and reasonable return and maintain net operating income in accordance with the following criteria: 
1.  Fair net operating income. Fair return applications shall be considered according to the following guidelines: 
a.  Net operating income equals gross income minus operating expenses. 
b.  Gross income equals the following: 
(i)  Gross rents, computed as gross rental income at one hundred percent occupancy; plus 
(ii)  Interest from security and cleaning deposits (except to the extent that said interest is payable to the homeowners/residents); plus 
(iii)  Income from services, garage and parking fees; plus 
(iv)  All other income or consideration received or receivable for or in connection with the use or occupancy of rental spaces and housing services; minus 
(v)  Uncollected rents due to vacancy and bad debts to the extent the same are beyond the landlord's control. Uncollected rents in excess of three percent of gross rents shall be presumed to be unreasonable unless established otherwise. 
c.  Operating expenses-inclusions: Operating expenses shall include the following: license fees, real property taxes, utility costs, insurance, maintenance, management expenses (contracted or owner performed), including necessary and reasonable advertising, accounting, other managerial expenses, normal repair and maintenance expenses, allowable legal expenses, and the amortized cost of capital improvements. Management expenses are presumed to be six percent of gross income, unless established otherwise. 
Owner-performed labor shall be counted at reasonable rates as established by board regulation. 
Building improvements, major repairs, replacement and maintenance subject to the condition that said expenses shall be amortized in accordance with board regulations, except to the extent such costs are compensated by insurance proceeds. 
d.  Excluded from operating expenses. Operating expenses shall not include: avoidable and unnecessary expense increases since the base year, mortgage interest and principal payments, fees, penalties and interest awarded for violation of this or any other law, or legal fees except as provided in this subsection and depreciation of the property. 
Allowable legal expenses shall include attorney's fees and costs incurred in connection with successful good faith attempts to recover rents owing and successful good faith unlawful detainer actions not in violation of applicable law, to the extent the same are not recovered from homeowners/residents. Attorney's fees and costs incurred in proceedings before the board, or in connection with civil actions against the board, are not allowed as operating expenses. 
e.  Base year for the purpose of this section shall be 1985. 
f.  Presumption of fair base year net operating income. Except as provided in subparagraph g., it shall be presumed that the net operating income produced by the property during the base year provided a fair return (fair net operating income). Landlords shall be entitled to earn a just and reasonable return and to maintain and increase their base year net operating income in accordance with subparagraph h. herein. 
g.  Rebutting the presumption. It may be determined that the base year net operating income yielded other than a fair return, in which case, the base year net operating income may be adjusted accordingly. In order to make such a determination, the board must make at least one of the following findings: 
(i)  The landlord's operating and maintenance expenses in the base year were unusually high or low in comparison to other years. In such instances, adjustments may be made in calculating such expenses so that the base year operating expenses reflect average expenses for the property over a reasonable period of time. In considering whether the base year net operating income yielded more or less than a fair net operating income, the board shall consider the following factors: 
(a)  The landlord made substantial capital improvements during the base year, which were not reflected in the base year rent levels; 
(b)  Substantial repairs were made due to damage caused by uninsured disaster or vandalism; 
(c)  Maintenance and repair were below accepted standards so as to cause significant deterioration of housing services; 
(d)  Other expenses were unreasonably high or low notwithstanding prudent business practice. 
(ii)  The rent on the base date was disproportionately low due to the fact that it was not established in an arms-length transaction or other peculiar circumstances. 
h.  Fair net operating income. The board shall permit rent increases in rent such that the landlord's net operating income shall be increased by sixty percent of the percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index over the base year. (For example, if the CPI has increased by ten percent since the base year, the landlord shall be entitled to a net operating income which is six percent above the base year level.) Unless the board selects a base period other than the year 1985, the base year CPI shall be the CPI for June 1, 1985. For the purposes of this section, the current CPI shall be the CPI last reported as of the date of the application. A rent increase granted pursuant to this section shall not exceed the increase requested in the application. 
B.  Substantive grounds for rent adjustment applied for by homeowners/residents. 
1.  Grounds for application. A homeowner/ resident or group of homeowners/residents may file a rent adjustment application for one or more rental spaces in the same rental complex on the ground that: 
a.  There has been a discontinuance or substantial reduction of housing service to homeowners/residents without a corresponding reduction in rent. 
b.  The landlord has accepted and retained rent in excess of that permitted by this chapter. 
(Ord. 607, 1995: Ord. 494 § 6, 1987)  
9.70.062 - Rental adjustment allowed for capital improvement, procedure for granting. 
The rental appeals board is authorized to establish rules and regulations defining a capital improvement, determining the amortization period allowed for the recovery of the capital improvement, determining a reasonable rate of return on the capital improvement, determining the impact of a capital improvement on rent once the cost of the capital improvement has been fully recovered, and any other factor or criteria relevant to such determinations. 
(Ord. 599 § 2, 1994)  
9.70.070 - Individual rent adjustment hearings. 
A.  Petitions. No such individual rent adjustment shall be granted until after the consideration of the petition at an individual rent adjustment hearing. The board may delegate its powers to hold such hearings or to rule on such petitions, or both, to staff hearing examiners or panels of board members, and the board may reserve to itself the power to hear appeals of the decisions and orders of hearing officers or board panels. Final decisions on such petitions and appeals must be made within reasonable deadlines established by the board. 
B.  Notice. The board shall notify the landlord, if the petition was filed by the homeowner/ resident; or the homeowner/resident, if the petition was filed by the landlord, of the receipt of such a petition. The board shall notify both parties as to the time, date and place of the hearing. Hearings shall be scheduled for times most convenient for all parties, including evenings and weekends. Hearings may be postponed or continued for good cause, provided that all parties receive timely notice of such action. 
C.  Records. The board may require either party to a rent and adjustment hearing to provide it with all pertinent books, records and papers. Such documents shall be made available to the parties involved prior to the hearing at the office of the rent appeals board. The board shall conduct a building inspection and/or request the city to conduct an inspection if the board and/or hearing examiner find good cause to believe the board's current information does not reflect the current condition of the controlled rental space. The homeowner/resident may request the board or hearing examiner to order such an inspection prior to the date of the hearing. All documents required under this section shall be made available to the parties involved prior to the hearing at the office of the rent appeals board. In cases where information filed in a petition for rent ceiling adjustment, or in additional submissions filed at the request of the board and/or hearing examiners, is adequate or false, no action shall be taken in the petition until the deficiency is remedied. 
D.  Open hearings. All rent ceiling adjustment hearings shall be open to the public. 
E.  Right of assistance. All parties to a hearing may have assistance in presenting evidence and developing their position from attorneys, legal workers, homeowner/resident union representatives, or any other persons designated by such parties. 
F.  Hearing record. The board shall make available for inspection a copy of the official record, which shall constitute the exclusive record for the decision on issues at the hearing. The record of the hearing, or any part of one, shall be obtainable for the cost of copying. The record of the hearing shall include: 
1.  All exhibits, papers and documents required to be filed or accepted into evidence during the proceeding; 
2.  A list of participants present; 
3.  A summary of all testimony accepted in the proceedings; 
4.  A statement of all materials officially noticed; 
5.  All findings of fact; 
6.  The ruling on each exception or objection, if they are presented; 
7.  All recommended decisions, orders or rulings; 
8.  All final decisions and/or orders of hearing examiners and/or panels of board members and/or the board; and 
9.  Each final decision, order or ruling. 
G.  Hearing decision. No individual rent adjustment shall be granted unless supported by the preponderance of the evidence submitted at the hearing. All parties to a hearing shall be sent a notice of the decision and a copy of the findings of fact and law upon which the decision is based. At the same time, parties to the proceedings shall also be notified of their rights to an administrative appeal, if allowed by the board, and to judicial review of the decision pursuant to section 9.70.100 of this chapter. 
H.  Consolidation. 
I.  Inadequate or false information. If information filed in a petition for an individual rent adjustment or any additional submissions filed at the request of the board is inadequate or false, no action shall be taken on the petition until the deficiency is remedied. 
(Ord. 607, 1995: Ord. 494 § 7, 1987)  
9.70.080 - Just cause for eviction. 
Shall apply to mobile home park evictions which are governed by Section 798-796.6 of the California Civil Code. 
(Ord. 494 § 8, 1987)  
9.70.090 - Non-waiverability. 
Any provision, whether oral or written in or pertaining to a rental agreement whereby any provision of this chapter for the benefit of a homeowner/resident is waived, shall be deemed against public policy and void. 
(Ord. 607, 1995: Ord. 494 § 9, 1987)  
9.70.100 - Judicial review. 
A landlord or homeowner/resident aggrieved by any action, regulation, rule, order or decision of the board may seek judicial review by appealing to the appropriate court within which the rent-controlled space is located. 
(Ord. 607, 1995: Ord. 494 § 10, 1987)  
9.70.110 - Civil remedies. 
Any landlord who demands, receives, accepts or retains any payment of rent in excess of the maximum lawful rent, in violation of the provisions of this chapter or any rule, regulation or order hereunder promulgated, shall be liable as hereinafter provided to the homeowner/resident from whom such excessive payment is demanded, accepted, received or retained, for reasonable attorney's fees and costs, as determined by the court, plus damages in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars or three times the amount by which the payment or payments demanded, accepted, received or retained exceeds the maximum lawful rent, or whichever is greater. 
(Ord. 607, 1995: Ord. 494 § 11, 1987)  
9.70.120 - Injunctive relief. 
The board and homeowners/residents and landlords of rent controlled spaces may seek relief from the appropriate court within the jurisdiction within which the rent controlled space is located, to restrain by injunction any violation of this chapter and of the rules, regulations, orders and decisions of the board. 
(Ord. 607, 1995: Ord. 494 § 12, 1987)  
9.70.130 - Partial invalidity. 
If any provision of this chapter or application thereof is held invalid or unconstitutional, this invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect other provisions or applications of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. This chapter shall be liberally construed to achieve its purposes and preserve its validity. 
(Ord. 612 § 2, 1996: Ord. 494 § 13, 1987)  
9.70.132 - Amendment. 
The provisions of this measure may be amended by the city council after a public hearing before the rent appeals board and by four-fifths vote of the city council. (Measure L, passed by voters at election of November 8, 1994 and Resolution 94-189 adopted December 6, 1994 ratified the citizens' votes)  
9.70.150 - Retaliation. 
The park owner/management shall in no way retaliate against any homeowner/resident for the homeowner/resident's assertion or exercise of any right under this chapter. In the event of retaliatory action by the park owner/management, the homeowner/resident is referred to state law and homeowner/resident rights existing under state law. 
(Ord. 612 § 2, 1996)  
Chapter 9.71 - PAYMENT OF INTEREST ON SECURITY DEPOSITS 
 
9.71.010 - Findings. 
The city council is aware of the fact that California law, and specifically California Civil Code §§ 1950.5 and 1950.7, allow a landlord to require a prospective tenant to deposit with, or make available to the landlord, if necessary, a security deposit to assure the landlord for failure of the tenant to pay the rent; to provide for a fund for repair of the premises if it is damaged substantially by the tenant; to clean the premises upon termination of the tenancy and for other purposes as set forth in the statutes. The city council also is aware and so finds that some security deposits remain with the landlord for long periods of time because the tenancy lasts for a long time or the tenancy changes but the new tenant(s) immediately follows the former tenant(s) and the security deposit is left on deposit with the landlord or is immediately replaced so that there is no loss of the benefit of the deposit to the landlord. The council is also aware of the fact that for residential property the advance payment authorized by Civil Code § 1950.5(c) can be as much as to six months rent in situations where the term of the lease is six months or longer. The council is also aware of the fact that Pacific Gas & Electric Company either pays interest on security deposits paid by utility customers required to deposit funds with the company to secure the payment of utility accounts with the company, subject to reasonable conditions regarding timely payment of the account and other related regulations, or returns the security deposit after a year's payment experience with no more than two months' delinquency in the first twelve months. 
(Ord. 587 § 1, 1994)  
9.71.020 - Definitions. 
The city council hereby defines the following words or phrases as used in this chapter as follows: 
A.  "Landlord" means the person or entity that owns the real property being rented. Landlord also means the person or entity that has entered into a lease/rental agreement with tenant to lease or rent the real property to the tenant. 
B.  "Interest rate" or "rate of interest" means the average rate of interest, based on regular (standard) consumer savings accounts paid by the three largest banks, by funds held, in Rohnert Park. 
C.  "Lease" or "lease/rental agreement" means the agreement, whether oral or written, by which the landlord grants the tenant the right to inhabit, occupy or use real property owned or controlled by the landlord. 
D.  "Security deposit" means the payment, fee, deposit or charge required, imposed or assessed by the landlord and required to be deposited with or kept by the landlord for any of the following: 
1.  The compensation of a landlord for a tenant's default in the payment of rent. 
2.  The repair of damages to the premises, exclusive of ordinary wear and tear, caused by the tenant or by a guest or licensee of the tenant. 
3.  The cleaning of the premises upon termination of the tenancy. 
4.  To remedy future defaults by the tenant in any obligation under the lease/rental agreement to restore, replace or return personal property or appurtenances, exclusive of ordinary wear and tear, if the security deposit is authorized to be applied thereto by the lease/rental agreement. 
E.  "Tenant" means a person or persons who have entered into a written or oral lease/rental agreement with the landlord by which the tenant is granted the right to inhabit, occupy or use improved real property subject to the lease/rental agreement. 
(Ord. 649 § 1, 1999: Ord. 587 § 2, 1994) 
(Ord. No. 845, § 2, 3-27-2012)  
9.71.030 - Payment of interest. 
A landlord shall pay interest on security deposits placed with the landlord when requested by a tenant at the time the lease/rental agreement is signed at the interest rate provided in Section 9.71.020B after the security deposit has been held by the landlord for twelve consecutive months without a default in timely payment of the rent as provided in the lease/rental agreement. Payment within the default or grace period, if any, provided within the lease/rental agreement shall be considered timely payment. 
Before the lease/rental agreement is signed by the tenant the landlord shall give the tenant written notice of the tenant's right to receive interest on the security deposit so that the tenant is aware of his or her rights regarding the payment of interest before he or she signs the lease/rental agreement. If the landlord fails to advise the tenant in writing and if the tenant would otherwise qualify to receive interest as provided in this section then the tenant shall have the right, at the option of the tenant, to demand or receive interest payments on the security deposit, as herein provided, after the first twelve months of the lease/rental agreement. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of the foregoing paragraph, the tenant shall have the option of negotiating a lease or rental agreement with the landlord which allows the tenant to waive or forego the obligation of the landlord to pay interest on the security deposit. 
(Ord. 643 § 2, 1998: Ord. 587 § 3, 1994)  
9.71.032 - Landlord's handling charge. 
The landlord shall be entitled to deduct and retain a charge for maintaining and administering the security deposit and for computing and paying interest payments therefrom as provided in this chapter. Interest shall be paid no less frequently than annually or at the time the tenancy ends. The amount of the administrative charge which the landlord may retain is ten percent of the interest amount payable to the tenant. 
(Ord. 644 § 1, 1999)  
9.71.040 - Applicability, mobile home park exclusion. 
This chapter shall apply to interest payments on security deposits for residential property rentals only, except for security deposits held by mobile home park owners or managers subject to the California Mobile home Residency Law, which security deposits are exempt from the requirement to pay interest thereon to the homeowner pursuant to California Civil Code § 798.36(e). 
(Ord. 649 § 2, 1999: Ord. 587 § 4, 1994)  
9.71.050 - Purpose. 
This chapter is enacted to supplement and complement state law and is not enacted for the purpose of contravening or contradicting state law. In addition, it is the purpose of this chapter to provide a remedy for an inequity the city council perceives to exist with regard to tenant security deposits. The city council declares that no city personnel, no city funds and no city resources shall be used in administering, enforcing or otherwise prosecuting this chapter. The purpose of this chapter is to provide, by city ordinance, a legal remedy for tenants who do not receive interest on security deposits, but who qualify as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 587 § 5, 1994)  
9.71.060 - Suspension. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, this chapter shall be suspended and be of no force or effect until such time as the interest rate, as defined by Section 9.71.020.B, reaches five percent. At such time, the housing director shall return this ordinance to the council to consider lifting the suspension. 
(Ord. No. 845, § 2, 3-27-2012)  
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS  
Charter 9.72 - REGULATION OF SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO MINORS 
 
9.72.010 - Definitions. 
"Business" means any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other business entity formed for profit-making purposes, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold as well as professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural or other professional services are delivered. 
"City" means the city of Rohnert Park. 
"Minor" means any individual who is less than eighteen years old. 
"Person" means any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity. 
"Self-service displays" means open display of tobacco products that the public has access to without the intervention of an employee. 
"Tobacco products" means any tobacco cigarette, cigar, pipe tobacco, smokeless tobacco (chewing tobacco and snuff) or any other form of tobacco which may be utilized for smoking, chewing, inhalation or other manner of ingestion. 
"Tobacco vending machine" means any self-service electronic or mechanical device or appliance the operation of which depends upon the insertion of money, whether in coin or paper currency, or tokens representative of value, which dispenses or releases a tobacco product. 
(Ord. 555 § 3, 1992)  
9.72.020 - Requirement of posting signs. 
Any person, business, tobacco retailer or other establishment subject to this chapter shall post plainly visible signs on their premises stating the sale of tobacco products to persons under the age of eighteen is prohibited by law. The exact working of these signs shall be determined by the persons, businesses, tobacco retailers or other establishments subject to this chapter. 
(Ord. 555 § 3, 1992)  
9.72.030 - Identification. 
No person, business, tobacco retailer, or owner, manager or operator of any establishment shall sell, offer to sell or permit to be sold any tobacco product to an individual without requesting and examining identification establishing the purchaser's age as eighteen years or greater unless the seller has some reasonable basis for determining if the purchaser is eighteen years old or greater. 
(Ord. 555 § 3, 1992)  
9.72.040 - Surveillance of self-service displays of certain tobacco products. 
Any person, business, tobacco retailer or any other establishment subject to this chapter shall comply with the following requirement: Self-service displays of single cigarettes, single packs of cigarettes and single containers of smokeless tobacco must be under adequate surveillance in a reasonably secure environment. 
(Ord. 555 § 3, 1992)  
9.72.050 - Prohibition of the sale of tobacco products from a vending machine. 
Except as provided herein, no person, business, or tobacco retailer shall locate, install, keep, maintain or use, or permit the location, installation, keeping, maintenance or use on his, her or its premises any vending machine for the purpose of selling or distributing any tobacco product. Any tobacco vending machine in use on the effective date of this article shall be removed within thirty days after the effective date of this chapter. Tobacco vending machines located in places in which persons under the age of eighteen are prohibited by law from entering are exempt from this provision so long as said machines are not located at the entrance thereto. 
(Ord. 555 § 3, 1992)  
9.72.060 - Enforcement. 
This section reserved for future consideration as provided in Section 1 of Ordinance 555. 
(Ord. 555 § 3, 1992)  
9.72.070 - Violations and penalties. 
This section reserved for future consideration as provided in Section 1 of Ordinance 555. 
(Ord. 555 § 3, 1992)  
9.72.080 - Nonretaliation. 
No person, business or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner retaliate against any employee or applicant for employment because such employee or applicant agrees to abide by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 555 § 3, 1992)  
9.72.090 - Other applicable laws. 
In order to increase voluntary compliance with this ordinance, the city and/or its designee shall conduct informational activities to notify and educate tobacco retailers and the public of this chapter, which may include, but not necessarily restricted to, any of the following activities: 
A.  Publication of this chapter in local newspapers; 
B.  Publication and distribution of materials explaining the chapter to tobacco retailers, their employees and member of the public; 
C.  Sources of appropriate signage; 
D.  Publication and distribution of materials on merchant education and employee training resources to prevent tobacco sales to minors which are locally available; and 
E.  Publication and distribution of materials on youth tobacco use prevention, education and cessation services and programs locally available. 
(Ord. 555 § 3, 1992)  
9.72.100 - Effective date. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be effective ninety days from the date of its adoption. 
(Ord. 555 § 3, 1992)  
9.72.110 - Statutory severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is, for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision(s) shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the chapter. 
(Ord. 555 § 3, 1992)  
Chapter 9.76 - CURFEW 
 
9.76.010 - Definitions. 
A.  "Aimlessly remain" means to stay at a specific location for no discernable or visible purpose. 
B.  "Idle" means to stay in one area for an extended period of time while performing no productive or beneficial activity. 
C.  "Loiter" means to linger for an extended period without performing any worthwhile activity. 
D.  "Wander" means to walk around an area or location without any specific purpose or objective in mind. 
E.  "Emergency" means an unforeseen event or combination of events that requires immediate action. 
F.  "Guardian" means the natural or adoptive parent of the minor child. 
G.  "Parent" means the natural or adoptive parent of the minor child. 
(Ord. 635 § 2, 1997)  
9.76.020 - Loitering of minors prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen years to loiter, idle, wander or to aimlessly remain, without any visible purpose, reason or explanation for such conduct, upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, and public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or unsupervised places between the hours of eleven p.m. and six a.m. and between the hours of eight-thirty a.m. and one-thirty p.m. on days when school is in session. 
(Ord. 635 § 1, 1997: Ord. 620 § 1, 1996: Ord. 272 § 1, 1975: Ord. 33 § 1, 1963)  
9.76.030 - Daylight loitering prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen years, who is subject to compulsory full time education or subject to compulsory continuation education to loiter, idle, wander or to aimlessly remain without any visible purpose, reason or explanation for such conduct, upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, or other public grounds, public places and public buildings, places of amusement or entertainment, vacant lots between the hours of eight-thirty a.m. and one-thirty p.m. on days when school is in session. 
(Ord. 635 § 1, 1997: Ord. 620 § 2, 1996)  
9.76.040 - Application and enforcement. 
Application and enforcement of Sections 9.76.020 and 9.76.030 shall not apply in the following circumstances: 
A.  If the minor is accompanied by his or her parents or guardian or by a responsible adult for a specific purpose. 
B.  If the minor is on an emergency errand on behalf of his or her parents or guardian, or on behalf of a responsible adult for a specific purpose, or on behalf of school authorities for a school-related purpose and the errand involves no detour or stops along the way. 
C.  The minor is in a motor vehicle or other transportation which is in interstate travel. 
D.  The minor is on the sidewalk outside the place where the minor resides. 
E.  The minor is attending an official school-sponsored social or other gathering or is attending a religious, cultural or recreational event, or an activity sponsored by the city of Rohnert Park and supervised by city employees or by responsible adults. 
F.  The minor is engaged in a peaceful and reasonable legitimate exercise of First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution. 
G.  The minor is emancipated. 
Before taking action under Sections 9.76.020 or 9.76.030 the police officer shall inquire of the minor as to his or her age and reason for being out in public contrary to the above-referenced section(s). No citation shall issue if the officer is reasonably satisfied that the minor is outside after curfew for one of the reasons or excuses above listed. If the officer is not reasonably satisfied that such is the case, then a citation shall issue. 
(Ord. 635 § 3, 1997: Ord. 620 § 3, 1996)  
9.76.050 - Responsibility of the parents. 
It is unlawful for the parent or guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor child under the age of eighteen years, to knowingly permit such a minor to loiter, idle, wander or aimlessly remain without any visible purpose, reason or explanation for such conduct, upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, and public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or unsupervised places between the hours of eleven p.m. and six a.m. and between the hours of eight-thirty a.m. and one-thirty p.m. on days when school is in session. 
(Ord. 635 § 1, 1997: Ord. 620 § 4, 1996: Ord. 272 § 2, 1975: Ord. 33 § 2, 1963)  
9.76.060 - Violation a separate offense. 
Each violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense and shall be prosecutable as such. 
(Ord. 635 § 4, 1997)  
9.76.070 - Penalties. 
A minor violating the provisions of Sections 9.76.020 or 9.76.030 shall be dealt with in accordance with juvenile court law and procedure. Any parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor and who has knowledge that such minor child is violating Section 9.76.020 or 9.76.030 shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars or confined in jail not more than sixty days or punished by both said fine and imprisonment for each offense. 
(Ord. 635 § 1, 1997: Ord. 620 § 5, 1996: Ord. 33 § 3, 1963)  
ARTICLE VIII. - WEAPONS  
Chapter 9.88 - DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS 
 
9.88.010 - Prohibitions designated—Exceptions. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person in the city to use or discharge any rifle, gun, pistol, revolver, air rifle, BB gun, or other instrument from or by means of which any bullet, shot or other missile of any kind may be projected. 
B.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the use of firearms in bona fide shooting galleries, gun clubs, or organizations or educational institutions authorized to give military instruction, while such firearms are being used as a part of such instruction. 
C.  The director of public safety may issue a permit, or permits, to any person or persons to use, shoot, fire or discharge BB guns or air rifles upon such terms and under such conditions and for such time as he deems advisable, and which terms, conditions and time shall be set forth in such permit. The person shall have upon his person such permit when exercising the privileges granted therein. 
D.  Nothing contained in this section shall apply to or prevent the use and firing of firearms by duly appointed peace officers while acting within the scope of their employment or in the performance of their duties as peace officers, nor shall the lawful use of any firearm in the defense of one's person, family, or property be prohibited. 
(Ord. 176 § 1, 1972)  
9.88.020 - Penalties. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof is subject to the fines, penalties and other provisions of Chapter 1.16 of this code. 
(Ord. 288 § 1, 1975: Ord. 176 § 1, 1972)  
Chapter 9.92 - RETAIL FIREARMS DEALERS 
 
9.92.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section: 
"Application" means an application for a firearms dealer's license. 
"City" means the city of Rohnert Park. 
"Firearm" means any device designated to be used as a weapon from which is expelled through a barrel a projectile by the force of any explosion or other form of combustion. Firearm also means any other such device as defined in the California Penal Code. 
"Firearms dealer" means any person engaged in the business of selling, leasing, transferring, advertising, offering, exposing for sale, lease or transfer any firearm. In the event any association, organization, corporation or other entity is eligible to receive a firearms dealer's license then that association, organization, corporation or entity is also a firearms dealer for the purpose of this chapter. 
"License" means written permission from the Rohnert Park department of public safety in conformity with its rules and regulations and with the California Penal Code and specifically Sections 12070 et seq. 
"Purchase" means the purchase or transfer of a firearm. 
"Purchaser" means the purchaser or transferee of a firearm. 
(Ord. 539 § 2, 1991)  
9.92.020 - License required for firearms dealer. 
No person shall engage in the activity, business or occupation of firearms dealer without first securing a license from the Rohnert Park department of public safety and paying the appropriate fee thereof. 
(Ord. 539 § 2, 1991)  
9.92.030 - Requirements for issuance of a license to engage in the activity of firearms dealer. 
Before any person shall be considered for a license as firearms dealer an application for license shall be made to the city of Rohnert Park department of public safety on forms approved by the director of public safety which require the applicant to submit any information required under the California Penal Code as a condition precedent to the issuance of the license. In addition, the applicant shall include the following information which must be current and valid: 
A.  A copy of the applicant's city business license. 
B.  A copy of the applicant's use permit as issued by the city. 
C.  A copy of the applicant's federal firearms license. 
D.  A copy of the applicant's sellers' permit as issued the state board of equalization. 
E.  A copy of the applicant's fictitious business name statement (if applicable). 
F.  A copy of the applicant's proof of identity. 
(Ord. 539 § 2, 1991)  
9.92.040 - License issued only to individual. 
The license issued by the city of Rohnert Park department of public safety for a firearms dealer shall be issued only to an individual. No license shall be issued to associations, corporations, partnerships or other entities. Any business, corporation or entity which possesses a federal firearms license in the name of the business, corporation, partnership or association shall not receive a license unless a principal or owner of the business, a corporate officer or a partner of the entity who is responsible for the operation completes the application and is fingerprinted. 
(Ord. 539 § 2, 1991)  
9.92.050 - Fees and charges. 
The following fees and charges shall be paid by the applicant before any license is issued. 
A.  An application fee of seventy-five dollars. 
B.  An additional fee, in the amount of the current rate for processing fingerprints, shall be payable by money order only to the department of justice. 
None of the fees paid shall be refunded. 
(Ord. 547 § 1, 1991: Ord. 539 § 2, 1991)  
9.92.060 - Grounds for denial of license. 
No license shall be issued if the city of Rohnert Park department of public safety finds or determines that: 
A.  The character of the applicant is such that licensing is not believed to be in the best interest of public safety and/or community security; or, 
B.  The applicant has made a false or misleading statement of a material fact or omission of a material fact in the application; or, 
C.  The operation of the business as proposed pursuant to the issue or renewal of a permit is not in compliance with appropriate building, electrical, plumbing, fire, health or zoning codes; or, 
D.  The applicant is under twenty-one years of age; or, 
E.  The applicant has had a similar permit previously revoked or denied for good cause within one year immediately preceding the date of filing of the application; or, 
F.  The applicant has not been licensed as required by federal law and the state of California; or, 
G.  The applicant is in a class of persons described in Penal Code Sections 8100 or 8103, e.g. the applicant: 
1.  Has been convicted of a felony under the laws of the United States, of the state of California, or any other state, government, or country; or 
2.  Has been convicted of a violation of Sections 245(a)(2), 245(a)(3), 245(c), 246, 417(a)(2), and 417(b) of the Penal Code; or 
3.  Is addicted to the use of any narcotic drug; or 
4.  Within ten years of application has been convicted of a misdemeanor violation of Sections 136.5,140,171(b), 171(c), 171(d), 241, 243, 244.5, 245.5, 246.3, 247, 417, 417.2, 62.9, 12034(b), 12034(d), 12100(a), 12320 or 12590 of the Penal Code; or 
5.  As an express condition of probation, is prohibited or restricted from owning, possessing, controlling, receiving, or purchasing a firearm; or 
6.  Is subject to a restraining order issued pursuant to sections 545, 545.5, 546 and 547(a)(2) of the Code of Civil Procedure; or 
7.  Has been convicted of a crime of violence; or 
8.  Has been adjudicated to be a danger to others as a result of a mental disorder or mental illness, to be a mentally disordered sex offender; has been found not guilty by reason of insanity; has been found mentally incompetent to stand trial; has been placed under conservatorship by a court. 
(Ord. 539 § 2, 1991)  
9.92.070 - Term of firearms dealer's license. 
The term of any firearms dealer's license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be one year. 
(Ord. 539 § 2, 1991)  
9.92.080 - Renewal of firearms dealer's license fee thereof. 
An application for renewal of a firearms dealer's license shall be made no less than thirty days of the date of expiration of the current firearms dealer's license. The application for renewal shall be on forms provided by the city of Rohnert Park, department of public safety and consistent with California Penal Code Section 12070, et seq. The renewal fee shall be fifty dollars which shall be paid at the time the application for renewal is submitted. 
(Ord. 539 § 2, 1991)  
9.92.090 - Revocation or suspension of firearms dealers license. 
The director of public safety or his designated representative may revoke or suspend a firearms dealer's license for any of the following reasons: 
A.  Discovery of the existence of any of the circumstances, or the licensee is convicted of any of the offenses, enumerated in Section 9.92.060 of this chapter. 
B.  If the permittee is not operating in full compliance with the provisions of state and federal law; or, if the permittee is not operating in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  If the business, corporation, partnership, or association ceases to have a principal of the business, or owner of the business, or corporate officer or partner actively associated with the business who holds a valid current firearms dealer's license. 
(Ord. 539 § 2, 1991)  
9.92.100 - Chapter statement of existing law and complementary thereto. 
This chapter is enacted to supplement and complement the provision of the California Penal Code regarding the licensing of firearms dealers and specifically California Penal Code § 12070—12083 as existing and enacted as of the date of enactment of this chapter. Existing California law and any subsequent additions or amendments are made a part of this chapter by reference. 
(Ord. 539 § 2, 1991)  
9.92.110 - Severability clause. 
If any sentence, section or portion of this chapter is declared unconstitutional and if the remaining portions of the chapter are enforceable the city council declares that they shall remain in full force and the city council would have enacted those sections even though other sections were declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. 539 § 2, 1991)  
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
Chapters:  
Chapter 10.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
10.04.010 - Adoption of Uniform Traffic Ordinance. 
All of the provisions of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance, 1964 Edition, adopted by the league of California cities, except Sections 1.2, 2.7, 2.8, 13, 13.1 and 13.2 are adopted and made a part of the ordinance codified in this chapter as though fully set forth herein. 
Three copies of this Uniform Traffic Ordinance are on file for use and examination by the public in the office of the city clerk of this city. 
(Ord. 55 § 1, 1965)  
10.04.020 - References to city and city council. 
Whenever reference is made in said Uniform Traffic Ordinance to the "city" or to the "city council," such reference shall be to the city of Rohnert Park and to the council of the city of Rohnert Park. 
(Ord. 55 § 2, 1965)  
10.04.030 - City traffic engineer. 
The office of city traffic engineer is established. The city engineer shall serve as city traffic engineer in addition to his other duties, and shall exercise the powers and duties with respect to traffic as provided in this title. 
(Ord. 383 § 1, 1981: Ord. 55 § 3, 1965)  
10.04.040 - Violation—Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this title is guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person who is convicted of a violation of this title is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 55 § 5, 1965)  
Chapter 10.08 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
10.08.010 - Definitions generally. 
The following words and phrases when used in this title shall for the purpose of this title have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 1), 1965)  
10.08.020 - Motor Vehicle Code definitions to be used. 
Whenever any words or phrases used herein are not defined, but are defined in the Vehicle Code of the state of California and amendments thereto, such definitions shall apply. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 1.1), 1965)  
10.08.030 - Coach defined. 
"Coach" means any motor bus, motor coach, trackless trolley, or passenger stage used as a common carrier of passengers. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 1.3, 1965)  
10.08.040 - Council defined. 
"Council" means the council of the city of Rohnert Park. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 1.4), 1965)  
10.08.050 - Curb defined. 
"Curb" means the lateral boundary of the roadway whether such curb is marked by curbing construction, or not so marked; the word "curb," as herein used, does not include the line dividing the roadway of a street from parking strips in the center of a street, nor from tracks or right-of-way of public utility companies. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 1.5), 1965)  
10.08.060 - Divisional island defined. 
"Divisional island" means a raised island located in the roadway and separating opposing or conflicting streams of traffic. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 1.6), 1965)  
10.08.070 - Holidays defined. 
Holidays are New Year's Day, Lincoln's Birthday, Washington's Birthday, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Admission Day, Columbus Day, Veterans' Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day, regardless of the date designated by federal, state or local law or proclamation. 
If any of the days designated as holidays, except Labor Day and Thanksgiving Day, fall on a Sunday, the following Monday is a holiday. 
(Ord. 275 § 1, 1975: Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 1.7), 1965)  
10.08.080 - Loading zone defined. 
"Loading zone" means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 1.8), 1965)  
10.08.090 - Official time standard defined. 
"Official time standard" means whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in this city. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 1.9), 1965)  
10.08.096 - Pandemoniac motor vehicle defined. 
"Pandemoniac motor vehicle" means a motor vehicle designed, constructed or operated in such a manner as to create audible noise from tire friction caused by the quick acceleration of the vehicle. 
(Ord. 356 § 1, 1978)  
10.08.100 - Parking meter defined. 
"Parking meter" means a mechanical device installed within or upon the curb or sidewalk area, immediately adjacent to a parking space, for the purpose of controlling the period of time occupancy of such parking meter space by any vehicle. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 1.11), 1965)  
10.08.110 - Parkway defined. 
"Parkway" means that portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 1.10), 1965)  
10.08.120 - Passenger loading zone defined. 
"Passenger loading zone" means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 1.12), 1965)  
10.08.130 - Pedestrian defined. 
"Pedestrian" means any person afoot. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 1.13), 1965)  
10.08.140 - Police officer defined. 
"Police officer" means every officer of the police department of this city or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 1.14), 1965)  
10.08.150 - Stop defined. 
"Stop," when required, means complete cessation of movement. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 1.15), 1965)  
10.08.160 - Vehicle Code defined. 
"Vehicle Code" means the Vehicle Code of the state. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 1.16), 1965)  
10.08.170 - Central traffic district, defined. 
No central traffic district is presently established. 
(Ord. 583 § 2, 1981)  
Chapter 10.12 - TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 
Sections: 
 
10.12.010 - Police administration. 
There is established in the police department of this city a traffic division to be under the control of a police officer appointed by and directly responsible to the chief of police. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 2), 1965)  
10.12.020 - Duty of traffic division. 
It is the duty of the traffic division with such aid as may be rendered by other members of the police department to enforce the street traffic regulations of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate traffic accidents and to cooperate with the city traffic engineer and other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon said division by this title and the traffic ordinances of this city. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 2.1), 1965)  
10.12.030 - Traffic accident studies. 
Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the traffic division shall cooperate with the city traffic engineer in conducting studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. 2.2), 1965)  
10.12.040 - Traffic accident reports. 
The traffic division shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed alphabetically by location. Such reports shall be available for the use and information of the city traffic engineer. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. 2.3), 1965)  
10.12.050 - Annual traffic safety report—Contents. 
The traffic division shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the city council. Such a report shall contain information on traffic matters in this city as follows: 
A.  The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons injured, and other pertinent traffic accident data; 
B.  The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities of the police; 
C.  The plans and recommendations of the division for future traffic safety activities. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 2.4), 1965)  
10.12.060 - City traffic engineer—Powers and duties. 
It shall be the general duty of the city traffic engineer to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices and signals, to conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering and traffic investigations of traffic conditions and to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of this city. Whenever, by the provisions of the ordinance codified herein a power is granted to the city traffic engineer or a duty imposed upon him, the power may be exercised or the duty performed by his deputy or by a person authorized in writing by him. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 2.6), 1965)  
Chapter 10.16 - ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
10.16.010 - Authority of police and fire department officials. 
Officers of the police department and such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, audible or other signal in conformance with traffic laws, except that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department or members of the fire department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions to the contrary contained in this title or the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 3), 1965)  
10.16.020 - Traffic direction by officers only. 
No person other than an officer of the police department or members of the fire department or a person authorized by the chief of police or a person authorized by law shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal, except that persons may operate, when and as herein provided, any mechanical push button signal erected by order of the city traffic engineer. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 3.1), 1965)  
10.16.030 - Obedience to authorized officers. 
No person shall fail or refuse to comply with or to perform any act forbidden by any lawful order, signal, or direction of a traffic or police officer, or a member of the fire department, or a person authorized by the chief of police or by law. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 3.2), 1965)  
10.16.040 - Persons riding bicycles or animals. 
Every person riding a bicycle or riding or driving an animal upon a highway has all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this title, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 3.3), 1965)  
10.16.050 - Obstruction or interference with authorized officers. 
No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police officer or other officer or employee of this city in their enforcement of the provisions of this title. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other employee or officer of this city in connection with the enforcement of the parking regulations of this title, shall, if done for the purpose of evading the provisions of this title, constitute such interference or obstruction. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 3.4), 1965)  
10.16.060 - Public employees to obey traffic regulations. 
The provisions of this title shall apply to the operator of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States Government, this state, or any county or city; and it is unlawful for any said operator to violate any of the provisions of this title except as otherwise permitted in this title or by the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 3.5), 1965)  
10.16.070 - Exemptions. 
A.  The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles operated by the police or fire department, any public ambulance, or any public utility vehicle or any private ambulance, which public utility vehicle or private ambulance has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this section is operated in the manner specified by the Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call; 
B.  The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, relieve the operator of any such vehicle from obligation to exercise due care for the safety of others or the consequences of his wilful disregard of the safety of others; 
C.  The provisions of this title regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work or any vehicle owned or operated by the United States Post Office Department while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of United States mail. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 3.6), 1965)  
10.16.080 - Damage report. 
A.  The operator of a vehicle or the person in charge of any animal involved in any accident resulting in damage to any property publicly owned or owned by a public utility, including but not limited to any fire hydrant, parking meter, lighting post, telephone pole, electric light or power pole, or resulting in damage to any tree, traffic control device or other property of a like nature located in or along any street, shall within twenty-four hours after such accident make a written report of such accident to the police department of this city. 
B.  Every such report shall state the time when and the place where the accident took place, the name and address of the person owning and of the person operating or in charge of such vehicle or animal, the license number of every such vehicle, and shall briefly describe the property damage in such accident. 
C.  The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident shall not be subject to the requirements or penalties of this section if and during the time he is physically incapable of making a report, but in such event he shall make a report as required in subdivision A within twenty-four hours after regaining ability to make such report. 
(Ord. 55 (Unit. Traf. Ord. § 3.7), 1965)  
10.16.090 - When vehicles may be removed from streets. 
Any regularly employed and salaried officer of the police department of this city may remove or cause to be removed: 
A.  Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a street or highway for seventy-two or more consecutive hours; 
B.  Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway between the hours of seven a.m. and seven p.m. when such parking or standing is prohibited by ordinance or resolution of this city and signs are posted giving notice of such removal; 
C.  Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or for the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided that signs giving notice that such vehicle may be removed are erected or placed at least twenty-four hours prior to the removal. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 3.8), 1965)  
Chapter 10.20 - SPECIAL SPEED ZONES 
Sections: 
 
10.20.010 - State speed limits—Inappropriate. 
It is determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the speed permitted by state law upon the following streets is inappropriate for the safe operation of vehicles thereon. It is declared that the prima facie speed limit on the streets or portions of streets, hereinafter designated, to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and which has been found to be reasonable and safe, after the installation of appropriate signs giving notice thereof, shall be: 
Name of Street or Portion of Street 	Declared Prima Facie Speed Limit 
All of Adrian Drive 	25 m.p.h. 
All of Arlen Drive 	25 m.p.h. 
Bodway Parkway from Magnolia Avenue to East Cotati Avenue 	30 m.p.h. 
Business Park Drive from Redwood Drive to Labath Avenue 	40 m.p.h. 
Camino Colegio from East Cotati Avenue to Bodway Parkway 	35 m.p.h. 
Commerce Boulevard from Golf Course Drive to Avram Avenue 	40 m.p.h. 
Commerce Boulevard from Avram Avenue to Southwest Boulevard 	35 m.p.h. 
Country Club Drive from Golf Course Drive to Rohnert Park Expressway 	30 m.p.h. 
Country Club Drive from Rohnert Park Expressway to Southwest Boulevard 	30 m.p.h. 
All of East Cotati Avenue within Rohnert Park city limits 	35 m.p.h. 
All of Enterprise Drive 	30 m.p.h. 
Golf Course Drive from Commerce Boulevard to Country Club Drive 	40 m.p.h. 
Golf Course Drive from Country Club Drive to Snyder Lane 	35 m.p.h. 
Labath Avenue from Business Park Drive to Rohnert Park Expressway 	35 m.p.h. 
Redwood Drive from Dowdell Avenue to Willis Road 	40 m.p.h. 
Redwood Drive from Willis Road to City Limits South 	40 m.p.h. 
Rohnert Park Expressway lying west of Redwood Drive 	40 m.p.h. 
Rohnert Park Expresssway between Redwood Drive and Commerce Drive 	35 m.p.h. 
Rohnert Park Expressway from Commerce to State Farm 	35 m.p.h. 
Rohnert Park Expressway from State Farm to Country Club Drive 	40 m.p.h. 
Rohnert Park Expressway from Country Club Drive to Snyder 	45 m.p.h. 
Rohnert Park Expressway from Snyder to Petaluma Hill Road 	45 m.p.h. 
All of Seed Farm Drive 	30 m.p.h. 
Snyder Lane from Heritage Lane to Eleanor Avenue 	35 m.p.h. 
Snyder Lane from Hinebaugh Creek to East Cotati Avenue 	35 m.p.h. 
Southwest Boulevard from Commerce Boulevard to Snyder Lane 	35 m.p.h. 
State Farm Drive from Professional Center Drive to Rohnert Park Expressway 	35 m.p.h. 
State Farm Drive from Professional Center Drive to Commerce Boulevard 	30 m.p.h. 
 
(Ord. 806 § 1, 2008; Ord. 802 § 1, 2008; Ord. 728 § 1, 2005: Ord. 614 § 1, 1996: Ord. 571 § 1, 1993: Ord. 525 § 1, 1990: Ord. 480 § 1, 1987: Ord. 476 § 1, 1987: Ord. 455 § 1, 1986: Ord. 383 § 3, 1981: Ord. 302 § 1, 1975: Ord. 275 § 3, 1975: Ord. 248 § 1, 1974: Ord. 240 § 1, 1974: Ord. 227 § 1, 1974: Ord. 225 § 1, 1974: Ord. 136 § 1, 1970: Ord. 87 § 1, 1967: Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 16), 1965) 
(Ord. No. 817, § 1, 6-9-2009; Ord. No. 842, § 1, 12-13-2011)  
10.20.030 - State speed limits—Decrease between districts. 
Reference is made to the following portions of streets where the state speed law of fifty-five miles per hour is applicable for a distance of not exceeding two thousand feet in length between districts, either business or residence; and it is determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, that the speed permitted by state law upon the following described portions of said streets which are not state highways is greater than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist upon the described portions of such streets, and it is declared that the prima facie speed limit shall be as herein set forth on those portions of streets herein designated when signs are erected giving notice thereof: 
Portion of Street Affected 

Not Exceeding 2000 Feet 

Between Districts 	Declared Prima 

Facie Speed Limit 
None presently established. 	
 
(Ord. 383 § 5, 1981: Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 16.2), 1965)  
10.20.040 - Regulation of speed by traffic signals. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections, and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 16.3), 1965)  
Chapter 10.24 - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 
Sections: 
 
10.24.010 - Authority to install. 
A.  The city traffic engineer shall have the power and duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic control devices when and as required to make effective the provisions of this title. 
B.  Whenever the Vehicle Code requires for the effectiveness of any provision thereof that traffic control devices be installed to give notice to the public of the application of such law the city traffic engineer is authorized to install or cause to be installed the necessary devices subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto. 
C.  The city traffic engineer may also place and maintain or cause to place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary or proper to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but he shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations, and rules as may be set forth in this title or as may be determined by ordinance or resolution of the council. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 4), 1965)  
10.24.020 - Enforcement—Signs required. 
No provision of the Vehicle Code or of this title for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate legible signs are in place giving notice of such provisions of the traffic laws. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 4.1), 1965)  
10.24.030 - Obedience required. 
The operator of any vehicle or train shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device placed in accordance with this title unless otherwise directed by a police officer or other authorized person subject to the exceptions granted the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle when responding to emergency calls. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 4.2), 1965)  
10.24.040 - Traffic signals—Installation. 
A.  The city traffic engineer is directed to install and maintain official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life or property from exceptional hazard. 
B.  The city traffic engineer shall ascertain and determine the locations where such signals are required by field investigation, traffic counts and other traffic information as may be pertinent and his determinations therefrom shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and safety standards and instructions set forth in the California Traffic Manual issued by the State Department of Transportation. 
C.  Whenever the city traffic engineer installs and maintains an official traffic signal at any intersection, he shall likewise erect and maintain at such intersection street name signs clearly visible to traffic approaching from all directions unless such street name signs have previously been placed and are maintained at any said intersection. 
(Ord. 383 § 6, 1981: Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 4.3), 1965)  
10.24.050 - Lane marking. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to mark center lines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center line of the highway. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 4.4), 1965)  
10.24.060 - Distinctive roadway markings. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to place and maintain distinctive roadway markings as described in the Vehicle Code on those streets or parts of streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of such marking or signs and markings. Such marking or signs and markings shall have the same effect as similar markings placed by the State Department of Transportation pursuant to provisions of the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 383 § 7, 1981: Ord. 55 (Uni Traf. Ord. § 4.5), 1965)  
10.24.070 - Authority to remove, relocate, and discontinue. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any traffic control device not specifically required by the Vehicle Code or this title whenever he determines in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist or obtain. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 4.6), 1965)  
10.24.080 - Hours of operation. 
The city traffic engineer shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those cases where such hours or days are specified in this title. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 4.7), 1965)  
10.24.090 - Unauthorized painting of curbs. 
No person, unless authorized by this city, shall paint any street or curb surface; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the painting of numbers on a curb surface by any person who has complied with the provisions of any resolution or ordinance of this city pertaining thereto. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 4.8), 1965)  
Chapter 10.28 - TURNING MOVEMENTS 
Sections: 
 
10.28.010 - Intersections and multiple lanes—Authority to place markers. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to place official traffic control devices within or adjacent to intersections and indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and the city traffic engineer is authorized to locate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right or left-hand turns, and the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 5), 1965)  
10.28.020 - Authority to place restricted turn signs. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left, or U turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 5.1), 1965)  
10.28.030 - Signal-controlled intersections—Right turns. 
A.  No driver of a vehicle shall make a right turn against a red or stop signal at any intersection which is sign posted giving notice of such restriction as provided in subsection B of this section. 
B.  The city traffic engineer shall post appropriate signs giving effect to this section where he determines that the making of right turns against traffic signal "stop" indication would seriously interfere with the safe and orderly flow of traffic. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 5.2), 1965)  
Chapter 10.32 - ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS 
Sections: 
 
10.32.010 - Signs. 
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates any one-way street or alley, the city traffic engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 6), 1965)  
Chapter 10.36 - THROUGH STREETS AND STOP INTERSECTIONS 
Sections: 
 
10.36.010 - Stop signs—Erected by city traffic engineer. 
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a through street, or any intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances thereto, or any railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are required to stop, the city traffic engineer shall erect and maintain stop signs as follows: 
A stop sign shall be erected on each and every street intersecting such through street or portion thereof so designated and at those entrances to other intersections where a stop is required and at any railroad grade crossing so designated; provided, however, stop signs shall not be erected or maintained at any entrance to any intersection or a railroad crossing when such entrance or railroad crossing is controlled by an official traffic control signal. Every such sign shall conform with, and shall be placed as provided in the vehicle code. 
(Ord. 275 § 4, 1975; Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 7), 1965)  
10.36.020 - Stopping at through street or stop sign. 
A.  Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the council are declared to be through streets for the purposes of this chapter. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter shall also apply at one or more entrances to the intersections as such entrances and intersections are established by resolution of the council. 
C.  The provisions of this chapter shall apply at those highway railway grade crossings as established by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 7.1), 1965)  
10.36.030 - Emerging from alley, driveway or building. 
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the sidewalk area extending across any alley way or driveway. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 7.2), 1965)  
Chapter 10.40 - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 
Sections: 
 
10.40.010 - Application of regulations. 
A.  The provisions of this title prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. 
B.  The provisions of this title imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code or the ordinances of this city prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 10), 1965)  
10.40.020 - Stopping or standing in parkways prohibited. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parkway. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 10.1), 1965)  
10.40.030 - Traffic engineer—Maintenance of no stopping zones and no parking areas. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to maintain, by appropriate signs or by paint upon the curb surface, all no stopping zones, no parking areas, and restricted parking areas, as defined and described in this title. 
When such curb markings or signs are in place, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign in violation of any of the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 10.2), 1965)  
10.40.040 - No parking areas. 
No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, park, or leave standing such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police or other authorized officer, of traffic sign or signal: 
A.  Within any divisional island unless authorized and clearly indicated with appropriate signs or markings; 
B.  On either side of any street between the projected property lines of any public walk, public steps, street, or thoroughfare terminating at such street, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface; 
C.  In any area where the city traffic engineer determines that the parking or stopping of a vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface; 
D.  In any area established by resolution of the council as a no parking area, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface; 
E.  Upon, along or across any railway track in such manner as to hinder, delay, or obstruct the movement of any car traveling upon such track; 
F.  In any area where the parking or stopping of any vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property; 
G.  On any street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided that signs giving notice of such no parking are erected or placed at least twenty-four hours prior to the effective time of such no parking; 
H.  At any place within twenty feet of a point on the curb immediately opposite the mid-block end of a safety zone, when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface; 
I.  At any place within twenty feet of a crosswalk at an intersection in the central traffic district or in any business district when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface except that a bus may stop at a designated bus stop; 
J.  Within twenty feet of the approach to any traffic signal, boulevard stop sign, or official electric flashing device. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 10.3), 1965)  
10.40.044 - Stopping, parking or standing restricted to certain streets: city council may designate. 
The city council may designate, by resolution, certain streets or roadways within the city upon which stopping, parking, or standing is prohibited or restricted. 
(Ord. 621 § 2, 1996)  
10.40.045 - Designation of types of vehicles restricted. 
The city council may designate, by resolution, the type of vehicle, by size, height, weight, length, horsepower, type of tires utilized, or any combination(s) thereof, which is restricted from stopping, parking, or standing on such designated streets. 
(Ord. 621, § 3, 1996)  
10.40.046 - Designation of hours of prohibited or restricted parking. 
The city council may designate, by resolution, the hours of the day during which such stopping, parking, or standing shall be prohibited. For the purpose of this section, the phrase "hours of the day" shall include the hours between six a.m. and eight p.m. 
(Ord. 621 § 4, 1996)  
10.40.047 - Designation of streets upon which exemptions may be given for the issuance of preferential parking privileges, criteria for same. 
The city council may designate, by resolution, that the city traffic engineer be authorized to issue exemptions to the stopping, parking, or standing requirements by the issuance of preferential parking privileges to residents and merchants adjacent to any street designated as a street upon which stopping, parking, or standing is prohibited. 
Preferential privileges for some parking shall be given, in the order of priority to (1) residents, (2) merchants, (3) customers of merchants, (4) guests of residents, (5) other persons who live or work in the area and are entitled to special consideration because of their status or a special condition, i.e., vehicles for handicapped, emergency vehicles, vehicles on official government business, etc. 
The length of time a resident or merchant or his or her guest may park shall be governed by the following criteria: 
A.  The age of the resident or merchant. (Senior citizens shall be entitled to additional consideration.) 
B.  Special need of the resident or merchant such as a physical handicap, type of job or employment, need for the service furnished (in the case of merchants), etc. 
C.  Length of time during the day and time of day that the resident and/or merchant requires preferential stopping, parking, or standing privileges. 
(Ord. 621 § 5, 1996)  
10.40.048 - Notice to publish sign. 
No designation of any intersection, street, or highway or portion thereof for prohibited stopping, parking or standing shall be effective until the city has placed signs at regular intervals not exceeding two hundred feet, which clearly state that the street or area has been designated pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 22507 as a street or area upon which stopping, parking, or standing is prohibited. 
(Ord. 621 § 6, 1996)  
10.40.049 - Exemptions, issuance of permits to residents for guests and to merchants for customers or service. 
The city council may determine, by resolution, the criteria and standards for issuing an exemption to the prohibition of the stopping, parking, or standing on designated streets. The city council may designate, by resolution, the number and criteria for issuance of special permits for guests of residents or customers or providers of service to merchants on any street or area designated as a preferential parking street or area. 
(Ord. 621 § 7, 1996)  
10.40.050 - Use of streets for storage of vehicles prohibited. 
No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street or alley for a consecutive period of seventy-two hours. For purposes of this section, a vehicle shall be deemed to be parked on a street or alley when it has not moved at least 1/10 of a mile within a consecutive seventy-two hour period. Any such vehicle so parked may be removed by the Department of Public Safety in accordance with Sections 22651 and 22669 of the Vehicle Code of the State of California. 
(Ord. 763 § 1, 2006)  
10.40.060 - Parking for demonstration. 
No operator of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street in this city for the principal purpose of advertising or displaying it for sale, unless authorized by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 10.5), 1965)  
10.40.070 - Repairing or greasing vehicles. 
No person shall construct or cause to be constructed, repair or cause to be repaired, grease or cause to be greased, dismantle or cause to be dismantled any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this city. Temporary emergency repairs may be made upon a public street. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 10.6), 1965)  
10.40.080 - Washing or polishing vehicles. 
No person shall wash or cause to be washed, polish or cause to be polished any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this city, when a charge is made for such service. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 10.7), 1965)  
10.40.090 - Parking adjacent to schools. 
A.  The city traffic engineer is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
B.  When official signs are erected prohibiting parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 10.8), 1965)  
10.40.100 - Parking prohibited on narrow streets. 
A.  The city traffic engineer is authorized to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty feet. 
B.  When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign or marking. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 10.9), 1965)  
10.40.110 - Parking on grades. 
No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on a highway when upon any grade exceeding three percent within any business or residence district, without blocking the wheels of said vehicle by turning them against the curb or by other means. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 10.10), 1965)  
10.40.120 - Peddlers and vendors—Unlawful parking. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall stand or park any vehicle, wagon or pushcart from which goods, wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables or foodstuffs are sold, displayed, solicited or offered for sale or bartered or exchanged, or any lunch wagon or eating car or vehicle, on any portion of any street within this city except that such vehicles, wagons or pushcarts may stand or park only at the request of a bona fide purchase for a period of time not to exceed ten minutes at any one place. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to persons delivering such articles upon order of, or by agreement with a customer from a store or other fixed place of business or distribution. 
B.  No person shall park or stand on any street any lunch wagon, eating cart or vehicle, or pushcart from which tamales, peanuts, popcorn, candy, ice cream or other articles of food are sold or offered for sale without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the city traffic engineer which shall designate the specific location in which such cart shall stand. 
C.  No person shall park or stand any vehicle or wagon used or intended to be used in the transportation of property for hire on any street while awaiting patronage for such vehicle or wagon without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the city traffic engineer which shall designate the specific location where such vehicle may stand. 
D.  Whenever any permit is granted under the provisions of this section and a particular location to park or stand is specified therein, no person shall park or stand any vehicle, wagon, or pushcart on any location other than as designated in such permit. In the event that the holder of any such permit is convicted in any court of competent jurisdiction for violating any of the provisions of this section, such permit shall be forthwith revoked by the city traffic engineer upon the filing of the record of such conviction with such officer and no permit shall thereafter be issued to such person until six months have elapsed from the date of such revocation. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 10.11), 1965)  
10.40.130 - Emergency parking signs. 
A.  Whenever the city traffic engineer determines that an emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings, or functions, or for other reasons, the city traffic engineer shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the city traffic engineer shall direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency and the city traffic engineer shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter. 
B.  When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 10.12), 1965)  
10.40.140 - Disabled commercial vehicle—Displaying warning devices. 
Every motor truck having an unladen weight of four thousand pounds or more, and every truck tractor irrespective of weight when operated upon any street or highway during darkness shall be equipped with and carry at least two flares or two red lanterns or two warning lights or reflectors, which reflectors shall be of a type approved by the Department of California Highway Patrol. When any vehicle above mentioned or any trailer or semitrailer is disabled upon streets or highways outside of any business or residence district within this city and upon which street or highway there is insufficient street lighting to reveal a vehicle at a distance of two hundred feet during darkness, a warning signal of the character indicated above shall be immediately placed at a distance of approximately one hundred feet in advance of, and one hundred feet to the rear of, such disabled vehicle by the driver thereof. The continuous flashing of at least four approved class A-Type I turn signal lamps, at least two toward the front and at least two toward the rear of the vehicle, shall be considered to meet the requirements of this section until the devices mentioned above can be placed in the required locations. The warning signals herein mentioned shall be displayed continuously during darkness while such vehicle remains disabled upon such street or highway. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 10.13), 1965)  
10.40.150 - Twenty-four minute parking. 
Green curb marking shall mean no standing or parking for a period of time longer than twenty-four minutes at any time between nine a.m. and six p.m. on any day except Sunday(s) and holidays. 
When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign or parking meter in violation thereof. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 11), 1965)  
10.40.160 - Forty-minute parking. 
When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle between the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sunday(s) and holidays, for a period of time longer than forty minutes. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 11.1), 1965)  
10.40.170 - One-hour parking. 
When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle between the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sunday(s) and holidays for a period of time longer than one hour. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 11.2), 1965)  
10.40.180 - Two-hour parking. 
When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle between the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sunday(s) and holidays for a period of time longer than two hours. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 11.3), 1965)  
10.40.190 - One-way streets—Parallel parking. 
A.  Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be stopped or parked within eighteen inches of the left-hand curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street unless signs are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing. 
B.  In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are in place permitting such standing or parking. 
C.  The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way street or when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any one-way roadway of a highway having two or more separate roadways and shall erect signs giving notice thereof. 
D.  The requirement of parallel parking imposed by this section shall not apply in the event any commercial vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading freight or goods, in which case such vehicle may be backed up to the curb, provided that such vehicle does not extend beyond the center line of the street and does not block traffic thereby. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 11.4), 1965)  
10.40.200 - Diagonal parking. 
On any of the streets or portions of streets established by resolution of the council as diagonal parking zones, when signs or pavement markings are in place indicating such diagonal parking, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park said vehicle except: 
A.  At the angle to the curb indicated by signs or pavement markings allotting space to parked vehicles and entirely within the limits of said allotted space; 
B.  With the front wheel nearest the curb within six inches of said curb. The provisions of this section shall not apply when such vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading passengers, freight or goods, in which event the provisions applicable in Section 10.20.190 shall be complied with. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 11.5), 1965)  
10.40.210 - Parking space markings. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to install and maintain parking space markings to indicate parking spaces adjacent to curbings where authorized parking is permitted. 
When such parking space markings are placed on the highway, subject to other and more restrictive limitations, no vehicle shall be stopped, left standing or parked other than within a single space unless the size or shape of such vehicle makes compliance impossible. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 11.6), 1965)  
10.40.220 - No stopping zones. 
The city traffic engineer shall designate established no stopping zones by placing and maintaining appropriate signs indicating that stopping of vehicles is prohibited and indicating the hours and days when stopping is prohibited. 
During the hours and on the days designated on the signs, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop said vehicle on any of the streets or parts of streets established by resolution of the council as no stopping zones. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 11.7), 1965)  
10.40.230 - All night parking—Prohibited. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle on any street for a period of time longer than thirty minutes between the hours of two a.m. and four a.m. of any day, provided that this section shall not apply to a vehicle of any regularly licensed physician when actually engaged in making professional calls. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 11.8), 1965)  
10.40.240 - Truck parking prohibited. 
It is unlawful to park, stand, or otherwise leave unattended any commercial vehicle having a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or more upon any public street within a residential district within the city except during the loading or unloading thereof. For purposes of this section, a "commercial vehicle" is a vehicle of a type required to be registered and used or maintained for the transportation of persons for hire, compensation, or profit, or designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property, as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 260. 
(Ord. 655 § 2, 2000: Ord. 15 § 1, 1962)  
10.40.250 - Penalties. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof is subject to the fines, penalties and other provisions of Chapter 1.16 of this Code. 
(Ord. 288 § 1, 1975: Ord. 15 § 1, 1962)  
Chapter 10.41 - BLUE CURB SPACES 
Sections: 
 
10.41.010 - Use of blue curb spaces. 
Persons using "blue curb" parking spaces shall comply with the following: 
A.  No person shall park or stand any vehicle in a disabled persons' parking zone (blue curb) unless said vehicle bears a special license or displays a special placard issued under the provisions of Section 9105 or Section 22511.5 of the California Vehicle Code. 
B.  Blue curb parking spaces shall be operative twenty-four hours a day, Sundays and holidays included. 
C.  Parking zones for the physically handicapped are subject to any temporary parking prohibitions established by the city. 
(Ord. 338a § l (part), 1977)  
10.41.020 - On-street parking. 
The city traffic engineer shall designate special "blue curb" parking spaces for the purpose of providing on-street parking for exclusive use by physically handicapped persons. 
(Ord. 338a § l (part), 1977)  
10.41.030 - Off-street publicly owned facilities. 
The traffic engineer shall designate parking stalls or spaces in publicly owned, leased, or controlled off-street parking facilities for exclusive use by physically handicapped persons. 
(Ord. 383 § 8, 1981: Ord. 338a § l (part), 1977)  
10.41.040 - Off-street privately financed facilities. 
The city declares that owners of privately owned and operated parking facilities are urged and encouraged to reserve parking stalls for exclusive use by physically handicapped persons. 
(Ord. 338a § l (part), 1977).  
10.41.050 - Identification. 
A.  On-street Blue Curb Spaces. Blue curb spaces shall be indicated by blue paint on the curb edge of the paved portion of the street. For further identification, the International Symbol of Access, may be painted on the blue curb in white followed by the word "ONLY." 
EXAMPLE: 
  
1.  In addition a sign not less than seventeen inches by twenty-two inches with lettering not less than one inch in height shall be posted stating: 
a.  "Unauthorized vehicles not displaying distinguishing license plates or placards issued for physically handicapped persons will be issued citations." or 
b.  "Unauthorized vehicles not displaying distinguishing placards or license plates issued for physically handicapped persons will be towed away at owner's expense. Towed vehicles may be reclaimed at (Address) or by telephoning (Telephone number of local law enforcement agency). " 
2.  All signs shall be posted at a height of eighty inches from the ground. 
B.  Off-street/Publicly Owned Facilities. Designation of "blue curb" parking stalls in publicly financed off-street parking facilities shall be made by posting immediately adjacent to and visible from same a sign consisting of the International Symbol of Access. 
1.  In addition, a sign not less than seventeen inches by twenty-two inches in size must be posted either at the entrance to the parking facility or immediately adjacent to and visible from the reserved stall(s), which states with lettering no less than one inch in height: 
a.  "Unauthorized vehicles not displaying distinguishing license plates or placards issued for physically handicapped persons will be issued citations." or 
b.  "Unauthorized vehicles not displaying distinguishing placards or license plates issued for physically handicapped persons will be towed away at owner's expense. Towed vehicles may be reclaimed at (Address) or by telephoning (Telephone number of local law enforcement agency). " 
2.  The operator of the parking facility may then, and only after first contacting the police department, cause the removal of a violator's automobile from the stall to the nearest public garage. 
3.  All signs shall be posted at a height of eighty inches from the ground. 
C.  Off-street/Privately Financed Facilities. Designation of "blue curb" parking stalls in privately financed off-street parking facilities shall be made by posting immediately adjacent to and visible from same a sign consisting of the International Symbol of Access. 
1.  In addition, a sign not less than seventeen inches by twenty-two inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in height which clearly states: 
a.  "Unauthorized vehicles not displaying distinguishing license plates or placards issued for physically handicapped persons will be issued citations." or 
b.  "Unauthorized vehicles not displaying distinguishing placards or license plates issued for physically handicapped persons will be towed away at owner's expense. Towed vehicles may be reclaimed at (Address) or by telephoning (Telephone number of local law enforcement agency). " 
2.  This sign shall be posted at the entrance to the parking facility or immediately adjacent to, and visible from, the reserved stall(s). 
3.  The person in lawful possession of the parking facility may then, and only after first contacting the police department, cause the removal of a violator's automobile from the stall to the nearest public garage. 
4.  A sign must be posted at the entry to all off-street parking facilities to the effect that the facility is subject to public traffic regulations and control. 
5.  All signs shall be posted at a height of eighty inches from the ground. 
(Ord. 338 § l (part), 1977)  
Chapter 10.44 - LOADING ZONES 
Sections: 
 
10.44.010 - Establishment authority. 
A.  The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine and to mark loading zones and passenger loading zones as follows: 
1.  At any place in the central traffic district or any business district; 
2.  Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly. 
B.  In no event shall more than one-half of the total curb length in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes. 
C.  Loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint upon the top of all curbs within such zones. 
D.  Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by white paint upon the top of all curbs in said zones. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 12), 1965)  
10.44.020 - Curb markings to indicate no stopping and parking regulations. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this title, to place, and when required herein shall place, the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and said curb markings shall have the meanings as herein set forth: 
A.  Red shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time except as permitted by the Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone; 
B.  Yellow shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time between seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sunday(s) and holidays for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials, provided that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes nor the loading or unloading of materials more than twenty minutes; 
C.  White shall mean no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers, or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox, which shall not exceed three minutes and such restrictions shall apply between seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sunday(s) and holidays and except as follows: 
1.  When such zone is in front of a hotel or in front of a mailbox, the restrictions shall apply at all times, 
2.  When such zone is in front of a theater, the restrictions shall apply at all times except when such theater is closed; 
D.  When the city traffic engineer as authorized under this title has caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking in violation of any of the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 12.1), 1965)  
10.44.030 - Loading and unloading—Permission. 
A.  Permission herein granted to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than twenty minutes. 
B.  The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial deliveries, also the delivery or pick-up of express and parcel post packages and United States mail. 
C.  Permission herein granted to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event for more than three minutes. 
D.  Within the total time limits above specified, the provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading but without permitting abuse of the privileges hereby granted. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 12.2), 1965)  
10.44.040 - Loading and unloading—Yellow zone. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any yellow loading zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or material for such time as is permitted in Section 10.22.030. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 12.3), 1965)  
10.44.050 - Passenger loading zone—Standing. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any passenger loading zone for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers for such time as is specified in Section 10.22.030. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 12.4), 1965)  
10.44.060 - Standing in any alley. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of persons or materials in any alley. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 12.5), 1965)  
10.44.070 - Coach zones. 
A.  The city traffic engineer is authorized to establish bus zones opposite curb space for the loading and unloading of buses or common carriers of passengers and to determine the location thereof. 
B.  Coach zones shall normally be established on the far side of an intersection. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 12.6), 1965)  
10.44.080 - Vehicles on private property. 
No person shall operate or drive or leave any vehicle in, over, or upon any private property without express or implied permission of the owner thereof, or the person entitled to the possession thereof, for the time being, or the authorized agent of either except that this section shall not apply to public or private parking lots. 
(Ord. 55 § 4(A) (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 12.7), 1965)  
10.44.090 - Special passenger or freight loading zones. 
No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park said vehicle in any special passenger or freight loading zone when approved permanent or portable signs are in place, as hereinafter provided, for any period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of passengers or freight. 
Special passenger or freight loading zones, as used herein, shall be those areas not more than sixty feet in length located between two approved permanent or portable signs in front of or adjacent to, and within the projected real property boundaries of any church, theater, club, or place of business or public gathering. Said signs shall be provided and paid for by the church, theater, club or place of business or public gathering for which they are used and shall be approved by the city traffic engineer. 
(Ord. 55 § 4(B) (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 12.8), 1965)  
Chapter 10.48 - PARKING METERS 
Sections: 
 
10.48.010 - Manner of installation. 
The city traffic engineer shall cause parking meters to be installed and maintained in all parking meter zones. 
Parking meters shall be installed upon the curb or sidewalk area immediately adjacent to each parking space. Each meter shall be placed in such manner as to show or display by a sign or signal that the parking space adjacent thereto is or is not legally in use. 
Each parking meter shall be set to display, after the operational procedure has been completed, a sign or signal indicating legal parkings for that period of time conforming to the limit of parking time as indicated on the meter. Each parking meter shall indicate the limit of parking time in the parking space adjacent to the parking meter, and shall continue to operate from the time of the completion of the operational procedure until the expiration of the time fixed as the parking limit or a portion thereof for the part of the street upon which said meter is placed. Each said meter shall also be so arranged that upon the expiration of said legal parking time it will indicate by a mechanical operation and by proper signal that the lawful parking period has expired. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 14.1), 1965)  
10.48.020 - Time of operation. 
The provisions of this title relating to the operation of parking meters shall be effective between the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m. on every day except Sunday(s) and holidays. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 14.2), 1965)  
10.48.030 - Operational procedure to be followed. 
Immediately after occupancy of a parking meter space, the operator of a vehicle shall deposit a coin of the United States in said parking meter and if necessary turn a crank, knob, or handle in accordance with the instructions posted on the face of the parking meter. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 14.3), 1965)  
10.48.040 - Fees. 
The parking meter fees for the parking meter zones herein established shall be as follows: 
A.  Where a parking meter indicates a limit of parking time in the parking space adjacent thereto to be twenty-four minutes or less, one hour or two hours, the parking meter fee shall be one cent for each twelve minutes of parking time. 
B.  Where a parking meter indicates a limit of parking time in the parking space adjacent thereto to be forty minutes, the parking meter fee shall be one cent for each eight minutes of parking time. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 14.4), 1965)  
10.48.050 - Parking unlawful after meter time has expired. 
No operator of any vehicle shall permit said vehicle to remain parked in any parking space during any time that the meter is showing a signal indicating that such space is illegally in use other than such time immediately after the original occupancy as is necessary to operate the meter to show legal parking. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 14.5), 1965)  
10.48.060 - Extending time beyond limit—Unlawful. 
No person shall follow the operational procedure or any part of the operational procedure for the purpose of increasing or extending the parking time of any vehicle beyond the legal parking time which has been established for the parking space adjacent to which said parking meter is placed. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 14.6), 1965)  
10.48.070 - Improper use. 
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any defaced or bent coin, or any slug, device or metallic substitute for a coin of the United States, or deface, injure, tamper with, open or wilfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 14.7), 1965)  
10.48.080 - Deposit of coins by unauthorized person. 
No person, other than the owner or operator of a vehicle, shall deposit any coin in any parking meter without the knowledge or consent of said owner or operator of the vehicle using the parking space immediately adjacent to said meter. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 14.8), 1965)  
10.48.090 - Use for certain purposes prohibited. 
No person shall attach anything to or allow a bicycle, newsrack or any other article or thing to lean against a parking meter or a parking meter standard. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 14.9), 1965)  
10.48.100 - Rule of evidence. 
The parking or standing of any motor vehicle in a parking space, at which space the parking meter displays the sign or signal indicating illegal parking, shall constitute a prima facie presumption that the vehicle has been parked or allowed to stand in such space for a period longer than permitted by this title. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 14.10), 1965)  
10.48.110 - Money deposited in parking meters—Use. 
All moneys collected from parking meters in this city shall be placed in a special fund, which fund shall be devoted exclusively to the following purposes: 
A.  For the purchasing, leasing, installing, repairing, maintaining, operating, removing, regulating and policing of parking meters in this city and for the payment of any and all expenses relating or incidental thereto; 
B.  For the purchasing, leasing, acquiring, improving, operating, and maintaining of off-street parking facilities in this city; 
C.  For the installation and maintenance of traffic control devices and signals; 
D.  For the painting and marking of streets and curbs required for the direction of traffic and parking of motor vehicles; 
E.  For the proper regulation, control and inspection of parking and traffic upon the public streets; 
F.  To be pledged as security for the payment of principal of and interest on off-street parking revenue bonds issued by this city, or any parking district organized within this city. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 14.11), 1965)  
10.48.120 - Chapter not exclusive regulation. 
No section of this chapter shall be construed as permitting any parking in violation of any other provision of this title. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 14.12), 1965)  
Chapter 10.50 - RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT PROGRAM 
Sections: 
 
10.50.010 - Legislative purpose. 
This chapter is enacted in response to the adverse effects of motor vehicle congestion in certain neighborhoods within the City of Rohnert Park. The long-term parking of motor vehicles by nonresidents creates significant traffic congestion and threatens the health, safety and general welfare of residents within the affected neighborhoods. To better protect and promote the integrity of these neighborhoods and their residents, it is necessary to enact a residential parking permit program. This chapter shall be interpreted and applied in a manner that is consistent with Vehicle Code Section 22507. 
(Ord. No. 818, § 1, 10-13-2009)  
10.50.020 - Legislative findings. 
As a result of public input and additional information gathered from survey responses and the department of public safety, the city council finds that adverse effects of motor vehicle congestion in certain neighborhoods caused by long-term parking of motor vehicles by nonresidents is detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Rohnert Park. The parking permit program established by this chapter will reduce these negative effects by: 
A.  Reducing potentially hazardous traffic conditions caused by the long-term parking of motor vehicles by nonresidents; 
B.  Protecting affected neighborhoods from air pollution, excessive noise, and refuse caused by the entry and exit of nonresident motor vehicles; 
C.  Protecting affected residents from unreasonable burdens in obtaining parking near, and gaining access to, their residences; 
D.  Preserving the residential character of affected neighborhoods; 
E.  Preserving the property value in affected neighborhoods; 
F.  Preserving the safety of children and pedestrians; and 
G.  Promoting traffic safety and the peace, good order, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the citizens of Rohnert Park. 
(Ord. No. 818, § 1, 10-13-2009)  
10.50.030 - Definitions. 
A.  "Residential parking permit area" means any contiguous area upon which the city council imposes parking regulations pursuant to the authority granted by this chapter and Vehicle Code Section 22507. 
B.  "Parking permit" means a permit issued under this chapter which, when properly displayed upon a motor vehicle, shall exempt the motor vehicle from the parking regulations established by the city council in accordance with this chapter. 
C.  "Motor vehicle" includes an automobile, truck, motorcycle or other motor-driven form of transportation not in excess of eight thousand pounds gross weight. Motor vehicles do not include boats, trailers, camp trailers, fifth-wheel travel trailers, or trailer coaches as those terms are defined in the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. No. 818, § 1, 10-13-2009)  
10.50.040 - Parking permit program. 
A.  A motor vehicle that properly displays a valid parking permit as provided for in this chapter shall be permitted to stand or park in the residential parking permit area for which the permit has been issued without being subject to any of the regulations that may be established in accordance with this chapter. 
B.  Any motor vehicle that does not properly display a valid parking permit will be subject to the fine and penalties set forth in Section 10.50.080 below. 
C.  A parking permit does not guarantee or reserve to the permitee an on-street parking space within the residential parking permit area. 
D.  The following motor vehicles shall be exempt from this chapter: 
1.  All state, county, and local government-issued motor vehicles, including emergency motor vehicles such as fire engines, ambulances, and police vehicles; 
2.  Motor vehicles used by disabled persons meeting the requirements of Vehicle Code Section 22511.5; and 
3.  Service or delivery motor vehicles that are under the control of a person providing service to a property located within the residential parking permit area. 
(Ord. No. 818, § 1, 10-13-2009)  
10.50.050 - Designation of a residential parking permit area; modification. 
(A)  The city council shall consider designating a residential parking permit area in any area for which an application has been submitted. To be eligible to apply for such a designation, there must be at least ten residences in a proposed residential parking permit area. The application must satisfy the following requirements: 
(1)  It must be submitted on a form obtained from city hall; 
(2)  It must contain a reasonable description and a map of the proposed residential parking permit area; 
(3)  It must contain the following statement: 
"We, the undersigned, are residents of the proposed residential parking permit area described in this application. We understand that if our neighborhood is designated as a residential parking permit area, certain restrictions will be placed upon on-street parking within the area. Residents of the area will be eligible to obtain parking permits exempting them from such parking restrictions. Parking permits will be subject to an annual fee established by City Council resolution. By signing this application, we hereby request that the City Council of the City of Rohnert Park consider this application for establishment of the above-described area as a "residential parking permit area." 
The statement must be followed by the signature, name, address and date of signing of at least sixty-five percent of the adult residents living in the proposed residential parking permit area. Only one adult resident per residence may be counted towards the sixty-five percent requirement. 
B.  Upon receipt of an application described in this section, and in accordance with Vehicle Code Section 22507, the city council shall hold a public hearing and may, by resolution, establish a residential parking permit area and adopt any regulations and time restrictions determined by the city council to be reasonable and necessary to effectuate the purpose of this chapter. 
1.  Any resolution adopted by the city council shall not take effect until signs or markings giving adequate notice thereof have been posted in the residential parking permit area in accordance with Section 10.50.070 of this chapter. 
2.  Notice of the public hearing held pursuant to this section shall be posted at least 10 days before the hearing on all blocks proposed to be included in the residential parking permit area. 
C.  Upon public notice as set forth herein, the city council may, by resolution, modify a residential parking permit area and any applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 818, § 1, 10-13-2009)  
10.50.060 - Parking permits. 
A.  Parking permits will remain valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance and must contain the location of the residential parking permit area for which they are issued and the dates for which they are valid. Parking permits must also contain a unique number that can be used to identify the person, motor vehicle, and/or residence affiliated with each parking permit. 
B.  Each parking permit shall be displayed hanging from the motor vehicle's rear-view mirror or dashboard, with the permit number clearly visible. 
C.  Once the city council establishes a residential parking permit area, an affected resident can apply for a parking permit at city hall. The city manager or his/her designee may adopt additional rules and regulations governing the issuance and display of residential parking permits, but at a minimum an applicant must provide the following: 
1.  Proof of residence within the residential parking permit area; 
2.  Proof of valid registration for the proposed permitted motor vehicle; 
3.  A fee in an amount established by city council resolution. 
D.  A parking permit may be issued to a resident who does not possess a motor vehicle if the resident submits a signed statement demonstrating that the resident needs to provide a parking permit to a caretaker or service provider. 
E.  No more than three parking permits shall be issued for each residence, and no more than one permit shall be issued per motor vehicle. 
F.  Once issued, parking permits may be interchanged among all motor vehicles associated with each residence or person listed on the application. Parking permits may also be loaned to guests, visitors, and service providers associated with the residence or person listed on the application. 
G.  To accommodate special events such as family gatherings and other temporary events, the city may issue temporary parking permits to residents within a residential parking permit area. Any resident within a residential parking permit area can apply for a temporary parking permit at city Hall. A temporary parking permit shall be valid for a maximum period of fourteen calendar days and must include the following information: 
1.  The residential parking permit area; 
2.  The dates for which it is valid; 
3.  The address of the residence associated with the temporary parking permit; and 
4.  The printed name and signature of the issuing official. 
(Ord. No. 818, § 1, 10-13-2009)  
10.50.070 - Posting of residential parking permit area. 
The city shall post signs in each residential parking permit area specifying the parking regulations for that area. 
(Ord. No. 818, § 1, 10-13-2009)  
10.50.080 - Violations. 
A.  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to: 
1.  Stand or park a motor vehicle without a properly displayed parking permit within a residential parking permit area for a period of time exceeding the posted time limitation for that area; 
2.  Falsely represent himself or herself as eligible for a parking permit or to furnish false information in a parking permit application; 
3.  Copy, reproduce or otherwise bring into existence a facsimile or counterfeit parking permit; or 
4.  Knowingly use or display a facsimile or counterfeit parking permit to evade any regulations established in accordance with this chapter. 
B.  Every person who violates the provisions of subsection (A)(1) of this section is guilty of an infraction and shall be subject to an administrative penalty in an amount established by resolution of the city council. 
(C)  Every person who violates the provisions of subsections (A)(2), (A)(3), or (A)(4) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to an administrative penalty in an amount established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 818, § 1, 10-13-2009)  
Chapter 10.52 - PRIVATE PARKING FACILITIES 
Sections: 
 
10.52.010 - Privately owned off-street parking facilities—Public use. 
The city council finds and declares that the hereinafter described property is privately owned and maintained as off-street parking facilities within the city limits and is generally held open for use of the public for purposes of vehicular parking: 
A.  All parking facilities within the Southwest center which is bounded on the south and west by College View Drive, on the north by Southwest Boulevard and on the east by Adrian Drive. 
B.  All parking facilities situated at the intersection of the Rohnert Park Expressway and Commerce Boulevard, 6350 Commerce Boulevard and commonly known as the parking facilities for the Park Plaza Shopping Center. 
C.  Parking facilities situated in the 100 block on Southwest Boulevard and commonly known as the parking facilities for the Manor Shopping Center, Herrington Square Shopping Center. 
D.  All parking facilities situated at the intersection of Rohnert Park Expressway and Commerce Boulevard, 6335 Commerce Boulevard and commonly known as the parking facilities of the North Bay Shopping Center. 
E.  All parking facilities situated at the intersection of State Farm Drive and Rohnert Park Expressway, 100 Raley's Towne Centre and commonly known as the parking facilities for the Raley's Shopping Center. 
F.  All parking facilities situated at the intersection of Snyder Lane and Southwest Boulevard, 1451 Southwest Boulevard and commonly known as the parking facilities for the University Square Shopping Center. 
G.  All parking facilities situated at the intersection of Gold Courts Drive and Country Club Drive, 901 Golf Course Drive and commonly known as the parking facilities for the Mountain Shadows Shopping Center. 
H.  All parking facilities situated in the 300 block on Rohnert Park Expressway Mall and K-Mart Shopping Center. 
I.  All parking facilities situated in the 4600 block on Redwood Drive, 4675i Redwood Drive and commonly known as the parking facilities for the Wal-Mart Shopping Center. 
(Ord. 569 § 1, 1992: Ord. 245 § 2, 1974: Ord. 205 § 1, 1973)  
10.52.020 - California Vehicle Code reference. 
Pursuant to the authority of Section 21107.8 of the California Vehicle Code, the City Council declares that Sections 22350, 23103 and 23109 and the provisions of Division 16.5 commencing with Vehicle Code Section 2800 of the California Vehicle Code shall apply to the above described privately owned and maintained off-street parking facilities. 
(Ord. 569 § 2, 1992: Ord. 245 § 3, 1974: Ord. 205, § 2,1973)  
Chapter 10.53 - PRIVATE ROADWAYS 
Sections: 
 
10.53.010 - Privately owned and maintained roads—Open for public use. 
The city council finds and declares that the hereinafter described property is a privately owned and maintained roadway within the city limits and is generally open for the use of the public for vehicular travel and which so connect with highways that the public cannot determine that the roads are not highways. 
A.  All that portion of Meadow Pines Avenue which intersects Civic Center Drive to the north and Copeland Creek Drive to the south. 
B.  For purposes of this section, "roadway" shall include all improved curbs and sidewalks bordering the paved surface used primarily for vehicular travel. 
(Ord. 569, § 3 (part), 1992)  
10.53.020 - California Vehicle Code reference. 
Pursuant to the authority of section 21107.5 of the California Vehicle Code, the council declares that all provisions of the California Vehicle Code shall apply to the above described privately owned and maintained roadway. 
(Ord. 569 § 3, (part), 1992)  
Chapter 10.56 - RESTRICTED USE OF CERTAIN STREETS 
Sections: 
 
10.56.010 - Vehicles used for advertising. 
No person shall operate or drive any vehicle used for advertising purposes or any advertising vehicle equipped with a sound-amplifying or loudspeaking device upon any street or alley at any time without first obtaining the written permission of the city traffic engineer. 
(Ord. 55 § 4(C), (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 13.1), 1965)  
10.56.020 - Truck routes. 
A.  Whenever any resolution of this city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street the use of which is permitted by any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of fifteen thousand pounds, the city traffic engineer is authorized to designate such street or streets by appropriate signs as "truck routes" for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of fifteen thousand pounds. 
B.  When any such truck route or routes are established and designated by appropriate signs, the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of fifteen thousand pounds shall drive on such route or routes and none other, except that nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of fifteen thousand pounds coming from a truck route having ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted streets or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon such restricted streets for which a building permit has previously been obtained therefor. 
C.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to (1) passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission, or to (2) any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility. 
D.  Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the council are declared to be truck routes for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight of fifteen thousand pounds. 
(Ord. 725 § 1, 2004; Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 13.3), 1965)  
10.56.030 - Commercial vehicles prohibited from using certain streets. 
A.  Whenever any resolution of this city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street the use of which is prohibited by any commercial vehicle, the city traffic engineer shall erect and maintain appropriate signs on those streets affected by such ordinance. 
B.  Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the council are declared to be streets, the use of which is prohibited by any commercial vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not apply to passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 13.4), 1965)  
10.56.040 - Parades. 
There shall be no parade or other demonstration upon any street of this city unless written permission shall first be obtained from the city traffic engineer. The city traffic engineer may refuse or grant such a permit and may attach such conditions upon the granting of any permit as may be necessary to preserve and protect the public welfare. 
(Ord. 55 § 4(D), (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 13.5), 1965)  
Chapter 10.58 - OVERSIZE VEHICLE OR LOAD PERMIT 
Sections: 
 
10.58.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this chapter is for the city council to permit the controlled operation and moving of vehicles or loads in, on, upon, along or into any public street or highway in the city in excess of size, height and weight of vehicles allowed to be moved or operated on highways under the provisions of Division 15 of the Vehicle Code of the State of California, and protect the public safety and welfare by requiring a permit and the filing of a policy of insurance protecting the public against personal injury and property damage. 
(Ord. 716 § 1 (part), 2004)  
10.58.020 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this chapter the following words or phrases are used they shall mean: 
"City Engineer" means the city engineer or his designated representative. 
"Oversize" means any vehicle and/or load in excess of the size and weight of vehicles and/or loads allowed to be moved or operated on highways under the provisions of Division 15 of the Vehicle Code of the State of California. 
(Ord. 716 § 1 (part), 2004)  
10.58.030 - Permit required. 
No person shall move or cause to be moved over or across any public right-of-way under the jurisdiction of the city any vehicle, load, trailer, or combination thereof, which exceeds the height, width, length, size or weight of vehicle or load limitations provided in Division 15 of the Vehicle Code of the State of California, without first obtaining an oversize load permit thereof from the city engineer, which will be subject to the following regulations: 
A.  An oversize load permit may be designated by the city engineer as either a single-move permit for the movement of an oversized vehicle or load over a designated route on a specified date, or an annual or repetitive permit issued for the period specified on the oversize load permit. Repetitive oversize load permits may be issued on the type of vehicle carrying the load in the case of non-self-propelled vehicles, and on the specific vehicle in the case of self-propelled vehicles. Repetitive oversize load permits shall authorize the movement of the vehicles, or loads specified on the permit; provided however, that the vehicle or load shall not exceed a width of thirteen feet, a height of sixteen feet, or a length of one hundred feet. If the load proposed under the repetitive load transportation permit exceeds the weight limits as prescribed in Division 15 of the Vehicle Code of the state by more than twenty-five percent, such move shall be subject to such route restrictions as are designated by the city engineer. 
B.  The city engineer shall use a standard transportation permit form established by the California Department of Transportation. 
C.  Application for an oversize load permit shall be made to the office of the city engineer a minimum of seventy-two hours prior to the time proposed for the move. 
D.  On the oversize load permit, the permittee shall designate the specific route or routes, the specific date or dates, and the hours in which the move will occur. 
(Ord. 716 § 1 (part), 2004)  
10.58.040 - Insurance required. 
The applicant shall comply with the following insurance requirements: 
A.  At the time of making application for a permit pursuant to this chapter, the applicant shall attach or have on file with the city, proof of general and auto liability insurance policies or a satisfactory plan of self-insurance covering all bodily injury and property liability incurred during the moving period. Such insurance policy shall include an endorsement naming the city of Rohnert Park as additional insured and providing primary coverage, and such vehicle insurance shall include non-owned autos. 
Where no satisfactory plan of self-insurance is provided, the minimum limits of such insurance shall be fixed by the city engineer in such amounts as he deems sufficient. In fixing such limits, the city engineer shall use as his basis the costs and hazards involved in the moving of oversize vehicles or load to be performed under this permit. 
B.  The endorsement shall further indicate the city will be entitled to at least thirty days' written notice of cancellation of the policy of insurance. 
C.  Governmental agencies, including the state and its political subdivisions, will not be required to provide the insurance required by this section, but shall be required to indemnify and hold the city harmless from any loss arising out of injury to persons, or damage to property, resulting directly or indirectly from the operation permitted by the oversize load permit, including the defense of any action arising therefrom, at no cost to the city. 
(Ord. 716 § 1 (part), 2004)  
10.58.050 - Emergency moves. 
For moves which, because of their emergency nature, require approval during periods other than the regularly scheduled working hours of the city engineer, authorized representatives thereof may grant interim approval for such moves on the condition that a permit will be acquired during the next regularly scheduled working day. Failure to acquire such permits may result in disqualification for obtaining future permits. 
(Ord. 716 § 1 (part), 2004)  
10.58.060 - Permit denial. 
The city engineer shall not issue an oversize load permit if any one of the following conditions exists: 
A.  If the overweight per axle exceeds the limits provided in Division 15 of the Vehicle Code of the state by fifty percent; 
B.  If the move is determined by the city engineer to be prohibitive from the standpoint of public safety or contrary to the public interests; 
C.  If the applicant has repeatedly violated conditions of previously issued permits, or the applicant has unsettled claims against him for damages resulting from past moves; 
D.  If the applicant has failed to obtain a permit on the next regularly scheduled working day following interim approval for an emergency move. 
(Ord. 716 § 1 (part), 2004)  
10.58.070 - Permit regulations. 
Any person desiring an oversize load permit shall comply with the following regulations: 
A.  The permittee shall have the responsibility to ascertain the adequacy of the route requested for the move. When an over-height load is authorized (over thirteen feet, six inches), the permittee shall check all underpasses, bridges, overhead wires and other limiting structures or facilities for adequate clearance. The permittee shall notify the owners of all overhead lines or structures subject to disturbances or damage by his move and shall make arrangements for the temporary removal or relocation of the conflicting facility if required. The permittee shall bear all costs for such relocation where the facility is located in accordance with state and local regulations. 
B.  For any move involving a load or vehicle whose vertical height is eighteen feet or over, or whose width is thirty feet or more, the permittee shall submit to the agencies whose facilities will be affected by such move the proposed route for approval at least seventy-two hours in advance of the move. No permit shall be issued until clearances have been received from the power company and telephone company or other agency owning such facility. Permittee shall be responsible for obtaining such clearance prior to permit issuance. 
C.  Oversize load permits shall be carried in the vehicle whose movement is authorized by such permit, and shall be available for inspection by any police officer, or any authorized agent of the city. Oversize load permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be nontransferable. 
D.  All moving operations under an oversize load permit shall be in conformance with all general and special conditions set forth by the city engineer on such permit. 
E.  In case of damage to any street or other public street improvement by reason of the moving of any vehicle or load under the oversize load permit, the city shall cause such work to be done as may be necessary to restore the public street improvement to as good a condition as the same was in prior to such damage, and shall charge the cost thereof to the permittee. Such damages as occur may be recovered from the insurance required under Section 10.58.040. 
F.  Movement of oversize loads or vehicles shall be prohibited during the hours of darkness (one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise), and between the hours of six a.m. and nine a.m., and three-thirty p.m. and six-thirty p.m., or as stipulated in the permit. 
G.  The city engineer shall have the right to inspect all rollers, trucks, wheels, dollies, tractors or other apparatus proposed to be used in the moving operations. The city engineer shall be the sole judge as to the adequacy of such equipment, and may require the use of such apparatus as in his judgment will not cause injury to streets or pavements. Any permit issued under this chapter shall stipulate that all equipment used in moving operations shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer. 
H.  Temporary "No Parking Tow Away" signs shall be posted seventy-two hours prior to the move by the permittee as designated on the permit. 
I.  The permittee shall comply at all times with the provisions of the Vehicle Code of the state. 
(Ord. 716 § 1 (part), 2004)  
10.58.080 - Exceptions. 
The city engineer shall not require an oversize load permit if any of the following conditions exists: 
A.  Oversized load vehicles shall have ingress or egress by direct route to and from such restricted streets for the purpose of ordinary commerce of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise. 
B.  Oversized load vehicles coming from an unrestricted street having ingress or egress by direct route to and from such restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure for which a building permit has previously been obtained, or any vehicle owned by a public utility in use in construction, installation or repair of any public utility. 
(Ord. 716 § 1 (part), 2004)  
10.58.090 - Permit fees. 
Permit fees required subject to the following regulations: 
A.  The fees for an oversize load permit shall be set by resolution of the city council upon the recommendation of the city manager. The fee shall not exceed the fee schedule developed by the California Department of Transportation. 
B.  A copy of the fee schedule established by resolution of the city council shall be placed on file in the office of the city clerk. 
C.  An extension of the effective date or an amendment to the oversize load permit may be made without payment of additional fees, if approved by the city engineer, and if requested prior to the expiration date of the original permit. 
D.  Government agencies, including the state of California and any of its political subdivisions, shall be required to make application for permits as provided under the provisions of this chapter, and if approved, shall be issued a no-fee permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Independent contractors engaged in government contracts shall not be exempt from permit fees. 
(Ord. 716 § 1 (part), 2004)  
10.58.100 - Violations. 
Any person or corporation proceeding without a permit or in violation of a permit is guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. 716 § 1 (part), 2004)  
10.58.110 - Appeal. 
The city engineer may deny issuance of a permit or revoke or suspend a permit issued to any person who violates any provision of this chapter. Within ten calendar days after receipt of the decision of city engineer, any party affected by the decision may file with the city clerk a written request for a hearing before the city council. Fees for appeal shall be established by resolution of the city council. Upon the filing of such a request and payment of fees, the city clerk shall set the matter for a hearing and shall notify the appellant of the date, time and place of such hearing at least five days before the hearing date. At the hearing, any person may present evidence in opposition to, or in support of, appellant's case. 
(Ord. 716 § 1 (part), 2004)  
10.58.120 - Exclusions from applicability of provisions. 
The requirements of this chapter shall not affect the requirements of any other chapter of this Code requiring permits, fees and bonds, including the requirements for moving and relocating structures. 
(Ord. 716 § 1 (part), 2004)  
Chapter 10.60 - MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES 
Sections: 
 
10.60.010 - Driving through funeral procession. 
No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession or a parade, provided that such vehicles are conspicuously so designated. The directing of all vehicles and traffic on any street over which such funeral procession or parade wishes to pass shall be subject to the orders of the police department. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 8), 1965)  
10.60.020 - Clinging to moving vehicle. 
No person shall attach himself with his hands, catch on, or hold on to with his hands or by other means, to any moving vehicle or train for the purpose of receiving motive power therefrom. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni, Traf. Ord. § 8.1), 1965)  
10.60.030 - Commercial vehicles using private driveways. 
No person shall operate or drive a commercial vehicle in, on or across any private driveway approach or sidewalk area or the driveway itself without the consent of the owner or occupant of the property, if a sign or markings are in place indicating that the use of such driveway is prohibited. 
For the purpose of this section a commercial vehicle means a vehicle having a rated capacity in excess of one-half ton. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 8.2), 1965)  
10.60.040 - Riding or driving on sidewalk. 
No person shall ride, drive, propel, or cause to be propelled any vehicle or animal across or upon any sidewalk excepting over permanently constructed driveways and excepting when it is necessary for any temporary purpose to drive a loaded vehicle across a sidewalk; provided further, that said sidewalk area be substantially protected by wooden planks two inches thick, and written permission be previously obtained from the city traffic engineer. Such wooden planks shall not be permitted to remain upon such sidewalk area during the hours from six p.m. to six a.m. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 8.3), 1965)  
10.60.050 - New pavement and markings. 
No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted markings in any street when a barrier sign, cone marker or other warning device is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking, or when any such device is in place indicating that the street or any portion thereof is closed. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 8.4), 1965)  
10.60.060 - Obedience to barriers and signs. 
No person, public utility or department in the city shall erect or place any barrier or sign on any street unless of a type approved by the city traffic engineer or disobey the instructions, remove, tamper with or destroy any barrier or sign lawfully placed on any street by any person, public utility or by any department of this city. 
(Ord. 55 (Ord. Traf. Ord. § 8.5), 1965)  
10.60.070 - Intersection entrance—Obstructing traffic. 
No operator of any vehicle shall enter any intersection or marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 8.6), 1965)  
10.60.080 - Limited access. 
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are lawfully established. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 8.7), 1965)  
10.60.090 - Restrictions on use of freeways. 
No person shall drive or operate any bicycle, motor-driven cycle, or any vehicle which is not drawn by a motor vehicle upon any street established as a freeway, as defined by state law, nor shall any pedestrian walk across or along any such street so designated and described except in space set aside for the use of pedestrians, provided official signs are in place giving notice of such restrictions. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 8.8), 1965)  
10.60.100 - Prohibited operations. 
No person shall operate a motor vehicle or coach upon any public sidewalk, walkway, bicycle path, drainage way, channel, parkway or in any public park, school yard or recreational area, except on designated vehicle roadways and parking areas, or upon any other publicly owned property, except highways, within the city, except that this section shall not prohibit the operations of motor vehicles or coaches when such vehicles are: 
A.  Authorized emergency vehicles; 
B.  Operated in accordance with approval received from a governmental agency; 
C.  Owned by a governmental agency and on public business. 
(Ord. 331 § 1, 1977)  
10.60.102 - Pandemoniac motor vehicles prohibited. 
It is unlawful to operate a pandemoniac motor vehicle on any street or any other public place within the city. 
(Ord. 356 § 2, 1978)  
Chapter 10.64 - PEDESTRIANS 
Sections: 
 
10.64.010 - Traffic engineer to establish marked crosswalks. 
A.  The city traffic engineer shall establish, designate and maintain crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway as follows: 
Crosswalks shall be established and maintained at all intersections within the central traffic district and at such intersections outside such district, and at other places within or outside said district where the city traffic engineer determines that there is particular hazard to pedestrians crossing the roadway subject to the limitation contained in (B) of this section. 
B.  Other than crosswalks at intersections, no crosswalk shall be established in any block which is less than four hundred feet in length and such crosswalk shall be located as nearly as practicable at midblock. 
C.  The city traffic engineer may place signs at or adjacent to an intersection in respect to any crosswalk directing that pedestrians shall not cross in the crosswalk so indicated. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 9), 1965)  
10.64.020 - When pedestrians must use crosswalks. 
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk in the central traffic district or in any business district. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 9.1), 1965)  
Chapter 10.68 - MOTORCYCLES 
Sections: 
 
10.68.010 - Findings and purpose. 
It is the finding of the city council that the operation of motorcycles and motor-driven cycles in drainage ways and other inappropriate areas in the city is increasing and has reached a level where serious hazards relating to safety, fire, dust, pollution and noise have developed. It is the purpose of this chapter to prohibit the operation of such vehicles on public and unimproved private property, except pursuant to a permit issued through the office of the city manager. 
(Ord. 199 § 1, 1973)  
10.68.020 - Scope. 
The provisions of this chapter are designed to regulate the operation of registered and unregistered motorcycle and motor-driven cycles by all persons, whether they possess a valid California motor vehicle operator's license or not, upon unimproved private property and upon all public property except highways, in the city. 
(Ord. 199 § 2, 1973)  
10.68.030 - Definitions. 
A.  "Highway" means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. Highway includes street. 
B.  "Motorcycle" means any motor vehicle other than a tractor having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground and weighing less than one thousand five hundred pounds, except that four wheels may be in contact with the ground when two of the wheels are a functional part of a sidecar. 
C.  "Motor-driven cycle" means any motorcycle, including every motor scooter, with a motor which produces not to exceed fifteen gross horsepower, and every bicycle with motor attached. 
D.  "Private property" means property in private ownership. 
E.  "Public property" means property owned by the city or other public body. 
F.  "Unimproved private property" means any parcel of land which either contains no structures or which is not surfaced with cement, concrete, asphaltic concrete, or other similar material, or which does not have a hard surface made up of a mixture of rock, sand or gravel bound together with a chemical or mineral substance other than natural soil. 
(Ord. 199 § 3, 1973)  
10.68.040 - Prohibited operations. 
No person shall operate a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle upon any public sidewalk, walkway, bicycle or bike path, drainage way, channel, parkway or in any public park, school yard or recreational area or upon any other publicly owned property, except highways, within the city, except pursuant to Section 10.34.050. 
(Ord. 249 § 1, 1974: Ord. 199 § 4, 1965)  
10.68.050 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of Section 10.34.040 shall not prohibit the operation of motorcycles and motor- driven cycles upon public or private unimproved property when such motor vehicles are: 
A.  Authorized emergency vehicles; 
B.  Operated pursuant to a permit received from the city manager or his designee pursuant to Section 10.34.060 of this chapter; 
C.  Operated upon unimproved private property solely for ingress and egress; 
D.  Owned by a governmental agency and on public business. 
(Ord. 199 § 5, 1965)  
10.68.060 - Permit—Application. 
Any person desiring to operate a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle on public or on unimproved private property may apply for a permit with the city manager or his designee. Permits shall be issued upon a determination that: 
A.  The owner or owners of said real property concerned, or the person or persons in lawful possession thereof, have consented in writing to the proposed operation; and 
B.  That the city fire chief has certified that such proposed operation will not create any undue fire hazard by reason of the nature of the vehicle and its proposed operation or by reason of the nature of the property concerned; and 
C.  That such operation will not create a public safety hazard and is of sufficient distance from occupied residences, churches, assembly halls or schools, as to likely not constitute a noise, dust, or fumes nuisance. 
A reasonable fee, as established by the city council, may be charged by the city for the processing of such applications. 
(Ord. 199 § 6, 1965)  
10.68.070 - Permit—Limitations—Display. 
The operation of any motorcycle or motor-driven cycle on public property or unimproved private property by authority of a permit issued in accordance with the provisions of Section 10.68.060, shall be limited to the hours commencing one-half hour before sunrise and ending one-half hour after sunset. The operation of said vehicle shall not be permitted nearer than two hundred yards to any residential structure, church, assembly hall, drainage way, channel, park, or school. Each permit so issued shall specify the effective date or dates of operation for which the permit is valid and shall further specify the area or areas of permitted operation. The permit shall be displayed on the vehicle at all times and shall be presented to any peace officer on request. The permit is not, and shall so state on its face, an expression by the city that the proposed operation can be done with safety to the operator or other persons or property, all of which said risks are assumed by the permittee or property owner. 
(Ord. 199 § 7, 1965)  
10.68.080 - Appeal. 
Any person whose application for a permit is denied may appeal such decision to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal within ten days after notification by the city manager that said permit has been denied. The city council shall thereupon conduct a hearing on said appeal within thirty days from the date of filing said notice of appeal with the city clerk. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive upon all persons concerned. 
(Ord. 199 § 8, 1965)  
10.68.090 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to the fines, penalties and other provisions of Chapter 1.16. 
(Ord. 288 § 1, 1975: Ord. 199 § 9, 1965)  
Chapter 10.70 - SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES, IN-LINE SKATES, COASTERS, SCOOTERS, AND OTHER SIMILAR DEVICES[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 819, § 1, adopted Feb. 9, 2010, repealed Ch. 10.70, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, Ch. 10.70 pertained to Skateboards. See Ordinance List and Disposition Table for derivation. 
 
10.70.010 - Legislative purpose. 
The purpose of this ordinance is to prohibit the use or operation of skateboards, roller skates, in-line skates, coasters, scooters, and other similar devices on city-owned property except for city-owned parks. The city deems such activities to be a nuisance and a danger to pedestrians, and such activities may cause damage to public property. The intent of this chapter is to establish areas of prohibition for skateboards, roller skates, in-line skates, coasters, scooters, and other similar devices to alleviate the nuisance caused by such devices, to reduce the risk of injury to pedestrians, and to reduce potential damage to public property. 
(Ord. No. 819, § 1, 2-9-2010)  
10.70.020 - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply to this chapter: 
A.  Skateboard. A board or platform of any type of material mounted on two or more wheels attached to the underside that is usually propelled by the user, who sometimes stands, sits, kneels, or lies upon the device while it is in motion. 
B.  Roller/In-line Skates. A pair of shoes or boots, with two or more wheels mounted on the underside of each shoe or boot that is usually self-propelled by the user in an upright position or kneeling. 
C.  Coaster/Scooter. A board or platform of any type of material mounted on two or more wheels attached to the underside and controlled by an upright steering handle that is usually self-propelled by the user in an upright position. 
D.  Other similar devices. Any device used for mobility that substantially meets the general definitions contained herein for skateboards, roller skates, in-line skates, coasters, and scooters. This term does not include wheelchairs or other devices operated by a mobility-impaired person or by such person's assistant. 
(Ord. No. 819, § 1, 2-9-2010)  
10.70.030 - Prohibited locations. 
No person shall use or operate skateboards, roller skates, in-line skates, coasters, scooters, or other similar devices on city-owned property identified in a resolution adopted by the city council, unless such use is permissible pursuant to Section 10.70.040. Said locations shall contain signage indicating that the use or operation of skateboards, roller skates, in-line skates, coasters, scooters, or other similar devices is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 819, § 1, 2-9-2010)  
10.70.040 - Exemptions. 
The use or operation of skateboards, roller skates, in-line skates, coasters, scooters, and other similar devices in prohibited locations identified in Section 10.70.030 is permissible if such use or operation is: 
A.  Pursuant to a valid administrative permit obtained from the community services department; or 
B.  On streets and sidewalks, unless otherwise prohibited by state law or local regulation. 
(Ord. No. 819, § 1, 2-9-2010)  
10.70.050 - Violation and penalty. 
A violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute an infraction as provided for in Chapter 1.16 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 819, § 1, 2-9-2010)  
Chapter 10.72 - BICYCLES* 
Sections: 
 
10.72.010 - Effect of regulations. 
A.  All regulations of the California Vehicle Code applicable to bicycles shall apply on any roadway or any public place in the city of Rohnert Park. 
B.  The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  All regulations of the California Vehicle Code and the Rohnert Park Municipal Code applicable to bicycles shall be applicable to a motorized bicycle and a motorized scooter. 
(Ord. 653 § 2, 1999: Ord. 631 § 1 (part), 1997)  
10.72.020 - Obligation to pedestrian. 
The operator of a bicycle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and if appropriate shall give audible signals before passing such pedestrian. 
(Ord. 631 § 1 (part), 1997)  
10.72.030 - Prohibiting riding on sidewalks. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to erect signs on any sidewalk prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person, and when such signs are in place no person shall disobey the same. 
(Ord. 631 § 1 (part), 1997)  
10.72.040 - Penalties. 
Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished pursuant to the provisions of the California Vehicle Code if applicable or otherwise pursuant to the Rohnert Park Municipal Code relative to infractions, or by impounding of such person's bicycle for a period not to exceed thirty days or by any combination thereof. 
(Ord. 631 § 1 (part), 1997)  
10.72.050 - Use of definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
A.  A "motorized bicycle" is a device that has fully operative pedals for propulsion by human power and has an electric motor that meets all of the following requirements: has a power output of not more than one thousand watts; is incapable of propelling the device at a speed of more than twenty miles per hour on ground level; is incapable of further increasing the speed of the device when human power is used to propel the motorized bicycle faster than twenty miles per hour. 
B.  A "motorized scooter" is any two-wheeled device that has handlebars, is designed to be stood or sat upon by the operator, and is powered by an electric motor, or other source of power, that is capable of propelling the device with or without human propulsion. 
(Ord. 693 § 1, 2003: Ord. 653 § 1, 1999)  
10.72.060 - Motorized bicycles and motorized scooters: exhaust system. 
A.  All motorized bicycles and motorized scooters shall be equipped with an adequate muffler maintained to prevent any excessive or unusual noise. No muffler or exhaust system shall be equipped with a cutout, bypass, or similar device. 
B.  No person shall modify the muffler of a motorized bicycle or motorized scooter in a manner which will amplify or increase the noise emitted from the motorized bicycle or motorized scooter. 
(Ord. 693 § 2, 2003)  
10.72.070 - Motorized bicycles and motorized scooters: gasoline powered motors excluded on Class I bicycle paths. 
Gasoline powered motorized bicycles and/or scooters shall not be allowed on Class I bicycle paths. 
(Ord. 693 § 3, 2003)  
Chapter 10.76 - TRAINS 
Sections: 
 
10.76.010 - Railway gates. 
No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 15), 1965)  
10.76.020 - Trains not to block crossings. 
No person shall cause or permit any railway train or railway cars or similar vehicle on rails to stop or stand or to be operated in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for the purposes of travel for a period of time longer than ten minutes, except that this provision shall not apply to railway trains, cars or similar vehicles on rails while blocking or obstructing a crossing because of an accident which requires the operator of the train, car or similar vehicle on rails to stop at or near the scene of the accident. 
(Ord. 55 (Uni. Traf. Ord. § 15.1), 1963)  
Chapter 10.80 - TRIP REDUCTION 
Sections: 
 
10.80.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Rohnert Park the Trip Reduction Ordinance (TRO)." 
(Ord. 616 § 1 (part), 1966: Ord. 557 § 1 (part), 1992)  
10.80.020 - Authority. 
This chapter is authorized under Proposition 111 legislation Government Code Section 65089(b)(3) and the Streets and Highways Code Section 2105. 
(Ord. 616 § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 557 § 1 (part), 1992)  
10.80.030 - Sonoma County Transportation Authority. 
This chapter is established to meet the Sonoma County Transportation Authority (SCTA) trip reduction and travel demand requirements. 
(Ord. 616 § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 557 § 1 (part), 1992)  
10.80.040 - Trip reduction requirements. 
The following trip reduction requirements are hereby established and are imposed upon employers within the city of Rohnert Park: 
A.  Employer site threshold. This chapter shall apply to all employers within the city of Rohnert Park with one hundred or more employees at an individual job site including the city of Rohnert Park. Where such an employer has multiple job sites, only those sites that have one hundred or more employees are subject to this chapter. 
B.  Dissemination of information. Each employer subject to this chapter is requested to voluntarily disseminate trip reduction information regarding transportation alternatives including carpools, vanpools, transit, bicycling, and other methods of reducing trips such as carpools transit, bicycling, telecommuting, compressed work week, and flexible work hours annually to each employee and to all new employees as they are hired. 
C.  Employee survey. Each employer subject to this chapter is requested to voluntarily conduct an annual employee trip survey with a summary of the trip survey results submitted to the city of Rohnert Park. A one hundred percent trip survey response rate is a desired goal. The city of Rohnert Park shall prepare an overall summary of all surveys submitted which will then be reported annually to the Sonoma County Transportation Authority (SCTA). 
D.  Local jurisdiction responsibilities. The city of Rohnert Park shall designate a transportation administrator to be responsible for implementing the Trip Reduction Ordinance (TRO). 
E.  On site transportation coordinator. Each employer subject to this chapter is requested to voluntarily designate a transportation coordinator to be responsible for administering the employer requirements of the Trip Reduction Ordinance (TRO). Each transportation coordinator should complete a training course approved by the Sonoma County Transportation Authority (SCTA). 
F.  Trip reduction goal. The desired trip reduction goal is an average occupant per vehicle ratio of 1.2 occupants per vehicle. 
G.  Implementation of Trip Reduction Ordinance (TRO). Each employer meeting the employer threshold shall be notified of the requirements of this Trip Reduction Ordinance. 
(Ord. 616 § 1 (part) 1996: Ord. 557 § 1 (part), 1992)  
10.80.050 - Nonduplication. 
If any other agency which has jurisdiction over trip reduction requirements for employers within the city of Rohnert Park adopts trip reduction requirements that meet or exceed the requirements of this chapter, then any employer within the city of Rohnert Park that meets those requirements will be deemed to be meeting the requirements of this chapter by annually forwarding or having the other agency that has jurisdiction forward to the city of Rohnert Park a summary of the trip reduction information and documentation required by that other agency. 
(Ord. 616 § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 557 § 1 (part), 1992)  
Chapter 10.84 - SPECIAL ABATEMENT PROCEDURES FOR INOPERATIVE, WRECKED OR ABANDONED VEHICLES 
Sections: 
 
10.84.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter are intended to provide a procedure for the abatement of nuisances consisting of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles, and are enacted under the authority of Section 22660 of the State Vehicle Code. 
B.  It is the intent of the city council to provide that the abatement of public nuisances consisting of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled and inoperative vehicles may be carried on either concurrently with or separately from the abatement of other conditions, if any, constituting a public nuisance on any premises within the city. 
(Ord. 656 § 1 (part), 2000)  
10.84.020 - Notice—Generally. 
When the chief of public safety or his designee determines that there exists on private property abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles, the chief of public safety or his designee may do the following: 
A.  Issue a notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicles or parts thereof as a public nuisance, directed to the owner of the premises on which the vehicles or parts thereof are located and the owner of the vehicles or parts there of unless the property owner and the owner of the vehicle have signed releases authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or parts thereof. This notice shall contain: 
1.  The street address and such other description as is required to identify the premises on which the vehicles or parts thereof are located; 
2.  The identity of the vehicles or parts thereof to be abated; 
3.  A statement that the vehicles or parts thereof are a public nuisance; 
4.  A statement of the action required to be taken and that such action is to be completed within ten days after the mailing of the notice; 
5.  A statement providing for a hearing by the hearing officer appointed pursuant to Section 1.26.030 of this code upon written request by the owner of the premises on which the vehicles are located or by the owner of the vehicles within ten days after the mailing of the notice. 
B.  The notice shall be sent certified mail, postage prepaid, to the owner of the premises as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll of the county and to the last registered and legal owner of record unless the vehicles or parts thereof are in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. 
C.  A notice of intention to abate is not required for removal of a vehicle or part thereof which is inoperable due to the absence of a motor, transmission, or wheels and incapable of being towed, from a parcel that is zoned for agricultural use or not improved with a residential structure, if the vehicle or part is valued at less than two hundred dollars by a person specified in Vehicle Code Section 22855, and is determined by the chief of public safety to be a public nuisance presenting an immediate threat to public health and safety, provided further that the property owner has signed a release authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part thereof. Prior to final disposition under Vehicle Code Section 22662 of such a low-valued vehicle or part for which evidence of registration was recovered, notice shall be given by the chief of public safety to the registered and legal owners of intent to dispose of the vehicle or part, and if the vehicle or part is then not claimed or removed within twelve days after the notice is mailed, disposition may proceed. 
(Ord. 656 § 1 (part), 2000) 
(Ord. No. 852, § G, 12-11-2012)  
10.84.030 - Same—Contents to include statement for property owner to disclaim responsibility for vehicle. 
The notice shall include the following statement on the copy of the notice sent to the owner of the premises: 
As to any vehicle(s) or parts thereof listed on this notice, you may file with the Chief of Public Safety a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence on your property of the vehicle(s) or parts thereof, together with your reasons for such denial. 
This statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing by you which you need not attend. At the hearing, your statement will be considered by the hearing examiner in determining whether the cost of removing said vehicle(s), or parts thereof will be assessed against your property as a lien in the event that removal is undertaken by the city. 
You need not file a sworn statement if you or the vehicle owner have requested a hearing at which you will appear, but you may do so if you wish. 
Such sworn statement will be considered only as to vehicle(s) or parts thereof, and will not be considered as to the existence of any other condition on your property which may be found to constitute a nuisance in this or any other proceedings. 
(Ord. 656 § 1 (part), 2000)  
10.84.040 - Hearing—Notices. 
Whenever the owner of the premises on which the vehicles or parts thereof are located or the owner of the vehicles or parts thereof requests a hearing (the "requesting party"), the chief of public safety shall issue a hearing notice to the requesting party allowing that party to appear before a hearing examiner to show cause why the vehicles or parts thereof are not a public nuisance and should not be abated by the city. The hearing notice shall be served upon the requesting party either personally or by mailing a copy of such notice by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, not less than five calendar days prior to the hearing date. 
(Ord. 656 § 1 (part), 2000)  
10.84.050 - Same—By hearing examiner. 
At the time fixed in the notice required by Section 10.84.040, the hearing examiner shall proceed to hear the testimony of the chief of public safety and the testimony of the requesting part and other persons respecting the condition of the vehicles or parts thereof and other relevant facts concerning the matter. 
(Ord. 656 § 1 (part), 2000)  
10.84.060 - Same—Abatement order. 
A.  If it is shown by a preponderance of all the evidence that the condition of the vehicles or parts thereof constitutes a violation of this Code, the hearing examiner may issue an order which affirms the determination that the vehicles or parts thereof are a public nuisance and directs the owner to abate the nuisance and which notifies him that if the nuisance is not so abated, it may be abated by the city and the cost thereof may be made on the premises involved. The order shall identify the abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof to be abated and shall require that abatement of the nuisance be physically completed within five days after issuance of the order, or in the alternative, within such time as is considered reasonable under the circumstances. 
B.  If the owner of the premises appears in person at the hearing or files a sworn written statement to deny responsibility for the presence on his property of the vehicles or parts thereof, the determination of the hearing examiner on this issue shall be included in the decision and order and sent to the owner. 
(Ord. 656 § 1 (part), 2000)  
10.84.070 - Appeal—From decision of hearing examiner. 
The requesting party may appeal the decision of the hearing examiner by filing with the city clerk within five days after the date of the order a request that the matter be set for an appeal hearing by the city council. 
(Ord. 656 § 1 (part), 2000)  
10.84.080 - Same—From decision of city council. 
The requesting party who objects or feels aggrieved at any proceedings taken by the city council in sustaining or modifying a decision of the hearing examiner must bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction within thirty days after the action by the city council in such matter. 
(Ord. 656 § 1 (part), 2000)  
10.84.090 - Notice to California Department of Transportation. 
The chief of public safety shall provide written notice to the California Department of Transportation within five days after abatement by the city of a vehicle pursuant to Section 10.84.070. 
(Ord. 656 § 1 (part), 2000)  
10.84.100 - Exemption of certain vehicles. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any vehicle or parts thereof which: 
A.  Is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
B.  Is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard; provided, that such business is not unsightly or otherwise detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. 656 § 1 (part), 2000)  
10.84.110 - Abandonment of vehicles prohibited. 
No person shall abandon a vehicle upon public or private property without the express or implied consent of the owner or person in lawful possession or control of the property as provided in Vehicle Code Section 22523. 
(Ord. 656 § 1 (part), 2000)  
Title 12 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 12.04 - ENCROACHMENTS 
Sections: 
 
12.04.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"City street" means and includes all or any part of the entire width of a city street, public right-of-way, or city-owned utility easement, whether or not such entire area is actually used for street purposes. 
"Encroachment" means and includes any curb, gutter, culvert, sidewalk, underground utility, above-ground utility or any other structure or object of any kind or character not particularly mentioned in this chapter, which is placed in, under or over any portion of a city street. The term "encroachment" does not include trees, shrubs, or plants. 
"Person" means and includes every person, firm or corporation constructing an encroachment itself or through the services of any employee, agent or independent contractor. 
(Ord. 783 § 1, 2007: Ord. 712 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 23 § 1, 1963) 
(Ord. No. 853, § 1, 2-12-2013)  
12.04.020 - Permit—Required—Issuance for excavations and alterations. 
A.  The city engineer or public works director may issue written permits authorizing the permittee to do any of the following acts: 
1.  Make an opening or excavation for any purpose in any city street; 
2.  Place, change, or renew an encroachment, except that no permit shall be required for changes, renewals or replacements of encroachments installed by public utilities corporation where such changes, renewals or replacements require no opening or excavation of a city street. 
B.  Any person who does any of the acts specified in this section without the authority of such a permit is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 23 § 2, 1963)  
12.04.030 - Work done according to permit and provisions. 
Any act done under the authority of a written permit issued pursuant to the provisions of Section 12.04.020 of this chapter shall be done in accordance with the applicable provisions of this chapter and the terms and conditions of such permit. 
(Ord. 712 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 23 § 3, 1963)  
12.04.040 - Permit—Conditions generally. 
Any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may provide that the permittee will pay the entire expense of replacing the city street in as good condition as before, and may provide such other conditions as to the location and the manner in which the work is to be done as the city engineer or public works director finds necessary for the protection of the street. 
(Ord. 712 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 23 § 4, 1963)  
12.04.050 - Permit—Provisions for relocation—Procedure—Revocation. 
Any permit issued to a permittee of the class specified in Section 12.04.110 shall contain a provision that in the event any future improvement of the street to accommodate public travel necessitates the relocation or removal of an encroachment placed pursuant thereto, the permittee will relocate or remove the same at his sole expense. In such event, the city engineer or public works director shall serve on the permittee his written demand specifying the place of relocation or that the encroachment must be removed from the city street and specifying a reasonable time within which work of relocation or removal must be commenced. The permittee must commence such relocation or removal within the time specified in such demand and thereafter diligently prosecute the same to completion; provided, however, that this provision shall remain in effect only so long as the city street in, under, or over which such encroachment is located shall be used for usual street purposes and not as a state freeway, and this provision shall cease to apply when such city street shall become a state freeway. All permits other than those issued to permittees of the class specified in Section 12.04.110 of this chapter are revocable on five days' notice and any encroachment placed pursuant to such permit so revoked must be removed or relocated as may be specified by the city engineer or public works director in the notice revoking the permit and within the time specified by the city engineer, which time shall not be less than five days unless the permit so provides. 
(Ord. 712 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 23 § 5, 1963)  
12.04.060 - Supervision of work. 
The city engineer or public works director may supervise any work done under permits issued under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 712 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 23 § 6, 1963)  
12.04.070 - Excavations for emergency repairs. 
Permittees under this chapter may excavate within city streets for the purpose of making repairs in cases of emergency requiring immediate action. In such cases the city engineer or public works director shall be promptly notified of any such action, and such permittee at his own expense shall immediately replace such city street in as good condition as before excavation. 
(Ord. 712 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 23 § 7, 1963)  
12.04.080 - Bond—Generally. 
Before granting a permit under the provisions of this chapter the city engineer or public works director may require the applicant to file with the city council a satisfactory bond payable to the city in such amount as the city engineer or public works director deems sufficient conditioned upon the proper compliance by the permittee with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 712 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 23 § 8, 1963)  
12.04.090 - Bond—Licensed contractor. 
Any licensed contractor desiring to perform work of the nature covered in this chapter may file with the city council a faithful performance bond annually, covering all permits required under this chapter by such licensed contractor for each year, in such amounts as the city engineer or public works director deems sufficient, conditioned upon proper compliance by such licensed contractor with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 712 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 23 § 9, 1963)  
12.04.100 - Insurance of permittee. 
In addition to the requirements provided in Sections 12.04.080 and 12.04.090 of this chapter and before granting a permit under the provisions of this chapter, the city engineer or public works director may require each applicant to file with the city council a certificate showing the maintenance of insurance or a satisfactory plan of self-insurance to cover the liability of the permittee for property damage and injuries to persons in connection with the work sought to be done under the permit. 
Where no satisfactory plan of self-insurance is provided, the minimum limits of such insurance shall be fixed by the city engineer or public works director in such amounts as he deems sufficient. In fixing such limits, the city engineer or public works director shall use as his basis the costs and hazards involved in the work sought to be performed under this permit. 
(Ord. 712 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 23 § 10, 1963)  
12.04.110 - Bond—Exemptions. 
Except as otherwise provided in this section, the bonds specified in Sections 12.04.080 and 12.04.090 of this chapter shall not be required of any city, public corporation, political subdivision or public utilities corporation which is authorized by law to establish or maintain any works or facilities in, under, or over any city street, nor shall the application of any person of the class specified in this section for a permit be denied. Each such applicant is entitled to a permit, but is otherwise subject to the provisions of this chapter and to all reasonable conditions and provisions made by the city engineer or public works director in any such permit. 
The city engineer or public works director may require of any such applicant a bond in a sum not to exceed twenty thousand dollars if such applicant has, in fact, prior to such application, failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with the provisions of a previous permit. 
(Ord. 712 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 23 § 11, 1963)  
12.04.120 - Encroachment permit fees. 
Fees shall be set forth in a fee schedule adopted by separate resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 712 § 2, 2004)  
12.04.130 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 853, § 1, adopted Feb. 12, 2013, repealed § 12.04.130, in its entirety. Former § 12.04.130 pertained to "Denial of application for cable operator or video service provider encroachment permits." See Ordinance List and Disposition Table for derivation.  
Chapter 12.06 - POSTAL SERVICE 
Sections: 
 
12.06.010 - Mailboxes—Public right-of-way. 
No mailboxes for delivery of mail shall be placed or maintained within the limits of any public right-of-way in any area where curbs, gutters, and sidewalks have been constructed abutting residential type properties, except as follows: 
A.  The United States Post Office Department may place collection and storage boxes within the public right-of-way; provided such boxes shall be placed so as not to endanger the life and safety of the traveling public. 
B.  A mailbox may be placed within the public right-of-way in a residential area where no curbs, gutters, and sidewalks have been constructed; provided a permit shall first be obtained from the city manager, acting by and through the department of public works, where the location of such mailbox will not endanger the life and safety of the traveling public. The application for such a permit shall be in writing and shall clearly designate thereon the type of mailbox to be installed and its location within the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. 317 § 1 (part), 1976)  
12.06.020 - Mailboxes—Residential yard areas. 
No mailbox shall be constructed or permitted to be placed or maintained within a required front or side yard in any residential district; provided that such mailbox may project a reasonable distance into any front or side yard requirement if such mailbox is an integral part of or attached directly to a permitted building. 
(Ord. 317 § 1 (part), 1976)  
Chapter 12.08 - DEPOSITING OF MATERIALS UPON CITY STREETS 
Sections: 
 
12.08.010 - Prohibitions designated. 
A.  No person shall throw or deposit upon any city street any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, hoops, wire, cans or any other substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle upon the highway. 
B.  It is unlawful to place, deposit or dump, or cause to be placed, deposited or dumped, any garbage, swill, cans, bottles, papers, ashes, refuse, carcass of any dead animal, offal, trash, or rubbish or any noisome, nauseous or offensive matter in or upon any city street including any portion of the right-of-way thereof. 
C.  It is unlawful to place, deposit or dump, or cause to be placed, deposited or dumped, any rocks or dirt in or upon any city street, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, without consent of the city public works director or city engineer. 
(Ord. 25 § 1, 1963)  
12.08.020 - Removal of material. 
Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any city street any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the same or cause the same to be removed. Such person shall reimburse the city for any costs incurred in removing said materials from city streets. 
(Ord. 25 § 2, 1963)  
12.08.030 - Spilling vehicle loads. 
No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any city street unless the vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its contents or load other than clear water from dropping, sifting, leaking, or otherwise escaping therefrom. 
(Ord. 25 § 3, 1963)  
12.08.040 - Plastic-type soil. 
The city council finds and determines that plastic-type soil deposited upon city streets is inherently damaging to said streets. Any person or business or organization that has dropped or deposited plastic-type soil upon any city street, and fails to remove said soil from the street within twenty-four hours after written notice from the city or any officer thereof, shall pay to the city treble the amount of costs incurred by the city in removing said plastic-type soil or treble the amount of damage inflicted upon the street by said soil, whichever is the greater. 
(Ord. 25 § 4, 1963)  
12.08.050 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor unless by ordinance the violation is made an infraction. Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by any ordinance of the city, any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the ordinances of the city shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Every violation determined to be an infraction is punishable by: (A) a fine not exceeding fifty dollars for a first violation; (B) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year; (C) a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year. 
Each such person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the ordinances of the city is committed, continued or permitted by any such person, and he shall be punished accordingly. 
(Ord. 293 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 1975: Ord. 255 § 1 (part), 1975: Ord. 25 § 5, 1963)  
Chapter 12.12 - UNDERGROUND UTILITIES 
Sections: 
 
12.12.010 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases hereinafter in this section defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions: 
A.  "Commission" means the Public Utilities Commission of the state. 
B.  "Person" means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, and their agents and employees. 
C.  "Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures" mean poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, cross arms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communications or similar or associated service. 
D.  "Underground utility district" or "district" means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires, associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 12.12.030 of this chapter. 
E.  "Utility" includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. 
(Ord. 101 § 1, 1968)  
12.12.020 - Public hearing by council. 
The council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned, by mail, of the time and place of such hearings as least ten days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 101 § 2, 1968)  
12.12.030 - Districts designated—Council resolution. 
If after any such public hearing the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, be resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials, and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. 
(Ord. 101 § 3, 1968)  
12.12.040 - Unlawful acts. 
Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 12.12.030, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when said overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as said overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 12.12.090, and for such reasonable time required to remove said facilities after said work has been performed and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 101 § 4, 1968)  
12.12.050 - Exception—Emergency or unusual circumstances. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed ten days, without authority of the council* in order to provide emergency service. The council* may grant special permission on such terms as the council* may deem appropriate in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures. 
(Ord. 101 § 5, 1968) 
*  If the city prefers, this could be the director of public works or some other appropriate city official.  
12.12.060 - Exceptions—Additional. 
In any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.12.030, the city may authorize any or all of the following exceptions: 
A.  Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer; 
B.  Poles, or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting; 
C.  Overhead wires, exclusive of supporting structures, crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited; 
D.  Poles, overhead wires and associated structures used for the transmission of electric energy at a nominal voltage in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred volts; 
E.  Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location of the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street; 
F.  Antennae, associated equipment, and supporting structures used by a utility for furnishing communication services; 
G.  Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts; 
H.  Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. 
(Ord. 101 § 6, 1968)  
12.12.070 - Notice to property owners and utility companies. 
Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.12.030 the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by said resolution of the adoption thereof. Said city clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location subject to applicable rules, regulations, and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission. 
Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.12.030, together with a copy of this chapter, to affected property owners as such as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. 
(Ord. 101 § 7, 1968)  
12.12.080 - Responsibility of utility companies. 
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.12.030, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. 
(Ord. 101 § 8, 1968)  
12.12.090 - Responsibility of property owners. 
A.  Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in Section 12.12.080 and the termination facility on or within said building or structure being served, subject to applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission. 
B.  In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting said property does not comply with the provisions of subparagraph A of this section within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 12.12.030, the city engineer shall post written notice on the property being served and thirty days thereafter shall have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to said property. 
(Ord. 101 § 9, 1968)  
12.12.100 - Responsibility of city. 
The city shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 12.12.030. 
(Ord. 101 § 10, 1968)  
12.12.110 - Extension of time. 
In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.12.030 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. 
(Ord. 101 § 11, 1968)  
12.12.120 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor unless by ordinance the violation is made an infraction. Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by any ordinance of the city, any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the ordinances of the city shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Every violation determined to be an infraction is punishable by: (A) a fine not exceeding fifty dollars for a first violation; (B) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year; (C) a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year. 
Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the ordinances of the city is committed, continued or permitted by any such person, and he shall be punished accordingly. 
(Ord. 293 §§ l (part), 2 (part), 1975: Ord. 255 § l (part), 1975: Ord. 101 § 12, 1968)  
Chapter 12.14 - BRIDGES AND MAJOR THOROUGHFARES 
Sections: 
 
12.14.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined as follows: 
A.  "Area of benefit" means the area, as delineated by the city council which receives benefit from the construction of a bridge or major thoroughfare. 
B.  "Benefit conferred" means the public improvement proposed for construction and includes a bridge or a major thoroughfare or any component or portion thereof. 
C.  "Bridge" means a structure utilized to extend a roadway over a waterway, stream, flood control channel, creek, railway, freeway or canyon. 
D.  "Construction" means, but is not limited to, design, acquisition of right-of-way, administration of construction contracts and actual construction. 
E.  "Improvement" means the actual improvement installed and means, depending upon the proposal made, either a bridge or a major thoroughfare or both. 
F.  "Major thoroughfare" means a major roadway no less than eighty feet wide, designed to carry a traffic volume of ten thousand vehicles per hour and which is a portion of a traffic network connecting to the state highway system and so identified on the Rohnert Park general plan. 
G.  "Public hearing" means a hearing before the Rohnert Park city council, to which members of the public are invited to attend after notice has been given, as herein provided, no less than ten days in advance of the date set for hearing. Notice of such public hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation, published and circulated in the city of Rohnert Park, or if there is no newspaper of general circulation circulated and published within the city of Rohnert Park, then such notice shall be posted in no less than three public places in the city of Rohnert Park. In addition to the foregoing, any person who has filed a written request for special notice with the city council in the calendar year during which the public hearing specified herein is to be held, shall receive notice of such proposed public hearing by first class mail. 
(Ord. 364 § l (part), 1979)  
12.14.020 - Institution of proceedings. 
Should the Rohnert Park city council determine that an area of the city of Rohnert Park would, in the judgment of the city council, be benefited by the construction of a bridge or major thoroughfare, the council shall first adopt a resolution of intention to hold a public hearing to determine whether the city should impose a fee upon the area to be benefited by the proposed improvement. 
(Ord. 364 § l (part), 1979)  
12.14.030 - Contents of resolution of intention. 
The resolution of intention shall define the area proposed to be benefited by the construction of the bridge or major thoroughfare and preliminarily establish the boundaries of the area of benefit. The resolution shall also contain an estimate by the city engineer of the estimated cost of the project and the manner in which the fee shall be apportioned to or spread against individual properties located within the area of benefit. The area of benefit may include land or improvements that are the subject of any map or building permit application considered at the public hearing. 
(Ord. 364 § l (part), 1979)  
12.14.040 - Notice of public hearing. 
No public hearing shall be held until notice has been given as provided under the definition of a public hearing as defined in Section 12.14.010. At the public hearing, the city council shall establish the boundaries of the area benefited, the total cost of the project, whether actual or estimated, and a fair method of allocation of the costs to the area benefited and the manner in which the fees or assessments are to be spread and assessed against the individual properties within the area of benefit. The resolution of intention shall define the proposal to be benefited in general terms sufficient to identify the area so that members of the public will know its general location. 
(Ord. 364 § l (part), 1979)  
12.14.050 - Fee apportionment—Major thoroughfares. 
In the case of major thoroughfares, the method of fee apportionment shall not provide for higher fees on land abutting the major thoroughfare than on lands not abutting the major thoroughfare, except where the land abutting the major thoroughfare has direct usable access to the major thoroughfare. 
(Ord. 364 § l (part), 1979)  
12.14.060 - Contents of resolution establishing an area of benefit. 
In the event the city council adopts a resolution establishing an area of benefit, the resolution shall contain, among other things, a description of the boundary of the area of benefit, the total costs of the improvement, whether actual or estimated, the method of fee apportionment as established by the city council at the public hearing, all of which shall be incorporated into the resolution. At the conclusion of the hearing and before the assessments may be levied, assessed and collected from the individual property owners within the area of benefit, a certified copy of the resolution shall be recorded in the office of the Sonoma County recorder by the Rohnert Park city council. 
(Ord. 364 § 1 (part), 1979)  
12.14.070 - Area of benefit—Collection of assessments or fees. 
Upon the recordation by the city of a certified copy of the resolution establishing an area of benefit and establishing the fees against the individual property owners, such fees shall be paid as a condition of approval of a final map or shall be paid as a condition of approval of a building permit for such property or portions thereof. 
(Ord. 364 § 1 (part), 1979)  
12.14.080 - Area of benefit—Provisions for payment of fees for properties not subject to assessment. 
Should the area of benefit contain land or improvements not subject to the payment of fees, the city council shall provide for payment of the share of improvement costs apportioned to such land and/or improvements from other sources. 
(Ord. 364 § l (part), 1979)  
12.14.090 - Limitation on collection of fees for installation of a major thoroughfare. 
In the case of major thoroughfares, no fees shall be required to be paid unless the major thoroughfares are in addition to, or are a reconstruction of, existing major thoroughfares serving the area of benefit at the time the city council establishes the boundaries of the area of benefit. 
(Ord. 364 § l (part), 1979)  
12.14.100 - Limitations on collection of fees for installation of bridges. 
In the case of the establishment of an area of benefit for a planned bridge facility, no fees shall be required to be paid unless the planned bridge facility is an original bridge serving the area or is an addition to an existing bridge facility serving the area of benefit at the time the city council establishes the boundaries of the area of benefit. No fees shall be levied, assessed, collected or expended to reimburse the cost of an existing bridge facility construction. 
(Ord. 364 § 1 (part), 1979)  
12.14.110 - Protests—Procedure for making or filing. 
Written protests may be filed with the city clerk at any time before the public hearing. In addition to the foregoing, written or oral protests may be received at the time of the public hearing. No protest may be made except by the owner or owners of the property within the area of benefit or a duly authorized agent of the owner or owners. 
(Ord. 364 § 1 (part), 1979)  
12.14.120 - Protests—Procedure upon receipt of. 
If sufficient written protests are filed with the office of the city clerk prior to the time of the public hearing, or if sufficient written and oral protests are filed or made at the public hearing, including those written protests made before the public hearing and prior to the time that the public hearing is closed, and if such protests equal or exceed one-half or more of the area of the property within the area of benefit, and if such protests are not withdrawn so as to reduce the area represented by protests to less than one-half of the area of benefit, then the proceedings shall be abandoned and the city council shall not, for a period of one year from the date of the filing of the written protests or of the filing and making of the written and oral protests at the time of the public hearing, as provided in this chapter, once it has determined that a valid majority protest has been made, commence or carry on any proceedings for the same improvement or acquisition. 
(Ord. 364 § l (part), 1979)  
12.14.130 - Withdrawal of protests. 
Protests may be withdrawn by the owner(s) or agent of the owner(s) making them, in the same manner as the protest was made, at any time prior to the conclusion of the public hearing. 
(Ord. 364 § l (part), 1979)  
12.14.140 - Majority protest against portion of improvement only. 
A.  Should a majority protest be made against a portion of the proposed improvement only, so that it is possible for the city council to determine that the protestants do not oppose the total improvement proposed, but only identifiable portions of it, then further proceedings to construct that portion or those portions of the improvement against which a majority protest has been made shall be barred from proceeding for one year; provided, however, that as to those portions of the proposed improvement against which a majority protest has not been made are not barred and the city council may, in its determination, institute new proceedings for that portion or those portions of the improvement against which no majority protest has been made or, in the alternative if it is possible to determine that no majority protest was ever made against portions of the improvement or if protests previously made against portions of the improvement are withdrawn at the public hearing so that the city council can determine (1) that a majority protest no longer exists against portions of the improvement and (2) that portion or those portions of the improvement against which a majority protest no longer exists, the city council may proceed with the public hearing on that portion or those portions of the improvement against which a majority protest does not exist. 
B.  The city council may commence new proceedings within the period of one year against that portion or those portions of the improvement against which a majority protest was made if it finds by the affirmative vote of four-fifths of the city council that the owners of more than one-half of the area of the property within the area of benefit favor proceeding with that portion or those portions of the improvement or acquisition. 
(Ord. 364 § l (part), 1979)  
12.14.150 - Fee collection by city under proceedings instituted. 
A.  All fees paid to the city by property owners for the construction of an improvement or improvements within the area of benefit shall be deposited in the planned bridge facility or the major thoroughfare fund for which the fees were assessed. A separate fund shall be established for each separate improvement within an area of benefit. If the area of benefit contains more than one bridge or more than one major thoroughfare and if the public hearing which authorized the collection and assessment of the fees contained notice that more than one bridge or more than one major thoroughfare was being considered and identified them so that the general public was aware of the fact that more than one improvement was being considered at the public hearing, then the fund so established may include all bridge projects or all major thoroughfare projects within the area of benefit within the one fund established. 
B.  Moneys collected and deposited into the fund for the identified area of benefit shall be expended solely for the construction or reimbursement for construction of the improvement serving the area of benefit and from which the fees comprising the fund were collected, or to reimburse the city for costs advanced in constructing the improvement. 
(Ord. 364 § l (part), 1979)  
12.14.160 - Consideration in lieu of fees. 
The city council may accept considerations in lieu of the payment of fees levied and assessed under the proceeding authorized by this chapter. Such consideration may include, but shall not be limited to the construction of all or a portion of the required improvement and contribution of other public improvements acceptable to the city. In making such determinations for consideration received in lieu of fees, the city council shall be governed by the fair market value, the appraised value, the cost of construction or other comparable values in the acceptance of consideration in lieu of fees. 
(Ord. 364 § l (part), 1979)  
12.14.170 - Advances by the city. 
The city may advance money, as the city council may determine, from its general fund or from its road improvement and maintenance or capital improvement fund to pay for all or any portion of the improvement or improvements and may reimburse such fund from which money was advanced from the planned bridge facility or major thoroughfare fund established to finance the construction of the improvement or improvements. 
(Ord. 364 § l (part), 1979)  
12.14.180 - Bonded indebtedness—Incurrence thereof by city to construction improvements. 
The city may incur as provided by applicable California law in such matters, bonded (interest bearing) indebtedness for construction of bridge facilities or major thoroughfares; provided, however, that the sole security for repayment of such indebtedness shall be moneys in the planned bridge facility or major thoroughfare fund. 
(Ord. 364 § l (part), 1979)  
12.14.190 - City not precluded from providing funds to construct improvements when. 
Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the city from providing funds for the construction of bridge facilities or major thoroughfares to defray costs not allocated to the area of benefit. 
(Ord. 364 § l (part), 1979)  
12.14.200 - City not precluded from installing improvements in stages. 
Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the city from installing only a portion of the improvements required for the construction of a planned bridge facility or a major thoroughfare under the assessment district proceeding herein provided and then, at a later time proposing another proceeding to complete the improvement or to add certain other portions to the improvement previously contracted. 
(Ord. 364 § l (part), 1979)  
12.14.210 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter or any part thereof for any reason is held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter or any part thereof. The city council declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional. 
(Ord. 364 § 1 (part), 1979)  
Chapter 12.16 - GAS FRANCHISE 
Sections: 
 
12.16.010 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases defined in this section are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions: 
A.  "City" means the city of Rohnert Park, a municipal corporation of the state, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form. 
B.  "Gas" means natural or artificial gas, or a mixture of natural and artificial gas. 
C.  "Grantee" means Pacific Gas and Electric Company, and its lawful successors or assigns. 
D.  "Install, maintain and use" means to lay, construct, erect, install, operate, maintain, use, repair or replace. 
E.  "Pipes and appurtenances" means pipes, pipelines, mains, services, traps, vents, vaults, manholes, meters, gauges, regulators, valves, conduits, appliances, attachments, appurtenances and, without limitation to the foregoing, any other property located or to be located in, upon, along, across, under or over the streets of the city, and used or useful in transmitting and/or distributing gas. 
F.  "Streets" means the public streets, ways, alleys, and places as the same now or may hereafter exist within the city, including state highways, now or hereafter established within the city, and freeways hereafter established within the city. 
(Ord. 10 § 1, 1962)  
12.16.020 - Granted—Under state act. 
The franchise is granted under the Franchise Act of 1937. 
(Ord. 10 § 7, 1962)  
12.16.030 - Granted—Purpose. 
The franchise to install, maintain and use in the streets of the city all pipes and appurtenances for transmitting and distributing gas to the public for any and all purposes within the city is granted to Pacific Gas and Electric Company, its successors and assigns. 
(Ord. 10 § 2, 1962)  
12.16.040 - Relocation of service facilities. 
The grantee of this franchise shall relocate, without expense to the city, any pipes and appurtenances theretofore installed, and then maintained or used under this franchise, if and when made necessary by any lawful change of grade, alignment or width of any streets by the city, including the construction of any subway or viaduct; provided, however, that the cost of any such relocation made necessary by the construction or any lawful change of grade, alignment or width of any freeway constructed by the state shall be divided equally between grantee and the state. 
(Ord. 10 § 3, 1962)  
12.16.050 - Franchise to be indeterminate. 
The franchise shall be indeterminate. The franchise shall endure in full force and effect until the same shall, with the consent of the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California, be voluntarily surrendered or abandoned by grantee, or until the state or some municipal or public corporation thereunto duly authorized by law purchases by voluntary agreement or condemns and takes under the power of eminent domain, all property actually used and useful in the exercise of the franchise and situated in the territorial limits of the state, municipal or public corporation, purchasing or condemning such property, or until the franchise shall be forfeited for noncompliance with its terms by grantee. 
(Ord. 10 § 4, 1962)  
12.16.060 - City to collect percentage of gross receipts. 
The grantee of the franchise shall, during the term thereof, pay to the city two percent of the gross annual receipts of grantee arising from the use, operation or possession of the franchise; provided, however, that such payment shall in no event be less than one percent of the gross annual receipts of the grantee derived from the sale of gas within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. 10 § 5, 1962)  
12.16.070 - Filing statement of gross receipts. 
The grantee shall file with the city clerk, within three months after the expiration of the calendar year, or fractional calendar year, following the date of the granting hereof, and within three months after the expiration of each and every calendar year thereafter, a duly verified statement showing in detail the total gross receipts of grantee during the preceding calendar year, or such fractional calendar year, from the sale of gas within the city. The grantee shall pay to the city within fifteen days after the time for filing such statement, in lawful money of the United States, the percentage of its gross receipts designated in Section 12.16.060 for such calendar year, or such fractional calendar year, covered by such statement. Any neglect, omission or refusal by grantee to file such verified statement, or to pay the percentage at the time and in the manner specified, shall be grounds for the declaration of a forfeiture of this franchise and of all rights of the grantee hereunder. 
(Ord. 10 § 6, 1962)  
12.16.080 - Reimbursement for publication expenses. 
The grantee of the franchise shall pay to the city a sum of money sufficient to reimburse it for all publication expenses incurred by it in connection with the granting thereof. Such payment shall be made within thirty days after the city has furnished the grantee with a written statement of such expenses. 
(Ord. 10 § 9, 1962)  
12.16.090 - Effective date of franchise. 
The franchise granted by this chapter shall not become effective until written acceptance thereof has been filed by the grantee with the city clerk. 
(Ord. 10 § 10, 1962)  
12.16.100 - Effective date of ordinance. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall become effective thirty days after its final passage, unless suspended by a referendum petition filed as provided by law. 
(Ord. 10 § 8, 1962)  
Chapter 12.20 - ELECTRICITY FRANCHISE 
Sections: 
 
12.20.010 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases defined in this section are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions: 
A.  "City" means the city of Rohnert Park, a municipal corporation of the state, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form. 
B.  "Construct, maintain and use" means to construct, erect, install, lay, operate, maintain, use, repair or replace. 
C.  "Grantee" means Pacific Gas and Electric Company, and its lawful successors or assigns. 
D.  "Poles, wires, conduits and appurtenances" means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, cables, guys, stubs, platforms, cross arms, braces, transformers, insulators, conduits, ducts, vaults, manholes, meters, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments, appurtenances, and, without limitation to the foregoing, any other property located or to be located in, upon, along, across, under or over the streets of the city, and used or useful in transmitting and/or distributing electricity. 
E.  "Streets" means the public streets, ways, alleys and places as the same now or may hereafter exist within the city, including state highways, now or hereafter established within the city, and freeways hereafter established within the city. 
(Ord. 11 § 1, 1962)  
12.20.020 - Granted—Under state act. 
The franchise is granted under the Franchise Act of 1937. 
(Ord. 11 § 7, 1962)  
12.20.030 - Granted—Purpose. 
The franchise to construct, maintain and use poles, wires, conduits and appurtenances necessary or proper for transmitting and distributing electricity to the public for any and all purposes, in, along, across, upon, under and over the streets within the city is granted to Pacific Gas and Electric Company, its successors and assigns. 
(Ord. 11 § 2, 1962)  
12.20.040 - Relocation of service facilities. 
The grantee of this franchise shall relocate, without expense to the city, any poles, wires, conduits and appurtenances theretofore, installed, and then maintained or used under this franchise, if and when made necessary by any lawful change of grade, alignment or width of any streets by the city, including the construction of any subway or viaduct; provided, however, that the cost of any such relocation made necessary by the construction or any lawful change of grade, alignment or width of any freeway constructed by the state shall be divided equally between grantee and the state. 
(Ord. 11 § 3, 1962)  
12.20.050 - Franchise to be indeterminate. 
The franchise shall be indeterminate. The franchise shall endure in full force and effect until the same shall, with the consent of the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California, be voluntarily surrendered or abandoned by grantee, or until the state or some municipal or public corporation thereunto duly authorized by law shall purchase by voluntary agreement or shall condemn and take under the power of eminent domain, all property actually used and useful in the exercise of the franchise and situated in the territorial limits of the state, municipal or public corporation purchasing or condemning such property, or until the franchise shall be forfeited for noncompliance with its terms by grantee. 
(Ord. 11 § 4, 1962)  
12.20.060 - City to collect percentage of gross receipts. 
The grantee of the franchise shall, during the term thereof, pay to city two percent of the gross annual receipts of the grantee arising from the use, operation or possession of the franchise; provided, however, that such payment shall in no event be less than one percent of the gross annual receipts of grantee derived from the sale of electricity within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. 11 § 5, 1962)  
12.20.070 - Filing statement of gross receipts. 
The grantee shall file with the city clerk, within three months after the expiration of the calendar year, or fractional calendar year, following the date of the granting hereof, and within three months after the expiration of each and every calendar year thereafter, a duly verified statement showing in detail the total gross receipts of grantee during the preceding calendar year, or such fractional calendar year, from the sale of electricity within the city. The grantee shall pay to the city within fifteen days after the time for filing such statement, in lawful money of the United States, the aforesaid percentage of its gross receipts for such calendar year, or such fractional calendar year, covered by such statement. Any neglect, omission or refusal by grantee to file such verified statement, or to pay the percentage at the time and in the manner specified, shall be grounds for the declaration of a forfeiture of this franchise and of all rights of grantee hereunder. 
(Ord. 11 § 6, 1962)  
12.20.080 - Reimbursement for publication expenses. 
The grantee of the franchise shall pay to the city a sum of money sufficient to reimburse it for all publication expenses incurred by it in connection with the granting thereof. Such payment shall be made within thirty days after the city has furnished grantee with a written statement of such expenses. 
(Ord. 11 § 9, 1962)  
12.20.090 - Effective date of franchise. 
The franchise granted by this chapter shall not become effective until written acceptance thereof has been filed by the grantee with the city clerk. 
(Ord. 11 § 10, 1962)  
12.20.100 - Effective date of ordinance. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall become effective thirty days after its final passage, unless suspended by a referendum petition filed as provided by law. 
(Ord. 11 § 8, 1962)  
Chapter 12.24 - PUBLIC TREE CARE 
Sections: 
 
12.24.010 - Declaration of legislative intent and purpose. 
The city council finds and declares that trees contribute greatly to the health, safety and general welfare of all of Rohnert Park's citizens and that the preservation and proper maintenance of trees is a matter of city wide concern. The city council recognizes and finds that trees provide great aesthetic benefits, offer windbreaks, provide summer shade, help abate noise, provide privacy screening, help control erosion, act as filters against airborne pollutants, release oxygen, and provide habitat for wildlife. All trees perform these functions for the property on which they are growing. Trees of significant size and maturity perform these functions for all persons living in their vicinity. Trees are key elements in a living system, the boundaries of which do not conform to the arbitrary property lines of individual lots and parcels, upon which the continued health and welfare of this community depends. In addition, trees in the community and in neighborhoods provide a sense of identity and tradition and enhance property values. 
(Ord. 537 § 1, 1991)  
12.24.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth below. 
A.  "Alter" means to take an action that could foreseeably diminish the health or vigor of a tree. "Alter" includes, but is not limited to, excessive or improper pruning of a tree, grade changes around or near a tree, excessive irrigation of a tree, and trenching in the root zone of a tree. The term "alter" does not include periodic trimming, shaping, thinning or pruning of a tree to preserve or protect its health, growth or appearance, in accordance with accepted arboricultural standards and practices. 
B.  "Park" means all public parks having individual names. 
C.  "Person" means any individual, group of individuals, partnership, corporation, association, company or organization of any kind. 
D.  "Property line" means the outer edge or boundary line of a property. 
E.  "Public places" means all grounds owned by the city of Rohnert Park. 
F.  "Relocate" means to relocate a tree from the place where it is growing and replanting it in another location in accordance with accepted arboricultural practices and with the intent and a reasonable expectation that it will survive and grow in the new location. 
G.  "Remove" means the cutting down of a tree or the relocation of a tree in a manner not in accordance with accepted arboricultural practices. 
H.  "Street tree" means any tree having a single trunk circumference greater than six and twenty-five one hundredths inches or a diameter greater than two inches, a height of more than six feet, and one half or more of its trunk is within a public right of way or within five feet of the paved portion of a city street or a public sidewalk. 
I.  "Tree" means any woody plant having a single trunk circumference of twelve and one half inches or more, or a diameter of four inches or more or a combination of multiple trunks having a total circumference of twenty-five and twenty-five one hundredths inches or more, or a total diameter of eight inches or more. 
J.  "Tree maintenance" means the spraying, fertilizing, preserving, pruning, removing, cutting above ground, or otherwise disturbing any tree. 
(Ord. 537 § 1, 1991)  
12.24.030 - Director of public works. 
The director of public works is hereby designated the responsibility of development and implementing an annual community forestry program. 
(Ord. 537 § 1, 1991)  
12.24.040 - Street trees. 
The director of public works shall prepare a list of trees which may be planted within the planting strip adjacent to city streets or within five feet of the paved portion of a city street or a public sidewalk. A planting strip, as used in this section, is the open soil area that may exist between the curb and a sidewalk. The list of permitted street trees may be amended from time to time and may also specify minimum distances that shall be maintained between the various kinds of trees listed. 
(Ord. 537 § 1, 1991)  
12.24.050 - Tree planting, alteration, removal, relocation. 
A.  Any person desiring to plant, engage in tree maintenance, alter, remove, or relocate any street tree or any tree located on public places shall apply in writing to the director of public works to do so. The application shall state the number, identity, and location of each tree sought to be planted, maintained, altered, removed, or relocated; shall contain a statement of the reason(s) the permit is requested; and shall contain such other pertinent information as the director of public works may require. The application may also include documentation of any type, including written recommendations from a certified arborist concerning the health, quality and desirability of alternatives to the tree or trees in question. 
B.  Property owners fronting along the proposed area of the tree planting, removals, or replacements will be notified. 
C.  Upon receipt of an application, the director of public works may make a determination as to the acceptability of the requested tree planting, maintenance, alteration, removal, or relocation including an analysis of: 
1.  The overall condition of the tree, including any diseases and pests that may or have attacked it, the tree's projected lifespan, the area the tree would hit if it, or any substantial part of it, were to fall, its symmetry and aesthetics, its proximity to existing structures, and any interference it may or has caused with underground or overhead utility lines. 
2.  The topography of land and the effect the tree may have on possible erosion or soil retention problems or on decreasing the flow or diversion of surface waters. 
3.  The number, species, size, and location of other existing trees in the area and the effect the requested action will have on shade areas, air pollution, historic values, scenic beauty, and the general welfare of the city. 
4.  Whether the request is supported by good urban forestry practices and standards such as, but not limited to, the number of healthy trees that a given parcel of land will support. 
D.  Prior to making a determination on the application, the director of public works may inspect the tree(s) sought to be planted, maintained, altered, removed, or relocated. The director of public works may also refer the application to another department, board, commission or committee of the city, as deemed appropriate, and may cause such additional investigation to be made deemed necessary in order to make an informed decision on the application. 
E.  If the director of public works approves an application to plant, maintain, alter, remove, or relocate a street tree or a tree located on public places, written notification shall be sent to the applicant. 
F.  The provisions of this section shall not apply if the trimming, removal, or clearing of any street tree or its branches or roots eliminates: 
1.  Interference with the lines of any public utility, city water, sewer, or storm drain lines, or open storm drain channels; 
2.  Interference with any city streets, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, parks, or public activities; 
3.  A public nuisance; or 
4.  Interference with the maintenance of adequate lines of sight along city streets, and entrances to such streets, including lines of sight of vehicles and pedestrians to traffic control signs and signals. 
(Ord. 769 § 3, 2007: Ord. 537 § 1, 1991)  
12.24.060 - Effective date. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be effective thirty days from and after the date of its adoption and publication or posting as required by law. 
(Ord. 537 § 1, 1991)  
12.24.070 - Statutory severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter is, for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the chapter. 
(Ord. 537 § 1, 1991)  
Title 13 - WATER AND SEWERS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 13.02 - CITY WATER SYSTEM 
Sections: 
 
13.02.010 - Established. 
There is established in the city a public water supply system to be known as the Rohnert Park potable water system which shall include all facilities for the production and distribution of water and all improvements, additions, extensions thereto. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.02.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the Rohnert Park potable water system is to provide a source of water for the inhabitants of the city. Extension of water service beyond city limits shall only be permitted upon approval of the city council. The city council shall not approve the extension of water service unless it finds the city has sufficient water supply and sewer treatment capacity to accommodate its current customers and the growth anticipated per the general plan. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.02.030 - General provisions. 
A.  The city has the sole right supply water within its city limits. No person, firm, corporation or institution shall drill, construct or cause to be constructed any well within the city of Rohnert Park. 
B.  The city council shall by resolution establish rates for the sale of water, connection fees, and any other such other fees, standards, rules and regulations as may be necessary for the administration and operation of the Rohnert Park city water system. 
C.  The city will not be liable for interruption, shortage, or insufficiency of supply, or for any loss or damage occasioned thereby caused by accidents, or acts of God, fire, strikes, riots, war, power outages or any other causes. 
D.  The city, whenever it shall find it necessary or convenient for the purpose of making repairs or improvements to its system, shall have the right to temporarily suspend delivery of water and it shall not be liable for any loss or damage occasioned thereby. 
E.  Applications for water service will be made. Such application will signify the applicant's willingness and intention to comply with all regulations or rates duly adopted by the city, and to make payment for services rendered. 
F.  All applicants for service connections or water service shall be required to accept such conditions of pressure and service as are provided by the distribution system at the location of the proposed service connection, and to hold the city harmless for any damages arising out of low pressure or high pressure conditions or interruptions in service. 
G.  If application is made for service to property where no service connection has been installed, but a distribution main is adjacent to the property, the applicant, in addition to making application for service, shall comply with the regulations and standards governing the installation of service connections. 
H.  No customer shall permit the use or resale of any of the water received. 
I.  Representatives of the city shall carry proper identification upon exhibition of which, they shall have the right of ingress and egress to the customer premises as necessary to ensure the provision of water service and the protection of public health and safety. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.02.040 - Ownership, responsibility and maintenance. 
A.  The city owns all water distribution pipelines located in streets, highways, public ways, alleys, right-of-ways or easements which are used to serve the general public. When water distribution pipelines are planned to be extended, in accordance with Section 13.02.050, the owner of the lands upon which future pipelines are to be located, shall as a prerequisite to service grant easements unto the city for said purposes. 
B.  The service connection including the meter and the meter box, whether located on public or private property, is the property of the city and no part of the cost thereof will be refunded to the applicant. The city reserves the right to repair, replace and maintain said service connections, as well as to remove them upon discontinuance of service. 
C.  Water lines beyond the city's service connections belong to the property owner and must be maintained in proper condition by the property owner. 
D.  The property owner, or designee, shall, at its own risk and expense, furnish, install and keep in good and safe condition all equipment that may be required for receiving, controlling, applying and utilizing water beyond the service connection. 
E.  The city shall not be responsible for any loss or damage caused by the improper installation of such equipment beyond the service connection, or the negligence or wrongful act of the customer or of any of his tenants, agents, employees, contractors, licensees, or permitees in installing, maintaining, operating or interfering with such equipment installed beyond the service connection. 
F.  The city shall not be responsible for damage to property caused by faucets, valves and other equipment that are open when water is turned on at the meter, either originally or when turned on after a temporary shutdown. 
G.  The customer shall use all reasonable care to prevent damage to the meter or any other facilities loaned by the city that are used in furnishing the service from the time they are installed until they are removed. If meters or other facilities are damaged by the customer, the cost of making repairs shall be paid by the customer, except to the extent that the city caused or contributed to the damage. 
H.  The customer shall be liable for any damage to the city-owned customer water service facilities when such damage is from causes originating on the premises by an act of the customer or his tenants, agents, employees, contractors, licensees or permitees, including the breaking or destruction of locks by the customer or others on or near a meter, and any damage to a meter that may result from hot water or steam from a boiler or heater on the customer's premises. The city shall be reimbursed by the customer for any such damage. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.02.050 - Extension of distribution mains. 
A.  Applications for extension of distribution mains shall be made. Such application will signify the applicant's willingness and intention to comply with all regulations or rates duly adopted by the city, and to make payment for services rendered. 
B.  The extension of distribution mains may be accomplished by either the applicant or the city, but in all cases must be approved as to design and location by the city engineer prior to installation. Where installation is made by the applicant, plans must be prepared by a licensed professional only, and the city will provide inspection services to assure installation according to approved plans. The cost of the extension shall be borne by the applicant. The cost of city inspection shall be borne by the applicant. 
C.  When the city requires the installation of a water main which is larger than that necessary to serve the applicant, the city may, in its sole discretion, enter into an agreement with the applicant whereby the applicant shall recover the excess cost through a reimbursement arrangement. The reimbursement may be by way of credits against connection or capacity charges, to the extent allowed by state law, or from other persons at the time of connection to said main. The city may, at its sole discretion, contribute a portion of the costs of main extensions. 
D.  Applicant shall guarantee all costs and charges specified herein prior to commencement of work. Such deposit or security shall be in an amount equal to the estimated cost together with any appropriate contingency, approved by the city engineer. If the applicant's guarantee is in cash, any cash balance remaining upon completion of the work shall be refunded to the applicant. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.02.060 - Installation of service connections. 
A.  Water service connections will be installed in the size and at the location specified by the city. Service connections will be made only to property abutting on public streets, alleys, right-of-ways, or easements. 
B.  Installation charges shall be in accordance with the rates established by the city's fee schedule. 
C.  For multifamily residential and non-residential services connections, the applicant shall arrange for the installation of the water service connections by an approved contractor. Said installation will be in accordance with the standards set forth by the city and will be subject to city approval. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.02.070 - Meters. 
A.  Meters are required for all users. 
B.  For commercial and industrial development, separate meters shall be installed for each portion of the property that is or could be used or occupied by a different customer class. 
C.  For all development, except single family residential development, irrigation water shall be separately metered. 
D.  Meters will be installed at accessible locations at the curb, or at the property line, in accordance with the city's adopted standards. Owners shall be responsible for maintaining area around meter to provide adequate access. 
E.  Upon installation, meters will become the property of the city. No rents or other charges will be paid by the city for a meter or other facilities, including housing and connections, located on a customer's premises. 
F.  All meters may be sealed by the city at the time of installation, and no seal shall be altered or broken except by an authorized city employee. 
G.  Meters or services moved for the convenience of the customer will be relocated at the customer's expense. Meters or services moved to protect the city's property will be moved at the city's expense. 
H.  The cost of a change in the size of a meter on an existing service will be paid for by the customer. 
I.  All meters will be tested prior to installation by the water meter manufacturer and no meter will be installed unless the accuracy is within one and one-half percent of being one hundred percent accurate. 
J.  If a customer desires to have the meter serving their premises tested, the customer shall pay a meter check fee, as established by the city's fees schedule. 
K.  If a meter tested at the request of a customer is found to be more than five percent slow, the city may bill the customer for estimated consumption. Such estimates will be made in Section 13.44.050 and will take into account the payments the customer has made. 
L.  If a meter is found to be non-registering due to any cause, except the non-use of water, the charges for service will be based on the estimated consumption. Such estimates will be made in Section 13.44.050. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.02.080 - Control valve on the customer property. 
The customer shall provide a valve on its side of the service installation as close as is practical to the meter location, street, highway, alley or easement in which the water main serving the customer's property is located, to control the flow of water to the piping on his premises. The customer shall not use the service curb stop to turn the water on and off for his convenience. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.02.090 - Groundwire attachments. 
All persons are forbidden to attach any ground wire or wires to any plumbing which is or may be connected to a service connection or main belonging to the city. The city will hold the customer liable for any damage to its property occasioned by such ground wire attachments. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.02.110 - Temporary service. 
A.  Temporary service may be provided from the potable water system through an approved hydrant meter, unless an alternative method is specifically approved by the city engineer. 
B.  Applications for temporary water service will be made. Such application will signify the applicant's willingness and intention to comply with all regulations or rates duly adopted by the city, and to make payment for services rendered. 
C.  The rates and meter rental fees for temporary water service, including any applicable deposits, shall be established as part of the city's rate schedule. 
D.  All hydrant meters, or other forms of temporary connection, shall be installed by the city or a licensed contractor and shall be operated in accordance with instructions. 
E.  The customer shall use all possible care to prevent loss or damage to the hydrant meter or to any other loaned facilities of the city which are involved in furnishing the temporary service from the time they are installed until they are removed. 
F.  If the meter or any other equipment is lost, damaged or stolen, the meter rental fee, including any applicable deposit, shall be forfeited. 
G.  Tampering with any fire hydrant for the unauthorized use of water there from, or for any other purpose is a misdemeanor, punishable by law and subject to the penalties outlined in Chapter 13.06. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
Chapter 13.03 - CITY RECYCLED WATER SYSTEM 
Sections: 
 
13.03.010 - Established. 
There is established in the city a public recycled water supply system to be known as the Rohnert Park City recycled water system which shall include all facilities for the distribution of recycled water including all improvements, additions, extensions thereto. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.03.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the Rohnert Park recycled water system to provide an alternative water supply source for the inhabitants of the city, in accordance with the city's agreement with its wholesale suppliers. The city shall not permit the extension of recycled water service beyond its limits. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.03.030 - General provisions. 
The Rohnert Park recycled water system shall be operated under the provisions of Chapter 13.02, which govern the Rohnert Park potable water system, except that the city council shall set applicable recycled water rates and connection fees through an approved form of a recycled water agreement. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.03.040 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases will have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
A.  "Approved uses" means the uses defined in the city's Recycled Water User's Guide or by state law as being approved for use of tertiary treated recycled water. 
B.  "Customer," "consumer," or "user" means a person or entity having a connection into the recycled water system or potable water system owned and operated by the city. 
C.  "On-site recycled water system" means that portion of the recycled water system on the consumer's premises which begins at the coupling on the consumer's side of the water meter. 
D.  "Potable water" means water which meets the federal, state and local standards for human consumption and is approved for human consumption. 
E.  "Recycled water" means tertiary treated water which results from the treatment of wastewater, is suitable for direct beneficial use, and conforms to the definition of disinfected tertiary recycled water in accordance with state law. 
F.  "Recycled water agreement" means the agreement between the city and the customer which grants permission to use recycled water and requires the customer to use recycled water in accordance with the rules, regulations and standards of the Recycled Water User's Guide and all applicable state and local rules and regulations. 
G.  "Recycled Water User's Guide" means city's document which details the requirements of the state and local rules and regulations that apply to the design, installation, and operations and maintenance of the on-site recycled water system, including but not limited to the requirements of the California Code of Regulations, Title 22. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.03.050 - Regulatory authority and requirement to connect. 
A.  The state of California has declared that the use of potable water for non-potable uses is a waste or unreasonable use of water if recycled water is available. 
B.  All new applicants for water service whose properties may be served by recycled water, shall connect their property to recycled water service for those uses for which the use of potable domestic water would be deemed a waste or unreasonable use of water as specified in Division 7, Chapter 7, of the California Water Code (Section 13550 et. seq.) and the state and local regulations promulgated pursuant thereto. 
C.  All customers are liable for the cost of connecting plumbing at the point of connection as determined by the city and any costs of making private plumbing and irrigation systems conform to state health standards. 
D.  Failure of a new customer to accept service of recycled water when it is made available, where use of potable water would otherwise be deemed a waste or unreasonable use of water, shall be grounds for termination of the customer's potable water service. 
E.  Failure of a recycled water customer to comply with the conditions specified for its use shall be deemed a violation and shall be subject to enforcement as outlined in Chapter 13.06. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.03.060 - Recycled water users guide. 
The city will at all times have a Recycled Water User's Guide which will be prepared, maintained and updated by the city engineer, or designee. The purpose of the Recycled Water User's Guide is to detail the requirements of the following rules and regulations as they apply to the city recycled water system, this chapter, the California Code of Regulations Title 22, and other state and local rules and regulations related to the use of recycled water as they may be adopted or changed from time to time. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.03.070 - Recycled water agreement. 
The city will enter into recycled water agreement with each recycled water customer, which grants permission to use recycled water and requires the customer to use recycled water in accordance with the rules, regulations and standards of the Recycled Water User's Guide and all applicable state and local rules and regulations. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.03.080 - Designation of site supervisor. 
Each customer shall designate a site supervisor for each site covered by a recycled water agreement. The site supervisor must serve as a liaison with the city, and must have the authority to carry out the requirements of the recycled water user's guide and recycled water agreement including the operations and maintenance of the on-site recycled water system and prevention of potential hazards. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.03.090 - Operation and maintenance of customer equipment. 
Each customer is required to operate and maintain the on-site recycled water system in accordance with the recycled water user's guide and recycled water agreement. 
Notwithstanding compliance with this section, the city reserves the right to take any action necessary with respect to the operation of the customer's recycled water system to safeguard public health. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.03.100 - Backflow prevention on recycled water systems. 
The city reserves the right to require a backflow prevention device on the customer's recycled water system if it is determined that there is a backflow hazard on-site. If a backflow device is required, it must be properly maintained by the customer, inspected quarterly and tested at least annually. All required tests must be submitted to the city in accordance with the city backflow prevention program. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
Chapter 13.04 - CROSS CONNECTION REGULATIONS[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 910, §§ 3, 4, adopted Sept. 26, 2017, repealed the former Ch. 13.04, §§ 13.04.010—13.04.030, and enacted a new Ch. 13.04 as set out herein. The former Ch. 13.04 pertained to city water system and derived from Ord. 76 §§ 1—3, adopted 1967; Ord. 732 § 1, adopted 2005; Ord. 801 § 2, adopted 2008. Similar provisions can be found in Ch. 13.02. 
 
13.04.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter provides for a reasonable and effective means of protecting the city potable water system, and where appropriate its recycled water system, from backflow, in compliance with the California Code of Regulations, Title 17, Division 1, Chapter 5. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.04.020 - General provisions. 
A.  It is the customer's responsibility to protect the water quality in its system when the city requires a backflow prevention assembly to protect the public system. 
B.  New potable water service connections shall be installed and existing potable water service connections shall be upgraded to conform to these requirements. 
C.  Wherever backflow protection has been found necessary on a water supply line entering a customer's premises, then any and all water supply lines from the city's mains entering such premises, buildings, or structures shall be protected by an approved backflow prevention assembly. 
D.  The provisions and requirements of this chapter are the minimum requirements. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction than is imposed or required by other laws, rules, regulations, standards or ordinances, of or applicable to the city, the provisions of this chapter shall control and be applied; where such other laws, rules, regulations, standards or ordinances are more restrictive, they shall control and be applied. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.04.030 - Definitions. 
A.  "Approved" means accepted by the city as meeting applicable specifications or as suitable for the proposed use. 
B.  "Approved device" means a backflow-prevention device which is manufactured in full conformance with the standards established by the American Water Works Association (AWWA) and has completely met the laboratory and field performance specifications of the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research (FCCC&HR) of the University of Southern California. 
C.  "Auxiliary water supply" means any water supply on or available to premises other than potable water supplied by the city potable water system. 
D.  "AWWA standard" means a standard developed and approved by the American Water Works Association. 
E.  "Backflow" means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances, under positive or reduced pressure from the customer's system into the city potable water system. 
F.  "Backflow prevention assembly" means an assembly or means designed to prevent backflow or back-siphonage. Backflow prevention assemblies included the following devices: 
1.  "Air gap separation (AG)" which is a physical break between the service connection and a receiving vessel on the customer's system, where all piping between the service connection and the receiving vessel is entirely visible and the air-gap separation is greater than one inch and at least double the diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically from the flood rim of the customer's receiving vessel to the supply pipe from the service connection. 
2.  "Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly (RP)" is an assembly consisting of two independently operating check valves with an automatically operating differential relief valve located between the two checks, a tightly closing shut-off valve on each side of the check valve assembly, and properly located test cocks for the testing of each check valve and the relief valve. 
3.  "Double check valve assembly (DC)" is an assembly of two independently operating, spring loaded check valves with tightly closing shut-off valves on each side of the check valve assembly and properly located test cocks for the testing of each check valve. 
G.  "Backpressure" means a condition in which the owner's system pressure is greater than the city water system pressure. 
H.  "Back-siphonage" means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances from the customer's system into the city potable water system caused by a reduction or loss of pressure within the city potable water system. 
I.  "Certified tester" means: 
1.  A person who is certified by the city to perform testing of backflow prevention devices, who has completed training and received certification by an AWWA sponsored backflow device testing certification program or the University of Southern California Backflow Prevention Device Testing School and who possesses a valid city business license. 
2.  A service representative of the manufacturer of the backflow-prevention device approved by the engineer and possessing a valid city business license. 
3.  All city personnel, as authorized by the engineer. 
J.  "City": means the city of Rohnert Park, California. 
K.  "City potable water system" means the potable water distribution system owned and operated by the city, including the service connection to a potable water main. 
L.  "Contamination" means an impairment of the quality of the water supply of the city potable water system by sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or other materials to a degree which creates an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. 
M.  "Cross-connection" means an unprotected actual or potential connection between the city potable water system and any source or system within a customer's premises and/or customer's system which contains water or any substance that is not or cannot be approved as a potable water supply. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel and changeover devices, or other devices through which backflow or back-siphonage could occur, shall be considered to be cross-connections. 
N.  "Customer" or "user" means any person obtaining water from the city water supply system. 
O.  "Customer's system" means the potable water piping system located immediately downstream from a meter. 
P.  "Degree of hazard" means the potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable water system. 
Q.  "Engineer" means the city engineer of the city, or a designee. 
R.  "Health agency" means the California Division of Drinking Water. 
S.  "Local health agency" means the Sonoma County Department of Health. 
T.  "Owner" means any person, who has legal title to, or a right to the use or occupancy of, a property. 
U.  "Nonpotable water" means water which is not safe for human consumption. 
V.  "Person" means any individual, partnership, company, public or private corporation, political subdivision or agency of the United States State of California or other governmental entity. 
W.  "Pollutant" means a foreign substance that, if permitted to get in the public water system, will degrade its quality so as to constitute a moderate hazard, or impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a degree which does not create an actual hazard to the public health but which does adversely and unreasonable affect such water for domestic use.. 
X.  "Potable water supply: means a water supply which, according to recognized standards and the public health authority having jurisdiction, is safe for human consumption. 
Y.  "Pollution" means an impairment of the quality of the potable water supply of the city. 
Z.  "Premises" means a piece of land together with such buildings and appurtenances located thereon. 
AA.  "Recycled water" means water which, as a result of treatment of waste, is suitable for uses other than potable use. 
BB.  "Service connection" or "user connection" means the water piping system and/or meter connecting the city potable water system to the customer's system. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.40.040 - Requirements for backflow prevention devices. 
A.  To comply with the California Code of Regulations, the city requires the installation of approved backflow prevention assemblies or air gaps, by and at the expense of the owner, when the degree of hazard in the customer's system so warrants, as solely determined by the city. 
B.  Backflow prevention devices or air-gaps of a type, manufacture and design approved by the engineer shall be installed by the customer on the customer's system in a location approved by the engineer in the following described categories: 
1.  Premises having an auxiliary water supply; 
2.  Premises and/or customer's systems within which any substance is handled under pressure or any other fashion that, in the opinion of the engineer, could potentially permit backflow or back-siphonage into the city potable water system, including water that originated from the city water system; 
3.  Premises and/or customer's systems which have more than one service connection and which, in the opinion of the engineer, contain cross-connections or the potential for cross-connections which could result in the pollution or the contamination of the city potable water system in the event of backflow or back-siphonage; 
4.  Premises and/or customer's systems which, in the opinion of the engineer, contain cross-connections or the potential for cross-connections which could result in the pollution or contamination of the potable city water system in the event of backflow or back-siphonage; 
5.  Premises and/or customer's systems where, in the opinion of the engineer, the potential for contamination is such as to require an air-gap separation system; 
6.  Premises having a gray water use system as defined by California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 5; and 
7.  Premises having a recycled water system as defined by the State of California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 4, Chapter 3. 
8.  On tank trucks and spray tanks of forty-nine gallons or more, that will connect to the city's system. 
9.  All temporary water cross connections, including but not limited to the use of fire hydrants or blow-offs for construction water, flushing lines, or similar purposes. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.04.050 - Ownership of backflow devices. 
Backflow-prevention devices and air-gaps shall be and remain the property of the customer. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.04.060 - Type of protection required. 
The type of backflow protection required shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard that exists on the customer's premises. The minimum types of backflow protection required to protect the public water supply, at the customer's water connection to premises with varying degrees of hazard are given in Table 1. The owner may choose a higher level of protection than required by the city. Situations which are not covered in Table 1 shall be evaluated on a case by case basis and the appropriate backflow protection shall be determined by the engineer. 
TABLE l 
TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED 
Degree of Hazard 	Minimum Level 
of Backflow 
Prevention 
A 	Sewage and Hazardous Substances 	
	Premises where the public water system is used to supplement the recycled water supply. 	AG 
	Premises where there are wastewater pumping and/or treatment plants and there is no inter-connection with the potable water system. This does not include a single family residence that has a sewage lift pump. 	AG 1 
	Premises where recycled water is used and there is no interconnection with the potable water system. 	AG 1 
	Premises where hazardous substances are handled in any manner in which the substances may enter a potable water system. This does not include a single family residence that has a sewage lift pump. 	AG 1 
	Premises where there are irrigation systems into which fertilizers, herbicides, or pesticides are, or can be, injected. 	RP 
B 	Auxiliary Water Supplies 	
	Premises where there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply which is interconnected with the public water system. 	AG 2 
	Premises where there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply and there are no interconnections with the public water system. 	RP 3 
C 	Fire Protection Systems 	
	Premises where the fire system is directly supplied from the public water system and there is an approved auxiliary water supply on or to the premises (not interconnected). 	DC 
	Premises where the fire system is supplied from the public water system and interconnected with an unapproved auxiliary water supply. 	AG 1 
	Premises where the fire system is supplied from the public water system and where either elevated storage tanks or fire pumps which take suction from the private reservoirs or tanks are used. 	DC 
D 	Premises where entry is restricted so that inspections for cross-connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency or at sufficiently short notice to assure that cross-connections do not exist. 	RP 
E 	Premises where there is a repeated history of cross-connections being established or re-established. 	RP 
F 	In the case of tankers and spray tanks of 49 gallons or more, including but not limited to fire. 	AG/RP 
1 	An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the city and the health agency. 
2 	A RP or DC may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the city and the health agency. 
3 	A DC may be provided in lieu of a RP if approved by the city and the health agency. 
 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.04.070 - Installation of backflow devices. 
A.  New Service Connections. 
1.  At the time of application for potable water service, the engineer will review said application to determine the need for a backflow-prevention device or air-gap. If the engineer determines that a backflow-prevention device or air-gap is required, it shall be the customer's responsibility at customer's expense to provide for installation of an approved backflow-prevention device or air-gap in accordance with city standards and at a location approved by the engineer. 
2.  Installation of a backflow-prevention device or air-gap, where required by the city, shall be a condition of city potable water service and meter installation. 
B.  Existing Service Connections without Backflow-Prevention Devices or Air-Gaps. The city may inspect the premises of existing customers which, in the opinion of the engineer, may require a backflow-prevention device or air-gap. If the engineer determines that a backflow-prevention device or air-gap is required, the installation of an approved device or air-gap shall be a condition of continued potable water service from the city potable water system to the premises and/or customer's systems. 
C.  Upgrading of Existing Backflow-Prevention Devices or Air-Gaps. An existing backflow-prevention device or air-gap which, in the opinion of the engineer, is a non-approved device or air-gap that does not provide adequate protection for the degree of potential hazard from the backflow or back-siphonage from a premises and/or customer's systems, shall be upgraded at the customer's expense. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.04.080 - Testing, maintenance and repair of backflow devices. 
A.  The customer on any premises where backflow-prevention devices are installed shall be responsible for maintenance and repair of the devices. The customer shall at all times maintain the devices in proper working order as a condition of continued city potable water service. 
B.  Customers' backflow-prevention devices shall be inspected and tested by a certified tester at least once a year. Where the engineer determines that there is a potential for backflow or back-siphonage, the engineer may require inspection and testing of the backflow-prevention devices at more frequent intervals. Inspections and tests shall be at the customers' expense. 
C.  Backflow-prevention devices which fail to pass inspection or testing by a certified tester shall be repaired within thirty days after notification of test results. 
D.  Repairs and satisfactory retest of devices by a private certified tester shall be documented and submitted on a form provided by the city. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
Chapter 13.05 - WATER WASTE AND WATER SHORTAGE CONTINGENCY PLAN 
 
13.05.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the efficient use of the water and recycled water supply provided by the city; to eliminate the intentional or unintentional waste of water when a reasonable alternative solution is available; to prohibit the use of equipment that is wasteful and to outline the city's policy with respect to water shortages. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all persons, customers, and property served by the city. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.05.020 - Nonessential uses. 
No customer of the city shall use or permit the use of city potable or recycled water supply for the following nonessential uses: 
A.  The washing of sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots and other hard-surfaced areas by direct hosing, except as may be necessary to properly dispose of flammable or other dangerous liquids or substances, wash away spills that present a trip and fall hazard, or to reduce or eliminate materials dangerous to the public health and safety. 
B.  The escape of water through breaks or leaks within the customer's plumbing or private distribution system for a period of time greater than seventy-two hours after discovery of the break or leak or receipt of notice from the city. 
C.  Irrigation in a manner or to an extent which allows excessive runoff of water or unreasonable over-spray of the areas being watered. 
D.  Washing cars, boats, trailers or other vehicles and machinery directly with a hose not equipped with a shutoff nozzle. 
E.  Water for non-recycling decorative water fountains. 
F.  Water for single pass evaporative cooling systems for air conditioning in all connections installed after the effective date of this chapter, unless required for health or safety reasons. 
G.  Water for new non-recirculating conveyor car wash systems. 
H.  Water for new non-recirculating industrial clothes washing systems. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.05.030 - Water shortage contingency plan. 
The city will at all times have a water shortage contingency plan which will be prepared, maintained and updated by the city engineer, or designee. The water shortage contingency plan shall, at a minimum, be reviewed every five years in association with the approval of the city's urban water management plan. 
The purpose of the water shortage contingency plan is to detail the voluntary and mandatory actions that the city will require to respond to water shortages caused by drought or other natural or manmade disaster. The water shortage contingency plan shall comply with state and local rules and regulations related to drought and water shortages as they may be adopted or changed from time to time. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.05.040 - Exempt water uses. 
All water use associated with the operation and maintenance of fire suppression equipment or employed by the city for water quality flushing and sanitation purposes shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.05.050 - Exceptions. 
Any customer of the city may make written application for an exception to the requirements of this chapter. Said application shall describe in detail why applicant believes an exception is justified based on unique hardship or circumstances. Generalized economic hardship alleged to result from the provisions of this chapter shall not be a reason for granting an exception. 
A.  The city manager may grant exceptions for use of water otherwise prohibited by this section, upon finding and determining that failure to do so would cause an emergency condition affecting the health, sanitation, fire protection or safety of the applicant or public; or, cause a unique, unnecessary and undue hardship on applicant or the public. 
B.  The decision of the city manager may be appealed to the city council by submitting a written appeal to the city clerk within fifteen calendar days of the date of the decision. If the exception is granted by the city council on appeal, the city council may impose any conditions it determines to be just and proper. Exceptions granted by the city council shall be prepared in writing and the city council may require the exception be recorded at applicant's expense. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
Chapter 13.06 - WATER AND RECYCLED WATER SYSTEMS—VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
13.06.010 - Violation—General provisions. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or institution to make or cause to refuse to comply with the provisions of Chapters 13.02 through 13.05 of this municipal code, governing the operation and use of the Rohnert Park city potable and recycled water systems. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.06.020 - Violation—Tampering with city property. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or institution to make or cause to be made any connection with or to the city water system or recycled water system unless authorized by the city. 
B.  No one except an employee or representative of the city shall at any time in any manner operate the curb or main valves, or remove and/or tamper with locking devices of the city's system; or interfere with meters or their connections, street mains or other parts of the water system. 
C.  Penalty for tampering: 
1.  First offense: Five hundred dollars. 
2.  Second offense: One thousand dollars. 
3.  Third offense: One thousand dollars. 
4.  Subsequent offenses: One thousand dollars. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.06.030 - Violation—Termination of service. 
A.  The city may terminate water and/or recycled water service to a customer for noncompliance with Chapters 13.02 through 13.05 of this municipal code and any other adopted ordinances, rules and regulations of the city, if the customer fails to comply within five days after receiving written notice of the city's intention to discontinue service. 
B.  The city may terminate water and/or recycled water service immediately and without notice to the customer when the customer's noncompliance constitutes an immediate danger to the health, safety and welfare of the public and/or to the operation, maintenance, or costs of operation and maintenance of the city's water or recycled water systems. 
C.  The city may refuse to furnish water and/or recycled water and may terminate water and/or recycled water service to any premises where apparatus, appliances, or equipment using water and/or recycled water furnished by the city are dangerous, unsafe, or not in conformity with any laws, ordinances and/or rules of the city, county, state or federal government. 
D.  The city may refuse to furnish water and/or recycled water and may terminate water and/or recycled water service to any customer whose current demand greatly exceeds past averages or seasonal use, and where such current demand threatens the public health, safety of welfare and the city's ability to provide service to one or more other customers. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.06.040 - Violation—Additional remedy. 
A.  Any violation of Chapters 13.02 through 13.05 of this municipal code and any other adopted ordinances, rules and regulations of the city shall be enforced as an infraction in accordance with Chapter 1.24 of this code. Every day any violation of this chapter continues is a separate offense. 
B.  As an additional remedy, the violation of any provision of this chapter by any person who has received more than one written warning to refrain from the same or any other violation under this chapter in one calendar year shall be deemed and is declared to be a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement in accordance with Chapter 1.24 of this code. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.06.050 - Violation—Appeal. 
Any person or customer of the city may make a written appeal of any alleged violation of Chapters 13.02 through 13.05 of this municipal code in accordance with procedures outlined in Chapter 1.25 of this code. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
Chapter 13.08 - SEWER USE ORDINANCE—PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY[2] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 834, § 1, adopted Feb. 22, 2011, repealed Ch. 13.08, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, Ch. 13.08 pertained to similar subject matter. See Ordinance List and Disposition Table for derivation. 
 
13.08.010 - Short title. 
The ordinances codified in Chapters 13.08 through 13.52 shall be known as the "sewer use ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 834, § 1, 2-22-2011)  
13.08.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the sewer use ordinance is to regulate the use of the city sewage collection system to avoid misuse and to comply with applicable state and federal requirements. The ordinance includes provisions for control of sewer construction, source control of toxic substances, and the monitoring and control of the quality and quantity of industrial wastes. The ordinance requires charges for use of the sewerage system, including the city's collection system, pump station and interceptors and the subregional system's treatment, disposal, and reclamation system. The ordinance includes provisions for enforcement and penalties for violations. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 1, 2-22-2011)  
13.08.030 - Applicability. 
The sewer use ordinance shall apply to all property within the city and to all property served through an outside service agreement. The sewer use ordinance shall remain in effect unless and until repealed, amended or modified by the city council in accordance with applicable state and local laws and procedures. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 1, 2-22-2011)  
13.08.040 - Violations unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to connect to, reconnect to, install, provide, maintain, or use any portion of the city's sewer system except as provided by this sewer use ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 1, 2-22-2011)  
13.08.050 - Ministerial permit issuance. 
The city has determined that the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit pursuant to the provisions of this sewer use ordinance is a ministerial act. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 1, 2-22-2011)  
Chapter 13.12 - ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINITIONS[3] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 834, § 2, adopted Feb. 22, 2011, repealed Ch. 13.12, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, Ch. 13.12 pertained to Definitions. See Ordinance List and Disposition Table for derivation. 
 
13.12.010 - Abbreviations 
For purposes of this sewer use ordinance, the following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
AO—Administrative Order 
BMP—Best Management Practices 
BOD—Biochemical Oxygen Demand 
BTEX—Benzene, Toluene, Ethylbenzene, Xylene 
C°—Centigrade 
CFR—Code of Federal Regulations 
CIU—Categorical Industrial User 
COD—Chemical Oxygen Demand 
EPA—Environmental Protection Agency 
F°—Fahrenheit 
gpd—Gallons Per Day 
MGD—Million Gallons per Day 
mg/l—Milligrams per Liter 
NOV—Notice of Violation 
NPDES—National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
O&M—Operations and Maintenance 
POTW—Publicly Owned Treatment Works 
RCRA—Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
SIC—Standard Industrial Classification 
SIU—Significant Industrial User 
SNC—Significant Non-Compliance 
SWDA—Solid Waste Disposal Act 
TDS—Total Dissolved Solids 
TKN—Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen 
TSS—Total Suspended Solids 
TTO—Total Toxic Organics 
USC—United States Code 
(Ord. No. 834, § 2, 2-22-2011)  
13.12.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this sewer use ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this Section: 
(1)  "Act" means Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1251, et seq., or as amended. 
(2)  "Administrator" means the appropriate Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Regional Administrator (San Francisco EPA, Region IX). 
(3)  "Amalgam Separator" means a device that employs filtration, settlement, centrifugation, or ion exchange to remove amalgam and its metal constituents from a dental office vacuum system before it discharges to the sewer. 
(4)  "Amalgam Waste" means and includes any of the following without limitation: non-contact amalgam (amalgam scrap that has not been in contact with the patient); contact amalgam (including, but not limited to, extracted teeth containing amalgam); amalgam sludge captured by chair-side traps, vacuum pump filters, screens, and other amalgam trapping devices; used amalgam capsules; and leaking or unusable amalgam capsules. 
(5)  "Applicant" means a person or entity making an application for a permit that is an occupant and/or owner, or an occupant and/or owner's authorized representative of the premises to be served by the sewer for which a permit is required. 
(6)  "Approval authority" means the Program Director in a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) state with an approved state pretreatment program. 
(7)  "Authorized Representative" of the applicant or user. 
(a)  If the applicant or user is a corporation: 
(i)  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
(ii)  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facility employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $60 million (in fourth-quarter 2005 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(b)  If the applicant or user is a partnership, association, or sole proprietorship: an authorized representative shall mean a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(c)  If the applicant or user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: an authorized representative shall mean a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(d)  The individuals described in paragraphs (a) through (c) may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city's development services section. 
(e)  A user not falling within one of the above categories must designate as the authorized representative an individual responsible for the overall operation of the facility. 
(8)  "Average dry weather flow" (ADWF) means the mean daily volume of sewage during the period of time not influenced by rainfall. 
(9)  "Best available technology (BAT)" means the most efficient hardware, fixtures and systems as determined by the city engineer for reduction of the amount of wastewater volume or pollutants. 
(10)  "Best Management Practices" (BMP) means schedules of activities, prohibition of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce unintended discharges to the sanitary sewer system. BMPs include, but are not limited to, pretreatment requirements, operational procedures and practices, maintenance and repair of equipment, record keeping, containment to prevent spills or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, good housekeeping practices or diversion of water away from raw materials or chemical storage areas. 
(11)  "BOD" means biochemical oxygen demand as determined by the 5-day BOD in accordance with standards set forth in 40 CFR Part 136, or as amended. 
(12)  "Building" means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy as determined by the city engineer. 
(13)  "Building sewer" means a sewer serving a specific building or property extending from two feet outside the building to either the street lateral or the private sewer. Often referred to as a building lateral. 
(14)  "Business" means all commercial uses, including but not limited to offices, merchandising and industrial uses. 
(15)  "Categorical pretreatment standards" means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA under Section 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act applicable to industrial users. 
(16)  "Categorical User or Categorical Industrial User (CIU)" means all industrial users that are subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR Part 403.6 and in any industry as defined in 40 CFR Parts 405-599, as amended. 
(17)  "City" means the City of Rohnert Park, Sonoma County, California. 
(18)  "City Engineer" means the city engineer for the city, or his or her designee. 
(19)  "City Manager" means the city manager for the city or his or her designee. 
(20)  "City sewer" means any public sewer located within an easement or public right-of-way that is maintained by the city. 
(21)  "City sewerage system" means the sewerage system that is maintained by the city. 
(22)  "City Standards" means the "City of Rohnert Park Manual of Standards, Details and Specifications, as may be amended from time to time, on file with the city engineer. 
(23)  "COD" means chemical oxygen demand as determined in accordance with standard analytical procedures. 
(24)  "Color" means the optical density at the visual wave length of maximum absorption, relative to distilled water. One hundred percent transmittance is equivalent to zero optical density. 
(25)  "Common interest development" means either: 
(a)  A development characterized by individual ownership of a condominium unit (for residential or nonresidential use), coupled with the shared ownership or right to use common areas and facilities, including a shared building sewer connection to the city sewer; 
(b)  Individual properties that share a building sewer connection to the city sewer through private agreements or easements, or 
(c)  A development or individual properties that own, use or are responsible for the maintenance of a private sewer. 
(26)  "Compliance Schedule" means a detailed time schedule of specific actions that a user is required to take to prevent or correct a violation of any prohibitions or limitations prescribed herein or any of the city's effluent limitations or pretreatment standards promulgated in accordance herewith. 
(27)  "Composite Sample" means the sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow proportional or time. 
(28)  "Connected" means a physical joinder of any plumbing or drainage system or fixture contained in any structure to the subregional sewer system. 
(29)  "Contamination" means an impairment of the quality of the waters of the state by waste to a degree that creates a hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. 
(30)  "Cooling Water" means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat and other minor chemical constituents. 
(31)  "Cooling Water, Non-contact" means water used for cooling that does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
(32)  "Council" means the City Council of the City of Rohnert Park, Sonoma County, California. 
(33)  "Customer" means a person who is, or who has agreed to be, responsible for the payment of water or sewer service charges. 
(34)  "Discharger" is synonymous with "User." 
(35)  "Dissolved solids" means the residue upon evaporation of water after filtration in accordance with standards set forth in 40 CFR Part 136, or as amended, or any other test procedures approved by the Administrator. Dissolved solids are also termed total dissolved solids or "TDS." 
(36)  "Domestic Wastewater" Wastewater or sewage from restrooms and sanitary conveniences of domestic households and businesses originating from toilets, urinals, kitchens, bathrooms, showers, baths, basins and laundries and does not include industrial or agricultural wastewater. 
(37)  "Enforcement Response Plan" (ERP) means the mechanism for addressing applicable local, state, or federal violations. The ERP shall include a written description of each type of enforcement, when to administer it, and how the monitoring schedule is affected. In conjunction with the written description, there may be an ERP flow chart that maps out the path through the various levels of enforcement. 
(38)  "EPA" means the Environmental Protection Agency. 
(39)  "Existing Source" means any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards under Section 307 (b) and (c) of the Act that will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act. 
(40)  "Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972" means Public Law 92-500, officially entitled the "Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972," or as amended, as well as guidelines, limitations, and standards promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency. 
(41)  "Garbage" means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage, and sale of food products. 
(42)  "Grab Sample" means a sample that is taken from a waste stream without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
(43)  "Holding Tank Waste" means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
(44)  "Improvement" means that which is built or constructed, an edifice of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. Improvement shall not include "building" as defined above and temporary on-site storm basins, but shall include the playing area of any non-enclosed sport facility or restricted sport field. 
(45)  "Indirect discharge" means the introduction of pollutants into a POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act. 
(46)  "Industrial cost recovery" means the portion of annual capital cost recovery allocable to industry and subject to federal industrial payback. 
(47)  "Industrial user" means a source of indirect discharge including SIUs and other industry. For purposes of federal industrial cost recovery and payback provisions, any user of a publicly owned treatment works identified in the U.S. "Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972," under the following divisions: 
Division A 	Agriculture, Forestry, 
and Fishing 
Division B 	Mining 
Division D 	Manufacturing 
Division E 	Transportations, Communications, Electric, Gas, and Sanitary Services 
Division I 	Services 
 
Users in these divisions may be excluded from the industrial user category if it is determined that they will introduce primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences. 
(48)  "Industrial wastewater" means the waterborne waste and waste water from any production, manufacturing or processing operation of whatever nature including institutional and commercial operations where water is used for the removal of significant quantities of wastes other than from human habitation of premises connected to the public sewers. Contents of chemical toilets, septic tanks, waste holding tanks and waste sumps shall be classified as industrial waste. 
(49)  "Infiltration" means water entering the sewer system through the ground. 
(50)  "Inflow" means water entering a sewer system from surface drainage and from clean cooling water from non-contact cooling systems. 
(51)  "Maximum Allowable Discharge Limit" means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composite samples collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
(52)  "Interceptor" means a grease removal device designed to intercept, trap, or otherwise prevent grease, sand, flammable liquids, or other substances potentially harmful to the sewer system from entering the system. 
(53)  "Force Main Interceptor" means the portion of the City sewer that connects the city's terminal pump station to the subregional system's water recycling plant. 
(54)  "Interference" means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both: 
(a)  Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use, or disposal; and 
(b)  Causes a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or prevents sludge use or disposal in compliance with statutory provisions, regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations) including without limitation: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including regulations contained in any State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
(55)  "Local Limits" means the technically and/or literature-based limits, expressed either as concentration or as mass, of those pollutants. 
(56)  "Lot" means any premises, piece or parcel of land or property as bounded, defined or shown upon a map, plat or deed recorded in the office of the County Recorder. However, in the event any building or improvements appurtenant to said building cover more area than a "lot", as defined above, the term "lot" shall be deemed to be and include all such pieces or parcels of land upon which said buildings or improvements are wholly or partly located. 
(57)  "Medical Waste" means isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
(58)  "National Pretreatment Standard" or "National Categorical Pretreatment Standard" means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307 (b) and (c) of the Act, which applies to industrial users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to 40 CFR, Part 403.5. 
(59)  "Natural outlet" means any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, pond, lake, or other body of surface or groundwater. 
(60)  "New source" means: 
(a)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under 307(c) of the Act, which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
(i)  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site or on a lot at which no other source is located; 
(ii)  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
(iii)  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site or lot. The city engineer shall determine whether the production or wastewater generating processes are substantially independent, taking into account these factors as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, or 
(b)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located resulting in a modification of said source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(c)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the applicant, user or customer has either: 
(i)  Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
(ii)  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which is intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection. 
(61)  "Nonresidential users" includes those whose premises are used primarily for commercial, governmental, or other nonresidential activities but excludes those whose premises are used for industrial activities. 
(62)  "NPDES permit" means National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit issued to a POTW pursuant to Section 402 of the Act. 
(63)  "Nuisance" means any condition caused, maintained or permitted to exist which constitutes a threat to public health, safety, and welfare that is injurious to the senses or that significantly obstructs, injures or interferes with the reasonable or free use of property in a neighborhood, community or to any considerable number of persons. A public nuisance also has the same meaning as set forth under the California Civil Code. 
(64)  "Pass-through" means any discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit or waste discharge requirements, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
(65)  "Peak wet weather flow" (PWWF) means peak rate of flow occurring during or from the effects of precipitation. 
(66)  "Person" means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or the legal representatives, agents, or assigns of such entities. Person includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
(67)  "pH" means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration and indicates the measure of acidity or alkalinity. 
(68)  "Pollutant" includes but is not limited to dredge soil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TDS, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor) as well as any other referenced pollutants in 40 CFR or as amended. 
(69)  "Pollution" means an alteration of the quality of the waters of the state by waste to a degree that unreasonably affects such waters for beneficial use or facilities which serve such beneficial uses. 
(70)  "Premises" means a parcel of real property, or portion thereof, including any improvement thereon, which is determined by the city engineer to be a single unit for the purposes of receiving, using, and paying for sewerage service. 
(71)  "Pretreatment" means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration may be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes, process changes or by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR Part 403.6 (d), or as amended. 
(72)  "Pretreatment requirements" means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard, imposed on an industrial user. 
(73)  "Pretreatment Standards" or "Standards" means discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local standards and limits. 
(74)  "Private Sewer" means a common sewer privately owned that connects one or more building sewers to the public sewer. A private sewer includes sewer main, manholes and all appurtenances. 
(75)  "Prohibited Discharge Standards" or "Prohibited Discharges" means prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances. 
(76)  "Public agency" means any of the following: the United States Government or any department or agency thereof; the State of California or any department or agency thereof; any city, county, town, or any department or agencies thereof; any school district; any other governmental or public district or entity; or any other legal public district, entity or entities; or any combination of the foregoing. 
(77)  "Publicly owned treatment works" (POTW) means a treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Act that is owned and/or operated by a state or municipality. This includes any devices and systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of the municipal sewage or industrial wastewater of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes, and other conveyances if they convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant. 
(78)  "Public Sewer" means the common sewer directly controlled and owned by a public authority. 
(79)  "Regional Water Quality Control Board" means the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, North Coastal Region, which has jurisdiction in the Rohnert Park area. 
(80)  "Residential user" means users whose premises are primarily for residential purposes and have no significant producing or processing activity of a commercial or industrial nature. 
(81)  "Sanitary sewer" means the same as sewer. 
(82)  " Seasonal flow" is defined as an industrial wastewater discharge during any 15 day period during which the average volume and/or strength of any regulated wastewater characteristic exceeds the respective yearly averages by 50%. 
(83)  "Septic Tank Waste" means any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. (See Holding Tank Waste.) 
(84)  "Sewage" means the water-borne wastes received from human habitation and use of premises for residential, business, institutional, commercial and industrial purposes. 
(85)  "Sewer" means a pipe or conduit that carries sewage and/or industrial wastes and to which storm, surface, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. Unless otherwise qualified, the word "sewer," when used in Chapters 13.08 through 13.52, shall be taken to mean "sanitary sewer." 
(86)  "Sewer lateral" means the same as "Sewer service lateral." 
(87)  "Sewer main" means the portion of the sewer that collects and conveys flow from the sewer laterals to the city's terminal pump station. A sewer main can be a " public sewer" or a "private sewer." 
(88)  "Sewer service charges" means fees, rolls, rates, rentals, or other charges for services and facilities furnished by the city in connection with the sanitation or sewage system. They shall include user charges and industrial cost recovery charges as defined under U.S. Public Law 92-500. 
(89)  "Sewer service lateral" means that portion of the sewer system that connects the user's premises to the public sewer or a private sewer. This includes the building sewer and the street lateral. 
(90)  "Sewer or sanitary overflow" means any overflow, spill, release, discharge or diversion of untreated or partially treated wastewater that may or may not reach water of the United States or that may or may not cause wastewater backups into buildings or onto private property. 
(91)  "Sewer system" or "Sewerage system" means all works for collecting, pumping, treating, disposing, storing, and reclaiming sewage. 
(92)  "Significant industrial user" (SIU) means a user subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR Part 403.6 and in any industry as defined in 40 CFR Parts 405-471 or a user that: 
(a)  Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
(b)  Contributes a process wastestream that makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW; or 
(c)  Is designated as such by the City Engineer on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement (in accordance with 40 CFR Part 403.8(f)(6)). 
(93)  "Sludge" means a primarily organic solid product produced by wastewater treatment processes that can be beneficially recycled. 
(94)  "Slug Discharge" or "Slug" means a discharge capable of causing adverse impacts to the city, its workers, or the environment, or any pollutant including an oxygen-demanding pollutant released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration that may cause interference with the operation of the city sewer system. This includes, but is not limited to, any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste, which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen minutes, more than five times the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flow rate during normal operation. A slug discharge is considered to be a discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge. Batch discharges are intentional, controllable discharges that occur periodically within an industrial user's process (typically the result of a non-continuous process). Accidental spills are unintentional, largely uncontrolled discharges that may result from leaks or spills of storage containers or manufacturing processes in an area with access to floor drains. 
(95)  "Standard analytical procedures" means procedures contained in the latest editions of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" (American Public Health Association), in American Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM) standard and tentative methods, EPA 40 CFR 136, and other standard procedures appropriate to the conditions as set forth or approved by the EPA. 
(96)  "Standard Industrial Classification or SIC" means a classification pursuant to the latest published edition of the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget used to promote the comparability of industries. 
(97)  "State" means the state of California. 
(98)  "Street lateral" means the portion of the City sewer that connects the sewer main to the building sewer at the property line. 
(99)  "Subregional system" means the Santa Rosa Subregional Water Reclamation System service area, a POTW, which includes the Cities of Santa Rosa, Rohnert Park, Sebastopol, Cotati, and the Sonoma County South Park Sanitation District. 
(100)  "Suspended solids" (SS) means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering per standards set forth in 40 CFR Part 136 or any other test procedure approved by the Administrator or City Engineer. 
(101)  "Television Inspection" means an inspection with a television camera that allows viewing of the inside main or lateral and recording of the images in accordance with city standards. 
(102)  "Total Dissolved Solids (TDS)" means the residue upon evaporation of water after filtration. Standards for analysis are set forth in 40 CFR Part 136. 
(103)  "Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen (TKN)" means ammonia as nitrogen, as measured by the Kjeldahl method. Standards for analysis are set forth in 40 CFR Part 136. 
(104)  "Toxic Pollutant" means one of the pollutants or combinations of pollutants listed as toxic under Section 307 of the Act. 
(105)  "Trade secret" means a method or process, not patented, but known only to persons using it in producing an article of trade or a service having commercial value. 
(106)  "User" means any person who is owner of record, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, or responsible for property having a connection to a city sewer or for processes that contribute sewage or industrial wastewater to a city sewer. See also "industrial user." 
(107)  "User agency" means a public agency which by agreement with the city is served by and acquires a capacity service in the city sewerage system. 
(108)  "Waste" includes sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, gaseous, or radioactive associated with human habitation, or of human or animal origin, or from any producing, manufacturing or processing operation of whatever nature. See also "industrial wastewater." 
(109)  "Waste Hauler" means persons who haul wastewater from a domestic, commercial, industrial, or other origin as approved by the city engineer to the POTW. Domestic sources include chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, or cesspools. 
(110)  "Wastewater" means the liquid and water-carried industrial wastewater, or sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed to the city sewer system. 
(111)  "Wastewater Discharge Permit" means the written permit or mechanism by which new or increased contributions of pollutants, or changes in the nature of pollutants, to the subregional system by industrial users, may be controlled to ensure compliance with applicable pretreatment standards, pretreatment requirements, or city local limits. 
(112)  "Wastewater Treatment Plant or Treatment Plant" means that portion of the POTW that is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial wastewater. 
(113)  "Water quality requirements" means requirements for City's treatment plant effluent or that of the Santa Rosa subregional system upon connection thereto as established by the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit, or by state or federal regulatory agencies for the protection of receiving water quality. Water quality requirements include effluent limitations and waste discharge standards, limitations, or prohibitions that may be established or adopted from time to time by state or federal laws or regulatory agencies. 
(114)  "Waters of the State" or "Receiving Waters" means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 2, 2-22-2011)  
Chapter 13.16 - SEWERS—GENERAL PROVISIONS[4] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 834, § 3, adopted Feb. 22, 2011, repealed Ch. 13.16, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, Ch. 13.16 pertained to similar subject matter. See Ordinance List and Disposition Table for derivation. 
 
13.16.010 - Sewer connection required when available. 
(A)  Sewer Connection. The owner of any parcel used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other human purpose that utilizes a private sewage system and is situated within the city and abutting on any street or easement in which there is situated a sanitary sewer within 200 feet of the property line closest to the available sewer, and designed to serve such parcel is required to install, at his or her sole expense, a connection with the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this title within 90 days after date of official notice by the city engineer to do so. This requirement also pertains to the construction of an additional unit on the existing parcel. Such official notice may inform the owner that no person may construct, excavate, maintain, cause, allow or permit to be constructed, excavated, or maintained on any parcels, any private sewage system, sewer pipes or other pipes or conduits, including residential graywater systems as defined by Chapter 22, Section 14875 et seq., of the California Water Code, for the treatment and discharge of sewage or impure waters, gas, vapor, oils, acids, tar or any other matter or substance offensive, injurious or dangerous to the public health, safety, or general welfare. 
(B)  Abandonment of Private Sewer Disposal System. Within ninety days of connecting to the city sewer, any private sewage disposal system on the property shall be abandoned in accordance with the requirements of the county health officer. It is unlawful to construct, reconstruct, relocate or alter any privy, privy vault, cesspool, septic tank or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sanitary sewage within the city without the express written permission of the city engineer and the county health officer. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 3, 2-22-2011)  
13.16.020 - Outside service area connections—Written agreement required. 
(A)  As a condition to the approval of the connection of property situated outside the corporate limits of the City to the City sewer, the owner of such property or his or her authorized agent must enter into a written agreement with the City that includes at least the following provisions: 
(1)  A provision that the connection shall be at the sole expense of the owners of the property; 
(2)  A provision that the owners of the property shall pay all applicable capacity fees and public facilities fees and other City fees related to impacts of providing capacity; 
(3)  A provision that the owners of the property or their successors in interest shall pay sewer service charges; 
(4)  A provision that the owners of the property or their successors shall comply the requirements of the Chapters 13.08 through 13.52 of this code, the Uniform Building Code, the California Plumbing Code and other applicable regulations adopted by the City, applicable City Standards and the plans and specification for the construction approved by the City Engineer. Absence of this provision in the service agreement does not relieve owners of property served by the City from complying with Chapters 13.08 through 13.52 of this code; and 
(5)  Provisions for the default and termination of the agreement. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 3, 2-22-2011)  
13.16.030 - Connection to force main interceptor. 
No connections to the force main interceptor shall be permitted except in accordance with the provisions of the 1975 Subregional System Agreement for Use of Santa Rosa Subregional Sewerage System between the City of Santa Rosa and the cities of Cotati, Rohnert Park, Sebastopol and the South Park County Sanitation District, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 3, 2-22-2011)  
13.16.040 - Connection of surface or subsurface drains. 
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, area drains, foundation drains, or other surface or subsurface runoff or groundwater to a city sewer, building sewer, sewer lateral or any line that is directly or indirectly connected to a city sewer. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 3, 2-22-2011)  
13.16.050 - Discharge to city sewer and laterals. 
No person may discharge to the city sewer through any cleanout or manhole without the express written permission of the city engineer. Requests must be made in writing and are subject to the sole discretion of the city engineer whose determination shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 3, 2-22-2011)  
13.16.060 - Compliance with laws and regulations. 
It is unlawful to discharge any sewage, industrial waste or other polluted waters into any storm drain. Discharge of waste from any premises within the City onto land or to any natural outlet may be permitted only if the discharge complies with all requirements of the Regional Water Quality Control Board and all other local, state and federal laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 3, 2-22-2011)  
13.16.070 - Nonlimitation of additional requirements. 
Nothing contained in Chapters 13.08 through 13.52 of this code shall be construed to limit any additional requirements that may be imposed by the county health officer, the Regional Water Quality Control Board, the state, the federal government, or any other governmental agencies having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 3, 2-22-2011)  
13.16.090 - Conflict with state law. 
Whenever the requirements of this sewer use ordinance conflict with the California Plumbing Code, the requirements of the California Plumbing Code shall govern unless such requirements have been modified in the manner required by law and findings for such modifications have been filed with the California Building Standards Commission. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 3, 2-22-2011)  
Chapter 13.24 - DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF CITY SEWERS* 
Sections: 
 
13.24.010 - Conformity to design standards. 
All design and construction of city sewers shall conform to the requirements of Chapters 13.08 to 13.52 of this code, the California Plumbing Code and other applicable regulations adopted by the city, applicable city standards and the plans and specifications for the construction approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 789 § 5 (part), 2007)  
13.24.020 - Construction or alteration—Permit required. 
Construction, alteration, or connection to any city sewer or appurtenances shall be made by an appropriately licensed contractor. All applicable permits including those required by this chapter, Chapter 12.04, "Encroachments" and Chapter 15.08, "Building Code," of the municipal code shall be obtained for the work. 
(Ord. 789 § 5 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 13.26 - SEWER LATERALS AND PRIVATE SEWERS[5] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 834, § 4, adopted Feb. 22, 2011, repealed Ch. 13.26, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, Ch. 13.26 pertained to Sewer Laterals. See Ordinance List and Disposition Table for derivation. 
 
13.26.010 - Conformity to design standards. 
All design and construction of sewer laterals, including the portion of the sewer lateral located on private property, shall conform to the requirements of Chapters 13.08 through 13.52 of this code, the California Plumbing Code and other applicable regulations adopted by the city, applicable city standards and the plans and specifications for the construction approved by the city engineer. Every sewer lateral shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
(A)  It shall not be connected to roof downspouts, area drains, foundation drains or other sources of surface water or groundwater runoff; 
(B)  Its joints shall be tight and all pipes shall be free from structural defects, cracks, breaks, openings, and missing portions to prevent ex-filtration of sewage or infiltration by groundwater or storm water; 
(C)  Its grade shall be uniform without sags or offsets; 
(D)  It shall have a two-way cleanout located at or near the property line or at or near the sewer main easement, which shall be securely capped at all times. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 4, 2-22-2011)  
13.26.020 - Construction or Alteration—Permit Required. 
Construction, alteration, replacement or repair of any sewer lateral or appurtenances shall be made by an appropriately licensed contractor or by the legal owner of the property to the extent allowed by state law. All applicable permits, including those required by this chapter, Chapter 12.04, "Encroachments" and Chapter 15.04, "General Provisions and Penalties" of this code shall be obtained before commencing any such work. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 4, 2-22-2011)  
13.26.025 - Discovery and Repair of Illegal Connections. 
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, areaway drains, foundation drains, or other sources of surface water runoff or groundwater to a sewer service lateral that is connected to, either directly or indirectly, a public sanitary sewer. 
(A)  As part of its periodic construction and maintenance of sewer mains or laterals, the city may discover illegal connections of roof downspouts, areaway drains, foundation drains or other sources of surface water runoff or groundwater. The city may order the property owner to remove the illegal connection and inspect, repair or replace any lateral or portion of the lateral that has been affected by the illegal connection. 
(B)  In the absence of a specific deadline established by the City Engineer, all repair or removal work to eliminate the illegal connection shall be completed within 30 days of notification by the city that an illegal connection has been discovered. Notification pursuant to this section shall be in writing and either personally delivered or sent to the property owner via certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(C)  If it becomes necessary to repair or replace any portion of the sewer lateral during the process of eliminating the illegal connection, such repair or replacement must be done in accordance with Section 13.26.045. 
(D)  The city may impose civil administrative penalties against a property owner who fails to perform any act required in this section. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 4, 2-22-2011)  
13.26.030 - Responsibilities for Sewer Laterals. 
(A)  The user shall be responsible for maintaining a clear, unobstructed sewer service lateral from the user's premises to the city sewer. The owner of any premises is responsible for the maintenance of the sewer service lateral, including both the building sewer and the street lateral. The owner shall perform all necessary maintenance to keep the sewer service lateral free from roots, grease deposits, and other solids that may impede the flow or obstruct the transmission of sewage. 
(B)  The owner of any premises is also responsible for the condition, maintenance, operation and repair of the building sewer. The owner shall perform all necessary repairs, including replacement, of the building sewer to keep it in good condition and free from structural defects, cracks, breaks, openings, and missing portions. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 4, 2-22-2011)  
13.26.040 - Requirements for Building Sewer Repair and Replacement. 
(A)  Repair. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the premises to repair and/or replace any building sewer which has been found to exhibit conditions that would permit infiltration or inflow to enter the sewer system. All repair and replacement work shall conform to the applicable city standards, including testing standards. 
(B)  Notice of Required Correction. Should the city engineer determine that a building sewer does not meet the standards of this code, the city engineer shall give a minimum of thirty days written notice to owner of the premises to correct said violation. The city engineer may allow for a reasonable correction schedule. The notice shall also provide that the city will affect the required repairs if not completed by the owner of the premises within the required timeframe and that the city shall be entitled to recover its costs for such repairs. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 4, 2-22-2011)  
13.26.045 - Maintenance, Inspection and Repair of Sewer Laterals 
(A)  Property owners shall inspect, and if found defective, repair or replace the building sewer or clean the sewer service lateral as follows: 
(1)  Whenever the city finds that a sewage overflow emanating from a sewer service lateral has reached public property, including but not limited to a city street or the city storm drain system, or had flowed onto private property owned by another property owner; 
(2)  Whenever the city finds that a sewage overflow emanating from a sewer service lateral presents a threat to public health, even if it has not flowed across a property line; and 
(3)  Upon determination of the city engineer that repair, cleaning or testing is required to abate a nuisance or for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(B)  Property owners shall inspect, and if found defective, repair or replace the sewer service lateral as follows: 
(1)  On application to build a new structure on property with an existing lateral. The inspection and any required repairs or replacement shall be completed and accepted by the city prior to receiving a Certificate of Occupancy or a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy; 
(2)  On application proposing to connect a previously unconnected structure to an existing lateral. The inspection and any required repairs or replacement shall be completed and accepted by the city prior to approval of the building permit and final connection to the sewer system; 
(3)  On application for a change of use on the premises served from residential to commercial, or from non-restaurant commercial to restaurant commercial. The inspection and any required repairs or replacement shall be completed and accepted by the city prior to approval of the building permit; or 
(4)  On application for a change of use on the premises served from any other land use to common interest development. The inspection and any required repairs or replacement shall be completed and accepted by the city prior to approval of the final map or parcel map. 
(C)  Performance and Inspection of Testing. All building sewer and sewer service lateral inspections and testing shall be performed by a state licensed contractor to the satisfaction of the city engineer in accordance with applicable city standards. Results of all inspections and testing shall be filed with the city engineer. 
(D)  The lateral shall be considered defective if it fails to meet the conditions set forth in the city standards or has any of the following conditions: displaced joints, root intrusion, substantial deterioration of the lines, damaged clean-out, defective clean-out, improper pipe grade, inflow, infiltration of extraneous water, or other conditions such as grease or other build-up likely to increase the chance for a lateral blockage, or if, within a period of one year, a lateral suffers two or more blockages resulting in overflows. 
(E)  As part of its periodic construction and maintenance of sewer mains, the city may discover defective building sewers. The city may order the property owner to conduct an inspection, repair or replacement of any building sewer that the city knows or reasonably suspects to be defective in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(F)  Whenever defective building sewers are found, the property owner, at the sole expense of the property owner, shall repair or replace the lateral. The following requirements shall be met: 
(1)  A replaced or repaired building sewer shall not be covered or backfilled until it has been inspected by the city. 
(2)  All new and repaired building sewers must be televised and pass an air or water pressure test as specified by the city engineer. 
(3)  All repaired or replaced building sewer shall be brought into compliance with current city standards and with the California Plumbing Code, including cleanouts, overflow relief and backwater valves as needed. 
(G)  In the absence of a specific deadline established by the city engineer, all repair or replacement work shall be completed within 30 days of notification by the city after review of inspection materials show that such repair or replacement is required. 
(H)  Roots, grease, dirt, rock, groundwater or other material that has accumulated in any part of the sewer service lateral shall be prevented from entering the sewer main during any maintenance or repair of the lateral. In the event that material is permitted to enter the sewer main causing or contributing to the cause of a sewage spill, the property owner and/or contractor performing such maintenance work, in addition to any criminal penalties imposed, shall be subject to civil and administrative fines and penalties and shall be required to reimburse city for any expenses incurred as a result of the spill. 
(I)  The city shall have the authority to recover from a property owner the city's expenses incurred in responding to sewer overflows on private property. In addition to any actual expenses incurred by the city resulting from an overflow, the city may impose civil and/or administrative fines and penalties against a property owner who fails to perform any act required in this chapter, which failure results in an overflow reaching public or private property other than the property owner's property. 
(J)  The city engineer shall have the authority to establish, waive, suspend or otherwise modify any civil administrative penalty imposed by this section that exceeds the direct costs to the city upon a showing by the property owner of severe financial hardship or upon a showing that the property owner has satisfactorily repaired the lateral to a degree sufficient to ensure avoidance of further violations. Any claim of severe financial hardship must be accompanied by a sworn affidavit and must demonstrate the person's actual inability to pay the civil and/or administrative fines and penalties imposed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 4, 2-22-2011)  
13.26.060 - Building Sewer Certification. 
(A)  Issuance. A certificate of building sewer compliance shall be issued by the city engineer upon the occurrence of either of the following: 
(1)  The city engineer has approved the results of inspection and testing and the owner of the premises has paid the appropriate fee; or 
(2)  The owner of the premises has presented evidence satisfactory to the city engineer that the building sewer was repaired or replaced within the last five years and the owner of the premises has paid the appropriate fee. 
(B)  Validity. A certificate of building sewer compliance shall be valid for fifteen years and shall be valid only for the lateral at the address specified in the certificate. The city building department shall maintain records of all certificates of building sewer compliance issued. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 4, 2-22-2011)  
13.26.070 - Fees and Property Owner Assistance Program. 
(A)  The city council may, by resolution, prescribe a program by which the city shall offer to perform all or a portion of building sewer repair work or contribute towards the cost of the work. 
(B)  Fees. When any work, testing or inspection in this chapter does not specifically require an application for permit with a city, county or state agency, the city council may, by resolution, approve a fee schedule to provide for administration of the inspection program. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 4, 2-22-2011)  
13.26.080 - New Connections to the City Sewer System. 
All connections made to the city sewer service shall provide, at the owners' cost, a fully functioning sewer lateral in compliance with the requirements of Chapters 3.2 and 13.08 through 13.52 of this code, the Uniform Building Code, California Plumbing Code and other applicable regulations adopted by the city, applicable city standards and the plans and specifications for the construction approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 4, 2-22-2011; Ord. No. 840, § 11, 11-22-2011)  
13.26.090 - Private Sewers. 
(A)  Property owners shall inspect and, if found defective, provide a plan for repair or maintenance of any private sewer as follows: 
(1)  On application to build a new structure on property which will connect to the private sewer with an existing lateral, or when otherwise proposing to connect a previously unconnected structure to an existing private sewer. inspection shall consist of a television inspection of the private sewer in accordance with city standards and conducting a smoke test. Inspection of the private sewer shall be from the point of connection or proposed connection downstream to the connection to the public sewer. The testing and any required repairs shall be made prior to receiving a certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  On application to connect a previously unconnected structure to an existing private sewer. Inspection shall consist of a television inspection of the private sewer in accordance with city standards and conducting a smoke test. Inspection of the private sewer shall be from the point of con-nection or proposed connection downstream to the connection to the public sewer. The inspection and any required repairs or replacement shall be completed and accepted by the city prior to approval of the building permit and final connection to the sewer system. 
(3)  On application for a change of use on the premises served from residential to commercial, or from non-restaurant commercial to restaurant commercial. Inspection shall consist of a television inspection of the private sewer in accordance with city standards and conducting a smoke test. Inspection of the private sewer shall be from the point of connection or proposed connection downstream to the connection to the public sewer. The inspection and any required repairs or replacement shall be completed and accepted by the city prior to approval of the building permit. 
(4)  On application for a change of use on the premises served from any other land use to common interest development. Inspection shall consist of a television inspection of the private sewer in accordance with city standards and conducting a smoke test. The entire length of the private sewer shall be inspected and tested. The inspection and any required repairs or replacement shall be completed and accepted by the city prior to approval of the final map or parcel map. 
(5)  Whenever the city finds that a sewage overflow emanating from a private sewer has reached public property, including but not limited to a city street or the city storm drain system, or had flowed onto private property owned by another property owner. Inspection shall consist of a television inspection of the private sewer in accordance with city standards and conducting a smoke test. The entire length of the private sewer shall be inspected and tested. 
(6)  Whenever the city finds that a sewage overflow emanating from a private sewer presents a threat to public health, even if it has not flowed across a property line. Inspection shall consist of a television inspection of the private sewer in accordance with city standards and conducting a smoke test. The entire length of the private sewer shall be inspected and tested. 
(7)  Upon determination of the city engineer that repair, cleaning or testing is required to abate a nuisance or for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. Inspection shall consist of a television inspection of the private sewer in accordance with city standards and conducting a smoke test. The entire length of the private sewer shall be inspected and tested. 
(B)  Performance and Inspection of Testing. All private sewer inspections and testing shall be performed by a state licensed contractor to the satisfaction of the city engineer in accordance with applicable city standards. Results of all inspections and tests shall be filed with the city engineer. 
(C)  Failure. No private sewer shall be allowed to remain connected to the city sewer for more than 90 days after failing to pass an inspection or test as specified in this section unless a written request for extension has been filed with and approved in writing by the city engineer. 
(D)  The private sewer shall be considered defective if it fails to meet the conditions set forth in the city standards or has any of the following conditions: displaced joints, root intrusion, substantial deterioration of the lines, improper pipe grade leading to clogging of the line, inflow, infiltration of extraneous water. 
(E)  As part of its periodic construction and maintenance of sewer mains, the city may discover defective private sewers. The city may order the property owner to conduct an inspection, repair or replacement of any private sewer that the city knows or reasonably suspects to be defective in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(F)  Whenever defective private sewers are found, the property owner, at the sole expense of the property owner, shall create a plan and schedule for repair or replacement of the private sewer. The plan shall be approved by the city engineer. The following requirements shall be met: 
(1)  A replaced or repaired building sewer shall not be covered or backfilled until it has been inspected by the city. 
(2)  All new and repaired building sewers must be televised and pass an air or water pressure test as specified by the city engineer. 
(3)  All repaired or replaced private sewers shall be brought into compliance with current city standards and per the plan submitted by the owner and approved by the city engineer. 
(G)  In the absence of a specific deadline established by the city engineer, all repair or replacement work shall be completed within 90 days of notification by the city after review of inspection materials show that such repair or replacement is required. 
(H)  Roots, grease, dirt, rock, groundwater or other material which has accumulated in a private sewer shall be prevented from entering the city sewer during any maintenance or repair of the private sewer. In the event that material is permitted to enter the main causing or contributing to the cause of a sewage spill, the property owner and/or contractor performing such maintenance work, in addition to any criminal penalties imposed, shall be subject to civil and administrative fines and penalties and shall be required to reimburse city for any expenses incurred as a result of the spill. 
(I)  The city shall have the authority to recover from a property owner the city's expenses incurred in responding to sewer overflows on private property. in addition to any actual expenses incurred by the city resulting from an overflow, the city may impose civil administrative penalties against a property owner who fails to perform any act required in this section, which failure results in an overflow reaching public or private or property other than the property owner's property. 
(J)  The city engineer shall have the authority to establish, waive, suspend or otherwise modify any civil administrative penalty imposed by this section that exceeds the direct costs to the city upon a showing by the property owner of severe financial hardship, or upon a showing that the property owner has satisfactorily repaired the lateral to a degree sufficient to ensure avoidance of further violations. Any claim of severe financial hardship must be accompanied by a sworn affidavit and must demonstrate the person's actual inability to pay the civil and/or administrative fines and penalties imposed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 4, 2-22-2011)  
Chapter 13.28 - SEWER USERS[6] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 834, § 5, adopted Feb. 22, 2011, repealed Ch. 13.28, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, Ch. 13.28 pertained to similar subject matter. See Ordinance List and Disposition Table for derivation. 
 
13.28.010 - User classifications. 
The city engineer will classify all users in accordance with the principal activity conducted on the premises where the discharge occurs. The purpose of the classification is to facilitate regulation of discharges to the subregional system on the basis of each user's waste quality, quantity, flow, and city involvement; to provide an effective means of source control of toxic substances; and to provide a basis for sewer use charges to insure an equitable recovery of capital and operating costs. User permit classifications are as follows: 
(A)  Nonresidential User. Users that discharge non-domestic wastewater to the sanitary sewer system and do not meet the criteria of SIU. 
(B)  Zero Discharger. Users who do not discharge to the sanitary sewer system, except domestic wastewater, do not have pollutants resulting from any commercial or industrial process, have no floor drains, and do not generate wastewater. 
(C)  Significant Industrial User as defined in section 13.12.020. 
(D)  Ongoing Groundwater Discharger. Users that discharge wastewater generated from groundwater remediation projects in excess of six months. 
(E)  One-Time Discharger. Users that discharge wastewater generated as a result of purging monitoring wells, dewatering underground storage tanks, groundwater sampling, or for a variety of other reasons for projects that will not exceed six months. 
(F)  Waste Hauler. Haulers that service domestic waste systems. Such systems include septic tanks, cesspools, chemical toilets, trailers, or campers." 
(Ord. No. 834, § 5, 2-22-2011)  
Chapter 13.32 - SEWER USE PERMITS[7] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 834, § 6, adopted Feb. 22, 2011, repealed Ch. 13.32, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, Ch. 13.32 pertained to similar subject matter. See Ordinance List and Disposition Table for derivation. 
 
13.32.010 - Wastewater Discharge Permit Classification. 
The city engineer shall classify all users in accordance with the principal activity conducted on the premises where the discharge occurs. The purposes of the classification are to facilitate regulation of discharges to the Subregional system on the basis of each user's waste quality, quantity, flow, and city involvement; to provide an effective means of source control of toxic substances; and to provide a basis for sewer use charges to insure an equitable recovery of capital and operating costs. User permit classifications are as follows: 
(A)  Nonresidential User. Users that discharge non-domestic wastewater to the sanitary sewer system and do not meet the criteria of SIU. 
(B)  Zero Discharger. Users who do not discharge to the sanitary sewer system, except domestic wastewater, do not have pollutants resulting from any commercial or industrial process, have no floor drains, and do not generate wastewater. 
(C)  Significant Industrial User. 
(D)  Ongoing Groundwater Discharger. Users that discharge wastewater generated from groundwater remediation projects in excess of six months. 
(E)  One Time Discharger. Users that discharge wastewater generated as a result of purging monitoring wells, dewatering underground storage tanks, groundwater sampling, or for a variety of other reasons for projects that will not exceed six months. 
(F)  Waste Hauler. Haulers that service domestic waste systems. Such systems include septic tanks, cesspools, chemical toilets, trailers, or campers. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 6, 2-22-2011)  
13.32.020 - Sewer Use Permit—Required. 
(A)  All user applicants, other than residential users, who intend to connect their premises to the city sewer, must obtain a sewer use permit. 
(B)  All users who convey waste by tank truck or other vehicle to a point of direct entry into the city sewerage system must obtain a sewer use permit. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 6, 2-22-2011)  
13.32.030 - Sewer Use Permit—Application. 
(A)  Application Form. Persons applying for a sewer use permit shall complete and file with the City Engineer an application form obtained from the City, together with the applicable fees. The application shall include the following information: 
(1)  A description of activity, facilities and plant process on the premises, including raw materials processes and types of materials which are or could be discharged; 
(2)  Total product produced by type; 
(3)  Number and type of employees; 
(4)  Estimated waste water strength; 
(5)  Estimated waste water flow; 
(6)  Average and peak waste water discharge flow for each service sewer; 
(7)  Locations of sewer laterals, sampling points, and pretreatment facilities; 
(8)  Water supply information; 
(9)  Source, volume and chemical characteristics of the contents of each tank; and 
(10)  Any other information the City Engineer shall deem necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
(B)  Additional Information. The City Engineer will evaluate the data furnished by the applicant and may require additional information. After evaluation and approval of the data furnished, the City Engineer will determine the class of the user and may issue a nonresidential or industrial sewer user permit subject to conditions and terms as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 6, 2-22-2011)  
13.32.040 - Sewer Use Permits—Conditions. 
(A)  Nonresidential and Industrial Sewer Use Permits. Sewer use permits may contain prohibitions on discharge of certain toxic substances as identified by federal or state law and of hazardous substances and may contain other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city engineer to insure compliance with Chapters 13.08 through 13.52 of this code. 
(B)  Industrial Sewer Use Permits. Industrial sewer use permits may impose any or all of the following additional conditions, or any other conditions deemed necessary by the city engineer: 
(1)  Separation of industrial waste water from sanitary sewage prior to discharge to the city sewer; 
(2)  Pretreatment of industrial wastes; 
(3)  Limits on flow rate, time of discharge, strength of specific constituents or characteristics, or requirements for flow and constituent regulation or equalization; 
(4)  Requirements for inspection, flow measurement, and sampling facilities including access to such facilities by the city engineer; 
(5)  Monitoring program which may include: Sampling locations, frequency and method of sampling; number, types, and standard for tests; and the establishment of a reporting schedule. Monitoring shall be provided by the user at his expense, using a state certified laboratory. The user's laboratory, where available, may be used if approved by the city engineer; 
(6)  Submission of technical reports or discharge reports; 
(7)  Maintenance of plant records relating to waste water discharge, as specified by the city engineer, and affording the city engineer access thereto; or 
(8)  Valid waste water discharge permit from City of Santa Rosa subregional system's industrial waste division. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 6, 2-22-2011)  
13.32.050 - Sewer Use Permits—Terms. 
(A)  Validity. A sewer use permit shall be valid for five years from the date of its issuance unless one of the following occurs: 
(1)  Change in User. A sewer use permit shall not be assigned or transferred. 
(2)  Change in Use. Whenever the use of the premises by the user or the character of the discharge changes materially from that stated in the permit application, or when deemed necessary by city engineer, the user shall file an application for a new permit within sixty days. 
(B)  Change of Permit Conditions. After providing written notice to the discharger, the city may change the conditions of a sewer use permit, including changing the limits or constituents of waste water strength from time to time as circumstances may require. The city shall allow the discharger a reasonable amount of time to comply with any changes. 
(C)  Tank Truck Discharges. A separate sewer use permit may be required for each load of wastes conveyed to discharge point by tank truck. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 6, 2-22-2011)  
13.32.060 - Sewer use permits—Temporary Suspension or Restrictions. 
(A)  Temporary Suspension. A wastewater discharge permit may be temporarily suspended by the city engineer at any time if, in his or her opinion, the continued discharge of the waste or water into the sewer system would, when combined with other discharges into the sewer system, exceed the city's allocated capacity service in the subregional system, substantially jeopardize the ability of the treatment system to meet water quality requirements or would cause an unsafe condition to occur. In lieu of temporary suspension of permits, the city engineer may impose such temporary restrictions, conditions, or limitations upon the quantities, qualities, and rates of discharge made thereunder as deemed necessary to assure that said receiving water quality requirements will not be violated by the discharge to the POTW, or to alleviate the unsafe condition. In addition, the city engineer may suspend a wastewater discharge permit at any time if he/she deems said suspension necessary to halt or prevent a discharge that has the potential to endanger human lives and/or injure the environment. 
(B)  Notice of Suspension. Notice of the temporary suspension or the imposition of temporary restrictions, conditions, or limitations shall be given in writing by the city engineer to the user at least 24 hours before the effective date of any such suspension, restriction, condition, or limitation. Delivery of said notice to the user's place of business within the city shall constitute delivery of notice to user. In circumstances where the city engineer deems it necessary to suspend a wastewater discharge permit in order to prevent potential danger to human life and/or injury to the environment, or in any circumstance that would cause a violation of the treatment plant's NPDES permit, the city engineer shall deliver such notice within 48 hours of such suspension if the city engineer is unable to provide the notice before the suspension. 
(C)  Compliance. Unless directed otherwise on the notice of suspension, the permittee shall cease discharging into the city sewer or conform to the temporary restrictions, conditions or limitations on the effective date of said notice. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 6, 2-22-2011)  
13.32.070 - Sewer Use Permits—Revocation. 
(A)  Grounds for Revocation. The city engineer may revoke a sewer use permit for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure of the permittee to comply with the conditions of the permit; or 
(2)  Failure of the permittee to pay when due any charges imposed as a condition of a permit. 
Notice. No permit shall be revoked by the city engineer until the city engineer has notified the permittee in writing of the intent to do so and has afforded the permittee the opportunity to appear before him within a reasonable period of time to show cause why the permit should not be revoked; provided, however, a permit may be summarily revoked after informal notice by the city engineer if the continuing discharge reasonably appears to present an imminent endangerment to the health, safety, or welfare of persons. 
(B)  Compliance. Unless directed otherwise on the notice of revocation, the permittee shall cease discharging into the city sewer on the effective date of revocation. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 6, 2-22-2011)  
Chapter 13.36 - SEWERS—REGULATION OF WASTE DISCHARGES[8] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 834, § 7, adopted Feb. 22, 2011, repealed Ch. 13.36, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, Ch. 13.36 pertained to similar subject matter. See Ordinance List and Disposition Table for derivation. 
 
13.36.010 - Permissible Discharges. 
Waste water may be discharged into city sewers for collection, treatment, and disposal by the city, provided that (i) such waste water does not contain substances prohibited or exceed limitations of waste water volume or strength set forth in this sewer use ordinance, other laws and regulations, and if applicable, in a sewer use permit, and (ii) the user has paid all applicable city charges and is otherwise in compliance with the provisions of this sewer use ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 7, 2-22-2011)  
13.36.020 - Prohibited Discharge Standards. 
(A)  General Prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass-through, interference, or is listed in the Specific Prohibitions in sub-section B below. These general prohibitions apply to all users discharging to the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(B)  Specific Prohibitions. No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
(1)  Pollutants which create fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including but not limited to wastestreams with closed cup flashpoint of less than 140o F (60o C) using test methods specified in 40 CFR Part 261.21 or at any point in the POTW, of more than 10% of the Lower Explosive Limit on a combustible gas meter; 
(2)  Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 12.0, or any substance causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW, or equipment as standardized in Test Methods for Evaluating Solid Waste, Physical/Chemical Methods SW-846, current edition; 
(3)  Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts or concentrations which will cause or threaten to cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case solids greater than 1/4" or 0.635 cm in any dimension. The installation and use of garbage grinders (disposals) in commercial food establishments is prohibited, except in the case where a 1,000 gallon minimum interceptor is in use; [40 CFR Part 403.5(b)(3)]; 
(4)  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference with the POTW; [40 CFR Part 403.5(b)(4)]; 
(5)  Wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the POTW to exceed 104o F (40o C); ); [40 CFR Part 403.5(b)(5)]; 
(6)  Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through; 
(7)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; [40 CFR Part 403.5(b)(7)]; 
(8)  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the POTW; [40 CFR Part 403.5(b)(8)]; 
(9)  Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW, or exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. Toxic pollutants shall include but not be limited to any pollutant identified pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act; 
(10)  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair; 
(11)  Any malodorous substance such as hydrogen sulfide or any other substance which will cause offensive odors in the sewer system or at the treatment plant; 
(12)  Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW, such as residues, sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act, any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act or the Toxic Substances Control Act, or State criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used; 
(13)  Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate the NPDES permit or Waste Discharge Requirements issued by the State; 
(14)  Any wastewater containing substances that may precipitate, solidify, or become viscous at temperatures capable of either causing obstruction to the flow in the sewers or interfering with the proper sewer system operation and maintenance; 
(15)  Any portions of the human anatomy; 
(16)  Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the POTW's effluent; 
(17)  Wastewater containing any radioactive waste or isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
(18)  Unpolluted wastewater including but not limited to storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, pool water, spa water, pond water, condensate, deionized water, non-contact cooling water or other, unless specifically authorized by the City Engineer; 
(19)  Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastewater; 
(20)  Any infectious waste that is deemed a threat to the public health and safety, or will result in any violation of applicable waste discharge requirements shall be rendered noninfectious prior to discharge; 
(21)  Wastewater causing the POTW effluent to fail a toxicity test; 
(22)  Pollutants which create conditions which violate any statute, rule, regulation, or ordinance of any public agency relating to releases of hazardous wastes, hazardous substances, or other pollutants to the environment when such release is to a publicly owned sanitary sewer; 
(23)  Any substance which is not amenable to treatment by the processes employed at the POTW; 
(24)  Any substance which will cause damage to City facilities; 
(25)  Any slug loading; 
(26)  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW; 
(27)  Any of the following prohibited substances as tested according to approved 40 CFR 136 methods: 
(a)  Aldrin; 
(b)  Benzidine and its salt; 
(c)  BHC-Alpha; 
(d)  BHC-Beta; 
(e)  BHC-Gamma (Lindane); 
(f)  Chrysene; 
(g)  DDD, DDE, and DDT; 
(h)  Dieldrin; 
(i)  Endrin; 
(j)  Endosulfan II (B Endosulfan); 
(k)  Heptachlor; 
(l)  Heptachlor Epoxide; 
(m)  Phenanthrene; 
(n)  Polychlorinated Biphenyl Compounds (PCBs); 
(o)  Tetrachloroethene (Perchloroethylene, Perc); 
(p)  Toxaphene; 
(28)  Any septic tank waste, holding tank waste, or portable toilet waste unless a permit is issued by the city and unless such sludge or waste is transported to the POTW by a permitted waste hauler in accordance with the regulations set forth within this sewer use ordinance; 
(29)  Wastewater causing two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW, of more than five percent, or any single reading over ten percent of the Lower Explosive Limit of the meter; or 
(30)  Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, leaves, grass cuttings, metal, glass, ceramics, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, or any other solid or viscous substance capable of either causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or interfering with the proper sewerage system operation and/or maintenance. 
(C)  Compliance by existing sources with the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards shall be within three years of the date the standard is promulgated unless a shorter compliance time is specified in the appropriate subpart of 40 CFR, Chapter 1, Subchapter N. Upon promulgation, if the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards are more stringent than limitations imposed under this chapter for a particular industrial subcategory, such standards shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this chapter. 
(D)  Other Prohibitions. 
(1)  No user shall discharge any wastewater directly into a manhole or other opening in the city sewage system other than through sewer laterals or other sewer connection approved by the city engineer, unless a permit has been obtained for such discharge. A permit will only be issued for such direct discharge in the event the discharge is otherwise in compliance with provisions of this sewer use ordinance and no other alternative is reasonably available in the opinion of the city engineer. 
(2)  Any discharge of sewage, industrial/commercial waste or other polluted waters into any storm drain or natural outlet. 
(3)  Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this sewer use ordinance shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. 
(4)  No person who owns, operates or maintains a restaurant shall at any time discharge any wastewater to the storm drain, service dock areas, or pavement. Wastewater generated by restaurants shall be disposed of through a sanitary sewer, and an approved grease removal device, interceptor, or sample station connected to a sanitary sewer or hauled off site and disposed at a legal disposal site. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge the contents of a swimming pool or a spa into the city sewer system except in the manner specified herein. The size of pipe carrying discharge water shall not be larger than one inch and shall not be under a head to exceed twenty feet. If the water is discharged by pumping, the rate of flow shall not exceed fifty gallons per minute. Each swimming pool or spa discharging to a sanitary sewer shall be equipped with an approved air gap to preclude any possibility of a backflow of sewage into the swimming pool or spa piping system. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 7, 2-22-2011)  
13.36.041 - Reporting Requirements and Notification of Discharge. 
(A)  Those users that come within the Code of Federal Regulations definition of "Categorical Industries" shall comply with the reporting requirements of 40 Code of Federal Regulations 403.12. 
(B)  Notification of Discharge. 
(1)  Users shall notify the city immediately upon accidentally discharging wastes in violation of this sewer use ordinance to enable countermeasures to be taken by the agency to minimize damage to the community sewer, treatment facility, treatment processes and the receiving waters. 
(2)  Notification shall be followed, within ten days of the date of occurrence, by a detailed written statement describing the causes of the accidental discharge and the measures being taken to prevent future occurrence. 
(3)  Notification will not relieve users of liability for any expense, loss or damage to the sewer system, treatment plant, or treatment process or for any fines imposed on the city on account thereof, under Section 13550 of the California Water Code or for violations of Section 5650 of the California Fish and Game Code. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 7, 2-22-2011)  
13.36.050 - Regulated Discharge Characteristics. 
(A)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged, to a city sewer, any of the following without first obtaining a sewer use permit that specifically permits such industrial waste discharge characteristics: 
(1)  Discharge during a twenty-four hour period in excess of twenty five thousand gallons; 
(2)  Discharge of fats, oils, and/or greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than 250 mg/l. 
(3)  Discharges containing metal pickling or etching wastes or plating solutions, whether neutralized or not. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 7, 2-22-2011)  
13.36.052 - National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. 
(A)  The categorical pretreatment standards found in 40 CFR Parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated into this sewer use ordinance. 
(B)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the City Engineer may impose equivalent mass or concentration limits in accordance with 40 CFR Part 403.6(c). 
(C)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the City Engineer shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula or flow weighted average in 40 CFR Part 403.6. 
(D)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR Part 403.13 that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(E)  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR Part 403.15. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 7, 2-22-2011)  
13.36.053 - State and Federal Pretreatment Standards. 
In the event that either state or federal requirement standards for discharge to the POTW are more stringent than the limitations, requirements, and standards set forth in this sewer use ordinance, the most stringent standards or requirements shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 7, 2-22-2011)  
13.36.054 - Local Limits. 
(A)  The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass-through and interference. No SIU or groundwater remediation shall discharge, or cause to discharge, any wastewater containing in excess of the following daily maximum allowable discharge limits. 
(1)  Antimony (T)* 153 mg/l 
(2)  Arsenic (T)* 0.47 mg/l 
(3)  Beryllium (T)* 0.5 mg/l 
(4)  Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) 20,400 mg/l 
(5)  Cadmium (T)* 0.04 mg/l 
(6)  Chromium VI 0.1 mg/l 
(7)  Chromium (T)* 1.71 mg/l 
(8)  Copper (T)* 0.2 mg/l 
(9)  Cyanide (T)* 0.2 mg/l 
(10)  Lead (T)* 0.3 mg/l 
(11)  Mercury (T)* 0.0003 mg/l 
(12)  Nickel (T)* 1.51 mg/l 
(13)  Selenium (T)* 2.7 mg/l 
(14)  Thallium (T)* 3.9 mg/l 
(15)  Zinc (T)* 1.63 mg/l 
(16)  pH 5.5 - 11.9 
(17)  Silver 0.17 mg/l 
(18)  Total Toxic Organics (TTO)** 2.13 mg/l 
(19)  Total Suspended Solids (TSS) 9,800 mg/l 
(20)  TPH Gas and Diesel 100 mg/l 
(21)  Total Dissolved Solids 5,200 mg/l 
(22)  Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen (TKN) 2,600 mg/l 
(23)  BTEX*** 2.0 mg/l 
*  T =Total; mg/l = milligrams per liter 
**  Federal Register List from 40 CFR 131 Subpart D - Total Toxic Organics less pesticides and dioxins 
***  Groundwater remediation and cleanup projects, BTEX=Benzene, Toluene, Ethylbenzene, Xylene 
(B)  The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. The City Engineer may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limitations above. 
(C)  The City Engineer may allow the SIU to discharge in excess of local limits when, at the discretion of the City Engineer, the SIU has implemented all applicable Best Management Practices adopted by the City and the Subregional system. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 7, 2-22-2011)  
13.36.056 - City's right of revision. 
The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance, resolution, or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the city sewerage system. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 7, 2-22-2011)  
13.36.058 - Dilution. 
No industrial user shall increase the use of process water or in any other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The city engineer may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or in other cases when, in the opinion of the city engineer, the imposition of mass limitation is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 7, 2-22-2011)  
13.36.059 - Vandalism/Tampering. 
No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any monitoring equipment so as to cause alteration of the sampling analysis or readings or cause damage or destruction of equipment being utilized to determine compliance with this sewer use ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 7, 2-22-2011)  
13.36.060 - Seasonal flow. 
Seasonal flow dischargers shall be subject to wastewater treatment plant service capacity allocation by the city engineer. If overloading conditions occur or threaten to occur at the treatment plant or if unused service capacity is insufficient to accommodate all seasonal flows, the city engineer may allocate available service capacity among all seasonal dischargers. In allocating the flow or constituent load, the city engineer shall take into account the discharger's non-seasonal flow, wastewater conservation practice, economic and environmental impact, historical data, and any other consideration advanced by the discharger which will help the city engineer make an equitable allocation.  
13.36.070 - Unusual conditions. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this sewer use ordinance to the contrary, the city council and any person may enter into an agreement where unusual conditions compel special terms and conditions and charges for the interception, treatment and disposal of an industrial wastewater necessary to meet the purposes of this sewer use ordinance. In no event, however, may the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards referred to in Section 13.36.052 or any other federal or state standard, be relaxed or waived. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 7, 2-22-2011)  
13.36.090 - Slug control plan. 
(A)  The city engineer may require any SIU or other user to develop a slug control plan. Before issuance of a wastewater discharge permit, the city engineer shall determine whether a user needs such a plan. Any user required to develop and implement slug control plan shall submit, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges. 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals. 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the City Engineer of any accidental or slug discharge. Such notification must also be given for any discharge which would violate any of the prohibited discharges. 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site run off, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(B)  In the case of an accidental spill or slug discharge, refer to Section 13.48.230 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 7, 2-22-2011)  
13.36.100 - Separation of domestic and process wastestream. 
All domestic wastewater (i.e., restrooms, showers, drinking fountains) shall be separated from process wastewater until the process wastewater has passed through a required pretreatment system and/or the user's monitoring facility. When directed to do so by the City Engineer, users shall separate existing domestic wastewater from process wastestream. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 7, 2-22-2011)  
13.36.110 - Hauled wastewater. 
(A)  Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the City Engineer, and at such times as are established by the City Engineer. Such waste shall not violate any requirements established by the City. Septic tank waste haulers must obtain wastewater discharge permits. 
(B)  Haulers/generators of industrial wastewater must obtain wastewater discharge permits. The City Engineer may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial wastewater. The discharge of hauled industrial wastewater is subject to all other requirements of this sewer use ordinance. 
(C)  Industrial wastewater haulers shall discharge loads only at locations designated by the City Engineer. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the City Engineer. The City Engineer may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The City Engineer may require the industrial wastewater hauler/generator to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(D)  Septic and/or industrial wastewater haulers shall provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial wastewater hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, volume, and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents. 
(E)  Hauled groundwater discharges shall be subject to the criteria set forth in this Section. 
(F)  Discharging trucked domestic septic tank wastes originating from outside the boundaries of Rohnert Park is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 7, 2-22-2011)  
13.36.115 - Clean-up and remediation projects. 
Waste generated from the cleanup of spills, leaking underground storage tanks, contaminated soil or groundwater, monitoring wells, or other similar sources shall not be discharged through direct or indirect connection to the City sewer system unless a temporary permit or a wastewater discharge permit is issued by the City Engineer. The City Engineer may approve the discharge of such wastewater and issue such a permit only when, in his or her judgment, no reasonable alternative method of disposal is available and the City's facilities and the subregional POTW will not be significantly affected. 
If a temporary discharge permit is granted for the discharge of such wastewater, the user shall pay such fees and charges and meet such special conditions and requirements as determined by the City Engineer to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the public and the integrity of the City sewer and treatment system. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 7, 2-22-2011)  
13.36.120 - Disposal of pretreatment sludges. 
Any sludge or other material removed from the industrial wastewater by the pretreatment facility shall be disposed of in accordance with applicable federal, state and local laws. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 7, 2-22-2011)  
Chapter 13.42 - SEWERS—PERMIT AND SERVICE CHARGES 
Sections: 
 
13.42.010 - Amounts of fees and charges. 
The amounts and rate schedules for fees and charges authorized hereunder shall be set by ordinance of the city council. 
(Ord. 772 § 3 (part), 2006)  
13.42.020 - Sewer use permit fee. 
A fee for application for a sewer use permit is authorized to recover costs of administering sewer use permits. Separate fee schedules may be established for the two classes of permits, i.e., nonresidential and industrial. 
(Ord. 772 § 3 (part), 2006)  
13.42.030 - Sewer service charges—Declaration of policy. 
The sanitary sewer facilities of the city, including all system parts and components for the collection, transportation, treatment and disposition of domestic and industrial waste products, is a city-owned public utility maintained and operated under the control and direction of the city council. The services of the city sanitary sewer system shall be provided to all users in return for payment of service charges, pursuant to this chapter, and the funds obtained by payment and the collection of such charges shall be used exclusively for the uses and purposes of the sewerage system and for payment of interest on and redemption of any bonds the city issued or may issue either by itself or by agreement with another city, district, or agency, as may be directed by the city council. It is the policy of the city that the city sewerage system be operated as a self-supporting utility and that service charges for its use shall be calculated and changed from time to time in sufficient amounts to operate and maintain the city sewer system and to provide for the expansion of the system to meet the needs of all users without resort to the general and other funds of the city. 
(Ord. 772 § 3 (part), 2006)  
13.42.035 - Sewer service charges—Establishment, calculation and administration. 
The city council shall establish, review annually, and revise periodically sewer service charges so that the total revenue from the collection of such charges is equal to the total cost of operating, maintaining, and expanding the city sewer system. The cost of operating the system shall include the cost of providing reasonable reserves in accordance with standard public utility bookkeeping practices and the cost of providing bond interest and redemption as may be ordered by the city council with regard to any bonds the city has issued or may issue either by itself or by agreement with another city, district, or agency for the sanitary sewer system purposes. All rates and charges shall meet applicable state and federal guidelines. 
A.  Rate Schedule. The city council shall by ordinance establish rates for sewer service. 
B.  Standards for Calculation. The city council shall calculate sewer service charges in accordance with the following rules and regulations: 
1.  The standard utility accounting period shall be a fiscal year commencing July first and ending June thirtieth; 
2.  The service charge shall be payable by each user on a monthly rate and generally billed and paid with the bill for water service to the same premises; 
3.  Sewer service charges shall be based upon the estimated actual use of the city sewerage system by the premises or user, except that a minimum charge may be set based upon a minimum monthly usage; 
4.  Estimated actual use shall be quantified based on bimonthly or monthly metered water consumption from all sources but excluding water which, upon determination by the city engineer, is found to not be discharged to a city sewer; 
5.  Charges additional to nonresidential users and industrial users will be assessed for sewage strengths exceeding those of residential users and shall be based on the pounds of BOD suspended solids and any other applicable waste loadings discharged to the city sewer each billing period determined in accordance with Chapter 13.44. 
a.  Special charges may be made to reimburse the city for abnormal costs incurred because of other pollutants in the waste water. All rates including those for seasonal industries shall include in their capital related element the costs of allocated capacity service in the subregional system. Industrial rates, to the extent applicable, shall include provisions to comply with industrial cost recovery provisions of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972. Charges to users for wastes conveyed to a point of direct entry to the city sewerage system by tank truck or other conveyance shall be based on volume, general waste strength, and other cost associated factors as may be applicable; 
6.  Charges for user agencies shall be in accordance with the terms of the agreement between each user agency and the city. 
C.  Special Rates. The city council may enter into written agreements for rates other than those listed when special conditions or circumstances make the listed rates inapplicable. 
D.  Relief from Unjust Rates. The owner or occupants of any premises, who, by reason of special circumstance finds that the foregoing rates are unjust or inequitable as applied to his premises, may make written application to the council, stating the circumstances and requesting a different basis of charges for sewer services to his premises. If such application be approved, the council may by resolution fix and establish fair and equitable rates for such premises to be effective as of the date of such application and continuing during the period of special circumstances. The council may on its own motion find that by reason of special circumstances the foregoing rates are unjust and inequitable as applied to particular premises and may, by resolution, fix and establish fair and equitable rates for such premises during the period of special circumstances. 
(Ord. 772 § 3 (part), 2006)  
13.42.040 - Utility accounting. 
An accounting system shall be maintained in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. It shall be sufficient in detail to demonstrate that collections and disbursements are made in compliance with the intents and purposes of state and federal regulations. Separate accounting shall be maintained for the city sewage collection system and other facilities exclusively serving the city service area. 
(Ord. 772 § 3 (part), 2006)  
13.42.050 - Disposition of funds. 
That portion of sewer service charges used for the annual acquisition, construction, reconstruction, replacement, and debt retirement of city-owned facilities funded under PL 92500 shall be deposited into the waste water capital reserve fund and shall be expended and invested in accordance with state and federal regulations and guidelines. 
Sewer capacity charges shall be deposited and accounted for in accordance with Chapter 13.40. 
All other local charges and fees shall be deposited in the sewer revenue fund and accounted for separately. Disbursement of funds shall be for operation and maintenance expense of the entire sewerage system, capital related expense of the collection system and other facilities exclusively serving the city service area, and interest expense on debt issued for sewage system acquisition, construction, reconstruction, or replacement. 
To the extent that sewer service charges, sewer capacity charges and other local fees and charges are imposed to recover subregional system assessments against the city, disbursement of these shall be in accordance with the agreements currently in affect between the city and the subregional system. 
(Ord. 772 § 3 (part), 2006)  
Chapter 13.44 - WATER, SEWER AND RECYCLED WATER SERVICE CHARGES, BILLING AND COLLECTION[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 910, §§ 3, 4, adopted Sept. 26, 2017, repealed the former Ch. 13.44, §§ 13.44.010—13.04.090, and enacted a new Ch. 13.44 as set out herein. The former Ch. 13.44 pertained to billing and payment of water and sewer service charges and derived from Ord. 777 § 2 (part), adopted 2007. 
 
13.44.010 - Purpose and authority. 
This chapter establishes the rules and regulations for billing and collection of water, sewer and recycled water service charges including, but not limited to, requirements for security deposits, and maintenance of service, customer responsibilities, prohibited acts and penalties, adjustments of billings, and service discontinuance. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.44.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section. 
A.  "Billing period" means the period of time between meter readings for which a customer is billed. 
B.  "Charge" or "rate" means the amount of money to be paid by the person liable to the city for potable, recycled water, and sewer services. 
C.  "Customer" or "consumer" means any persons liable for a connection into the potable water, recycled water or sewer systems. 
D.  "Permanent water service" means the installation of a permanent (non-temporary) city water meter in an approved water meter box accompanied by a request to the city by the property owner, agent, or tenant to establish a permanent connection for service by the potable water system or recycled water system. 
E.  "Potable water system" means the system of pipelines, pump stations and appurtenances owned and operated by the city and which delivers water for human consumption. 
F.  "Recycled water system" means the system of pipelines, pump stations and appurtenances owned and operated by the city and which delivers, for approved uses, non-potable tertiary treated recycled water as defined by state law. 
G.  "Fixed monthly service charge" means the fixed charge to be paid by persons liable for each and every connection to and/or use of the city recycled water, potable water and/or sewer system based upon the size of the water meter. This includes both fixed charges dedicated to system operations and fixed charges dedicated to capital replacement or reserves. 
H.  "Service or water service" means a connection through which potable or recycled water is supplied or is available to a person from and out of the potable or recycled water system owned and operated by the city. 
I.  "Service lateral" means that portion of the potable or recycled water system which extends from the city water main to the coupling immediately beyond the meter box on the consumer's premises. 
J.  "Sewer cap" means sewer charges for customers based on metered consumption of water as determined by averaging usage during winter billing periods occurring during the months of December through February and in accordance with policies, rules, or regulations approved by the city council. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.44.030 - Water, recycled water and sewer—Rates for service. 
A.  The city council shall adopt water and sewer rates by resolution. Water and sewer rates may include both fixed and variable components in order to allow the city to recover its costs for the provision of service. Water and sewer service charges are separately stated and billed upon the same bill. 
B.  The city council shall impose recycled water rates through agreement. Recycled water rates shall generally conform to the policies of the Santa Rosa Subregional System, the city's recycled water producer. Recycled water services charges may be billed with water and sewer service charges or may be separately billed. 
C.  Water Shortage Charges. At any time the city council declares a water shortage emergency and implements water rationing stages 2, 3 or 4 pursuant to its current, adopted urban water shortage contingency plan, any water shortage rates structure, adopted by the city council will be applied to all potable water accounts. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.44.040 - Charges for new installations, meters and special charges. 
In addition to its rates for service, the city council, by resolution, may adopt uniform installation charges for all new services and connections, including the cost of meters and special charges for special services rendered. Such charges may be amended and varied from time to time; provided, that all such charges shall reasonably reflect the total actual cost and expense of the service performed or materials supplied. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.44.050 - Charges when meter is inoperative. 
If a meter fails to register due to any cause except the nonuse of potable or recycled water, the charge for potable or recycled water will be estimated based on previous consumption for a comparable period or by such other method as is determined by the city. In the preparation of such averaged bills, due consideration will be given to fluctuations caused by seasonal changes or any interruption to the service known to have occurred. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.44.060 - Charges for vacant premises. 
If a property is vacant, the fixed component of the water and sewer service charge will be billed to the property owner. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.44.070 - Application for service and deposit required. 
A.  All customers must apply for service in order to establish a water, recycled water or sewer service account. Applications may be made in person, over, the phone, by email, through an online system or by any other method designated and approved by the city. 
B.  Applications may be made by either property owners or tenants and all applicants are liable for the city's charges for service. 
C.  As part of the application, property owners and occupants are required to provide a deposit in the amount set by the city manager. The deposit required of tenants shall not exceed that allowed under Public Utilities Code Section 10009.6. 
D.  Deposits made by property owners are refundable after the expiration of one year if the property owners' account has not been in arrears during the first year of said deposit. If the service is discontinued in less than one year, the deposit will be applied to the account to offset any outstanding amount due. Credit balances after all charges have been invoiced will be refunded. 
E.  Deposits made by other than property owners shall be applied on account upon termination of service. Credit balances, of more than ten dollars, after all charges have been invoiced will be refunded. Credit balances of less than ten dollars will be retained by the city. 
F.  Regardless of the customers' payment history, the city may require a new deposit before rendering service to the same customer at a new service address. 
G.  Any deposit eligible for refunding and uncalled for within five years from the date when made will become the property of and be retained by the city. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.44.080 - Application for service—Person with outstanding bills. 
When an application for potable, recycled water or sewer service is made by an applicant who was responsible for and failed to pay all bills for service previously rendered, regardless of location or when incurred, the city may refuse to furnish service to such applicant until the outstanding bills are paid and may require additional deposit, in an amount set by the city manager. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.44.090 - Bills—Generally. 
A.  Bills for water and sewer service to residential, commercial, institutional and industrial accounts will be rendered bi-monthly in arrears unless otherwise provided by agreement. 
B.  Bills for recycled water service will be rendered in accordance with the recycled water agreement. 
C.  If the total period of service is less than the billing period, the period of service will be prorated and the service charge adjusted accordingly. 
D.  Bills for service to all accounts are due and payable upon presentation. Payments may be made in any manner designated and approved by the city. 
E.  Bills become delinquent twenty days after they have been presented to the customer. 
F.  A fee of twenty-five dollars will be charged to customers for bill payments returned, from any method of payment. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.44.100 - Bills—Refunds. 
A.  Whenever the amount of any water, recycled water or sewer service charge has been overpaid, or paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be refunded as provided in this section. 
B.  The claimant or his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator must submit a written application to the city's finance director, on a form provided by the city, within six months of the alleged overpayment or erroneous or illegal collection. The application must clearly establish claimant's right to the refund by written records. 
C.  Upon receipt of the claim, the city will evaluate the request and provide a written evaluation of its analysis, including any refund due, within sixty days. 
D.  Any customer aggrieved by the city's decision with respect to its refund request, may appeal to the city manager by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk, within fifteen days of the finance director's decision. The city manager will render a written decision within sixty days of the filing of the appeal. The findings of the city manager shall be final. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. 
E.  The submission of a written claim as set forth in Chapter 2.44 shall be a prerequisite to a suit challenging a city decision made pursuant to this chapter. 
F.  The filing of a claim on behalf of a class or group of property owners is not permitted. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.44.110 - Delinquent bills—Courtesy notice. 
Courtesy notices will be sent out to those accounts whose balance is past due. If payment is not received within ten days from the date of the courtesy notice, a shut-off notice will be mailed. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.44.120 - Delinquent bills—Service disconnections. 
A.  Five days will be allowed after the shut-off notice is mailed before service is disconnected for non-payment. 
B.  When water, recycled water or sewer service is disconnected for nonpayment, the city may demand the full amount of both delinquent and current bills be paid in full, and the same shall be paid in full before service is restored. 
C.  To re-establish credit, a customer may be required to pay all back bills up to the time service was discontinued. The customer will also be required to pay reconnection charges as established by the city council. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.44.130 - Delinquent bills—Authority to assess penalties. 
The city council may by resolution prescribe penalties or charges to be assessed against delinquent accounts and shall have the power and authority to enforce collection thereof. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.44.140 - Delinquent bills—Collection agency charges. 
If, in an effort to collect a delinquent bill, the city uses the services of a collection agency, any and all collection agency fees shall be passed on to the delinquent customer. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.44.150 - Delinquent bills—Property owner liability and lien. 
Regardless of the whether the customer is the property owner or a tenant, by the adoption of a resolution, the city council may declare that delinquent charges and penalties for water, recycled water or sewer service, when recorded shall constitute a lien upon real property served after notice and hearing as in Section 13.44.150. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.44.160 - Delinquent bills—Formal notice and hearing. 
A.  On or before the fifteenth day of June of each year the city council shall hold a hearing to determine the amount of the delinquent charges and penalties for sewer and water service. Notice of hearing shall be given by the city clerk and shall contain a copy of the proposed resolution, state the time and place for a hearing on the proposed resolution, and provide that any person interested may appear at the hearing and be heard as to the charges and penalties. 
B.  The notice shall be published at least once each week for two weeks prior to the hearing in a newspaper published in the city. The first publication shall be at least fifteen days prior to the date of the hearing. 
C.  At the time and place fixed in the notice of hearing, the city council shall hold the hearing. At the hearing, any person interested may appear and be heard on the matters set forth in the notice. At the hearing the city council may change or modify the charges and penalties; provided, however, that no charge or penalty shall be increased from that set forth in the proposed resolution unless notice of intention to make said increase shall be published at least once or posted at least ten days prior to the hearing on the proposed charge. 
D.  At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council may determine that the charges and penalties are not discriminatory or excessive, comply with the law, and adopt said resolution as proposed or modified. 
E.  One of the modifications of the resolution may be the finding and determination by the city council that the amount of the charge and penalty shall be placed on the tax roll. If such finding and determination is made by the city council, the city clerk shall forward the amount fixed by the city council to the Sonoma County tax collector for placement on the tax roll next succeeding the hearing. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.44.170 - Charges as lien. 
Charges for potable or recycled water service and all penalties thereon, when confirmed by the city as provided in this chapter, shall constitute a lien upon the real property served and such lien shall continue until the charge and all penalties are fully paid or the property is sold therefore. The lien shall be prior to all other liens recorded after the lien for potable or recycled water charges is recorded as herein provided. In addition, the city council may authorize the finance director to place the lien on the tax roll of the property served. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.44.180 - Recordation of lien. 
The lien provided for in this chapter shall attach and be entitled to priority as of the time the finance director records the list of delinquent unpaid charges and penalties with the county recorder. Each recorded lien shall state the amount of each charge and the penalty, a description of the real property upon which the same is a lien, and the name of the city of Rohnert Park to which the same is payable. A list of all delinquent charges shall be recorded annually, but no delay or informality in recording them shall invalidate the lien or any unpaid charge or any subsequent act or proceeding. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
13.44.190 - Separate remedies. 
As separate, distinct, and cumulative remedies for the collection of said charges and penalties, the city shall use a collection agency or bring an action in court to collect the unpaid charge and all penalties. In the event of court action, reasonable attorney's fees may be awarded the city. In the event a collection agency is used, reasonable collection agency fees may be added to the unpaid charge. 
( Ord. No. 910 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-26-2017)  
Chapter 13.48 - SEWERS—ADMINISTRATION[11] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 834, § 8, adopted Feb. 22, 2011, repealed Ch. 13.48, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, Ch. 13.48 pertained to similar subject matter. See Ordinance List and Disposition Table for derivation. 
 
13.48.010 - Responsibility of city engineer and users. 
(A)  Responsibility of City Engineer. The City Engineer is charged with responsibility for the City's waste water control program and the administration and enforcement of the provisions of Chapters 13.08 through 13.52. For the purpose of inspecting the facilities for conformance with the provisions of Chapters 13.08 through 13.52, the City Engineer may, at any time, enter upon the premises of any person discharging or applying for permission to discharge nonresidential or industrial wastes into the City sewerage system. Such entry may be announced or unannounced, scheduled or unscheduled and may occur without prior notification to the user. The City Engineer may also request that a property owner provide all written records of lateral inspection, maintenance, repair or replacement at the time of inspection or within ten or more business days after receipt of the request. Any entry upon private property shall be in accordance with Section 13.52.135 of this ordinance. 
(B)  Responsibility of Users. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant, user and/or discharger to comply with all of the provisions of this sewer use ordinance. The omission to act by the city shall not relieve the applicant, user or discharger of responsibility to comply with the conditions of this sewer use ordinance, including, but not limited to, such requirements regarding permitting, pretreatment, monitoring, and reporting. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant, user or discharger to make determinations as to the nature of its operation and wastewater flow and to take such actions as may be required under this sewer use ordinance prior to any discharge of wastewater, whether or not the applicant, user or discharger has been informed by the city of the requirements which may apply to the applicant, user or discharger regarding its discharge. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 8, 2-22-2011)  
13.48.020 - Wastewater discharge permit. 
(A)  No SIU or non-residential user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the city engineer, except when the SIU has filed a timely application and its wastewater discharge permit is pending finalization and the city engineer has approved such discharge. 
(B)  The city engineer may require other users to obtain a wastewater discharge permit as necessary to carry out the purposes of this sewer use ordinance. 
(C)  Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this sewer use ordinance. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a user of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements with any federal, state and local law. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 8, 2-22-2011)  
13.48.030 - Authorization to discharge. 
The wastewater discharge permit expressly authorizes a user to discharge wastewater to the city sewerage system and POTW and is issued for that purpose. If, for any reason, a wastewater discharge permit is revoked, suspended, or otherwise held invalid, authorization to discharge is terminated and the user shall cease all discharge. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 8, 2-22-2011)  
13.48.040 - Wastewater discharge permit/existing conditions. 
Any unpermitted user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit, who was discharging to the POTW prior to the effective date of this sewer use ordinance, and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within 30 days after the effective date of this sewer use ordinance, apply to the city engineer for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with this sewer use ordinance. The user shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 30 days of the effective date of this sewer use ordinance except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the city engineer. Permits issued by the city engineer, pursuant to prior pretreatment requirements, shall remain valid for their stated terms or until terminated or amended pursuant to this sewer use ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 8, 2-22-2011)  
13.48.050 - Wastewater discharge permit/new connections. 
Any user who is required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit and who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW shall obtain such permits prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit shall be filed a minimum of 60 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. All new industrial users shall arrange for the city engineer to conduct a walk-through site inspection of the user's facilities during the 60 day period prior to connecting or contributing waste or wastewater to the city's sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 8, 2-22-2011)  
13.48.060 - Wastewater discharge permit application contents. 
When applying for a permit, the city engineer may require all users to submit either independently, or as part of an application, the following information: 
(A)  Identifying information: The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
(B)  General Facility Description. SIC numbers, hours of operation, principle business activities, products produced and/or services provided at this facility, number and type of employees, and proposed or actual hours of operation. 
(C)  Environmental Control Permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility including permitting agency, permit type, and identification number. 
(D)  Description of Operations. Facilities and plant operations/processes, wastewater generating activities, type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day) and disposal methods, each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production, time(s), and duration of all process discharges. 
(E)  Facility Layout. Facility layout including floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, process flow, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location and elevation and discharge locations. 
(F)  Flow Measurement. Measured average and maximum daily flow, monthly average, and seasonal variations of wastewater flow rates in gallons per day to the city sewer system from regulated process streams and other streams as necessary to use the combined wastestream formula or flow weighted average formula. 
(G)  Pollutant Measurement. Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including any pollutants in the discharge that are limited by any federal, state, or local standards, or pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process, and nature and concentration (or mass if pretreatment standard requires) of regulated pollutants in each regulated process (daily maximum and average concentration or mass when required by a pretreatment standard). Sampling and analysis will be undertaken in accordance with 40 CFR Part 136. 
(H)  Compliance Certification. A certification statement reviewed by an authorized representative of the user and certified by a qualified professional indicating whether the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is necessary for the user to meet pretreatment standards and requirements. [40 CFR Part 403.12(b)(6)] 
(I)  Other Information. Any other information required by the city engineer to evaluate the permit application. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the industrial user for revision. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 8, 2-22-2011)  
13.48.070 - Application signatories and certification. 
All wastewater discharge permit applications shall be signed by a responsible corporate officer, general partner, proprietor, or duly authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(Ord. No. 834, § 8, 2-22-2011)  
13.48.080 - Wastewater discharge permit decisions. 
The city engineer will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within sixty days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the city engineer will determine whether to issue a wastewater discharge permit. Any permit applicant or user (aggrieved party) may petition the city engineer to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within thirty days of notice of its issuance. Aggrieved parties may seek an administrative appeal under Section 13.52.200. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 8, 2-22-2011)  
13.48.090 - Wastewater discharge permit issuance process. 
(A)  No connection to the city sewer system shall be made until the connection has been approved by the city engineer. The owner of the premises to be served shall provide all information required by the city engineer, supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information which, in the judgment of the city engineer, is pertinent to the location and use of the premises. Separate connections may be required for each building of a single premise or for separation of industrial wastewater from sanitary sewage 
(B)  The wastewater discharge permit shall be issued upon final inspection and acceptance of construction of the connection and, when required, upon the application and issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 8, 2-22-2011)  
13.48.100 - Wastewater discharge permit duration. 
Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. The user shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit re-issuance at least ninety days prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. Expiration of a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the discharger of requirements outlined in their existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(A)  industrial wastewater discharge permits and ground water remediation discharge permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the wastewater discharge permit. 
(B)  A non-residential wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed six years from the effective date of the wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 8, 2-22-2011)  
13.48.110 - Wastewater discharge permit contents. 
A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the city engineer to prevent pass-through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. 
(A)  Wastewater discharge permits must contain provisions, requirements, and standards appropriate to carry out the objectives of this sewer use ordinance, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which shall not exceed five years for SIU and categorical users. 
(2)  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable. Any new user must apply for a new wastewater discharge permit and receive prior approval from the city engineer before discharging to the sewer; 
(3)  Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
(4)  Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on pretreatment standards; 
(5)  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedules may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law; 
(B)  Wastewater discharge permits may contain provisions, requirements, and standards appropriate to carry out the objectives of this sewer use ordinance , including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics. These limits may be based on pollutant concentration and/or mass and may include prohibitions on discharge of said pollutants; 
(2)  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
(3)  Implementation of best management practices or best available technology as determined by the city engineer. 
(4)  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
(5)  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans, Toxic Organic Management Plan or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges; 
(6)  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
(7)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection, sampling and flow metering facilities, and other related monitoring equipment and three years of records retention; 
(8)  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the user of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those that become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; 
(9)  Requirements for reporting compliance schedules, self-monitoring, change in conditions, change in discharge including slug loads, bypass, process changes and chemical changes and automatic resampling; 
(10)  The prohibition of dilution as partial or complete substitute for adequate pre-treatment to achieve compliance with permit conditions; 
(11)  Signatory requirements specifying the responsible corporate officer for the industrial user; and/or 
(12)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city engineer to ensure compliance with this sewer use ordinance, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 8, 2-22-2011)  
13.48.120 - Wastewater discharge permit modification. 
The city engineer may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(A)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(B)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(C)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(D)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the POTW, personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(E)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge or this sewer use ordinance; 
(F)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(G)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR Part 403.13; and/r 
(H)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit. 
The filing of a request by the user for a permit modification does not stay any permit condition. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 8, 2-22-2011)  
13.48.130 - Wastewater discharge permit transfer. 
Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation. However, nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the application of the terms and conditions of this sewer use ordinance, including enforcement penalties, from applying to a succeeding owner, successor in interest, or other assigns of an existing contract or wastewater discharge permit holder. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 8, 2-22-2011)  
13.48.140 - Wastewater discharge permit appeals. 
The city engineer shall provide notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit to the applicant. Any permit applicant or user (aggrieved party) may petition the city engineer to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within thirty days of notice of its issuance. Aggrieved parties may seek an administrative appeal under Section 13.52.200. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 8, 2-22-2011)  
13.48.150 - Wastewater survey. 
The city engineer may periodically require users to submit a survey that includes information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater. Failure to submit this survey within thirty days of the request shall be considered a violation of this sewer use ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 8, 2-22-2011)  
13.48.160 - Sampling. 
The city engineer may periodically require any user to sample their wastewater discharge or submit to the wastewater sampling by the city engineer in establishing the appropriate class of the user and/or to evaluate compliance with the standards and requirements of this sewer use ordinance. 
(A)  Sample Collection. Except as indicated in paragraph (B) below, the user shall collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the City Engineer may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or grab sampling over the production day where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with daily maximum discharge limits. 
(B)  Samples should be taken for Federal 40 CFR limits, for Categorical Industries immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist, or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment facilities exist. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user shall measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula in order to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 8, 2-22-2011)  
13.48.170 - Contents of reports on sampling and analysis. 
(A)  Reports shall contain results of sampling and analysis, identifying the nature and concentration (or mass, where required by the City) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where required) shall be reported. 
(B)  Reports, signed and certified by a duly authorized representative of the industrial user, as set forth in 40 CFR Part 403.6(a)(2)(ii) and 40 CFR Part 403.12(l) shall certify that such sampling and analysis are representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The date, precise location, method, and time of sampling and the names of the person(s) taking the samples; 
(2)  Sample preservation used; 
(3)  The dates analyses were performed; 
(4)  Chain of custody of the sample; 
(5)  Who performed the analyses; 
(6)  The analytical techniques/methods used; and 
(7)  The results of such analyses. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 8, 2-22-2011)  
13.48.180 - Analytical requirements. 
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or required report must be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA. All analyses shall be performed by a laboratory(ies) certified by the state for the specified pollutants and matrix to be analyzed. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 8, 2-22-2011)  
13.48.190 - Baseline monitoring reports. 
All categorical users shall submit to the city a baseline report within one hundred eighty days of the effective date of this section or one hundred eighty days after final administrative decision on a category determination, whichever is earlier. The baseline report shall contain the information specified in 40 CFR Part 403.12(b). The information required for application for a permit and/or modification of a permit may fulfill the requirements of the baseline report. If in submitting information to apply for or to modify a permit, the categorical user also intends to fulfill the requirements for the baseline report, the categorical user shall so state. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 8, 2-22-2011)  
13.48.200 - Compliance schedule progress reports. 
The user shall submit a progress report to the city engineer no later than fourteen days following each date in the compliance schedule (as defined in this ordinance) and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether the user complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 8, 2-22-2011)  
13.48.210 - Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. 
Within ninety days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements will submit to the city engineer a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process that are limited by pretreatment standards or requirements, the average and maximum daily flow for these process units, and the actual average production rate for these process units. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR Part 403.6(c), this report will contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operational and maintenance changes and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user and a certified qualified professional. Filing of this compliance report cannot relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability that may be imposed by this sewer use ordinance or other applicable law, or failure to meet the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements subsequent to the date for final compliance with such applicable standard. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 8, 2-22-2011)  
13.48.220 - Periodic compliance reports. 
(A)  All Significant Industrial Users shall, at a frequency determined by the City Engineer, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge that are limited by pretreatment standards or requirements and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports shall be signed and certified in accordance with 40 CFR Part 403.6(a)(2)(ii). The report shall contain a description of the methods utilized by the user in collecting the wastewater sample for analysis, including but not limited to the sampling device(s) used, the sampling period, the amount of each sample collected, sample handling and preservation techniques used, and date of sample delivery to the laboratory for analysis. 
(B)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities will be properly operated, cleaned, calibrated, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order is a violation and shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(C)  If a user, subject to the reporting requirement in this section, monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the City Engineer, using the procedures prescribed in this sewer use ordinance, the results of this monitoring will be included in the report. 
(D)  In the event a sample from a periodic compliance report indicates that a constituent is in violation of the allowable concentration levels as set forth in the user's permit or permit contract, the user shall inform the City within the next business day, repeat the sampling and pollutant analysis for the parameter in violation, and submit in writing the results of this second analysis within 30 days of the discovery of the first violation. The initial sampling and analysis report shall be submitted within 45 days of the initial sampling date with a cover report setting forth the causes of the violation, the remedial actions taken to date with regard to the violation, and the scheduled additional actions that will be implemented to prevent a recurrence. 
(E)  The City Engineer may require a signed statement by the user setting forth management practices and/or material usage practices that have an affect on the nature, volume, and quality of the wastewater discharge and/or that potentially will affect the ability to comply with pretreatment standard requirements. 
(F)  When required by the City Engineer, an industrial user shall submit a report indicating the concentration of specific pollutants discharged in the effluent. The determination of said pollutants by the City Engineer shall be based on what is reasonably expected to be found at the site and the frequency of monitoring shall be based on the compliance status of the industrial user. 
(G)  Periodic Compliance Reports may be waived by the City Engineer if the City is monitoring the user discharge. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 8, 2-22-2011)  
13.48.230 - Reports of potential problems. 
(A)  In the case of any discharge including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine or episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge or a slug load that may cause potential problems for the POTW (including a violation of the prohibited discharge standards of this sewer use ordinance), it is the responsibility of the user to immediately notify the city engineer of the incident. This notification shall include the location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume (if known), and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(B)  Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the city engineer, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar or future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability that may be incurred as a result of damage to the system, natural resources, or any other damage to persons or property. Nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability that may be imposed by this sewer use ordinance. 
(C)  Failure to notify the city of potential problem discharges shall be deemed a violation of this sewer use ordinance. 
(D)  A notice shall be permanently posted, advising employees of calling procedures in the event of a discharge described in paragraph (A) above. Employers shall ensure that all employees are advised of the emergency notification procedure and containment procedures. 
(E)  The city has the authority to deny or condition new or increased contributions of pollutants or changes in the nature of pollutants to the POTW by permitted and non-permitted users where such contributions do not meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or where such contributions would cause the POTW to violate its waste discharge requirements. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 8, 2-22-2011)  
13.48.240 - Reports from un-permitted users. 
All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the city engineer if deemed necessary by the city engineer to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the public and the integrity of the city sewer and treatment system. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 8, 2-22-2011)  
13.48.250 - Reports of changed conditions. 
Each user shall notify the city engineer of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system that might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least sixty days before the change. 
(A)  The city engineer may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application as required by this sewer use ordinance. 
(B)  The city engineer may issue a wastewater discharge permit as required by this sewer use ordinance or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(C)  No user shall implement the planned changed condition(s) until or unless the city engineer has responded to the user's notice. 
(D)  For purposes of this section, flow increase of twenty percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants, shall be deemed a significant change to the user's operations or system. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 8, 2-22-2011)  
13.48.260 - Reports as directed by the city engineer. 
The city engineer may at any time require waste reports, including, but not limited to, questionnaires, technical reports, sampling reports, and test analyses, and periodical reports of waste water discharge. When the requested report is not adequate in the judgment of the city engineer, he may require the user to supply such additional information as the city engineer deems necessary. Waste reports may include, but are not necessarily limited to, nature of the process, volume and rates of waste water flow, elements, constituents, and characteristics of the waste water, together with any information required in the sewer use permit. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 8, 2-22-2011)  
13.48.270 - Monitoring facilities. 
(A)  Users shall install sampling and/or monitoring equipment, including manholes, as deemed necessary by the city engineer. The user's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at the user's own expense. All devices used to determine wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated, at a frequency to be determined by the city engineer, to ensure their accuracy. The sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the city's requirements and all applicable construction standards and specifications. construction shall be completed within ninety days following written notification by the city engineer unless a time extension is granted by the city engineer. 
(B)  Location of Equipment. The sampling and monitoring equipment shall be situated on the user's premises, but the city engineer may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public right-of-way and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. 
(C)  Access to Equipment. If the monitoring facility is inside the user's fence, there shall be accommodations to allow access for city personnel, such as a gate secured with a city lock. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole to allow accurate sampling and compositing of samples for analysis. 
(D)  Effluent Meter and Composite Sampler. New industrial users or existing users planning a remodel of existing process facilities and/or pretreatment system that contribute high strength wastewater to the POTW shall install a non-resettable totalizing effluent meter and a flow proportioned composite sampler that is controlled by a flow meter. 
(E)  Provisions for Existing Users. Existing industrial users shall be subject to the provisions of this section as determined by the city engineer to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the public and the integrity of the city sewer and treatment system. 
(F)  Plan Review. Detailed plans showing the operation and proposed installation of all monitoring and/or sampling equipment shall be submitted to the city for review and shall be acceptable to the city engineer before installation of the equipment. Any subsequent changes to any sampling and/or monitoring equipment shall be reported to and be acceptable to the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 8, 2-22-2011)  
13.48.280 - Pretreatment facilities. 
(A)  Where required in the waste discharge permit or by state or federal laws and regulations, the discharger shall provide, operate and maintain, at the discharger's expense, such preliminary treatment or controls as may be necessary to eliminate or reduce the objectionable characteristics, constituents, or quantities and rates of discharge to conform to the maximum limits provided for in the permit. 
(B)  Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information related to proposed pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted for the approval of the city engineer. Construction of such facilities shall not commence until said approval is obtained in writing, and use of such facilities shall not commence until completed facilities are approved in writing. Pretreatment facilities shall be continuously maintained in satisfactory and effective operating condition to the satisfaction of the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 8, 2-22-2011)  
13.48.290 - Additional pretreatment measures. 
(A)  The city engineer may require any user discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(B)  From time to time the city may adopt best management practices for activities and/or industries. In these cases, users may employ the adopted best management practices in lieu of application of other pretreatment technologies, when approved by the city engineer. 
(C)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 8, 2-22-2011)  
13.48.300 - Grease Removal Devices. 
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors or other grease removal device shall be provided by the user when, in the opinion of the city engineer, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, sand or other harmful ingredients. All interception units shall be of type and capacity acceptable to the city engineer and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. All grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained in continuously efficient operation at all times. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense. The user shall keep and maintain records that document all cleaning, repair and proper disposal from all such interceptors for the preceding three years. Such records shall be kept on the site for review by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 8, 2-22-2011)  
13.48.310 - Amalgam separators. 
In addition to the requirements set forth below, the city engineer may specify additional requirements for dental facilities that remove or place amalgam fillings. 
(A)  All owners and operators of dental facilities that remove or place amalgam fillings shall comply with the following waste management practices: 
(1)  No person shall rinse chair-side traps, vacuum screens, or amalgam separator equipment in a sink or other connection to the sanitary sewer. 
(2)  Owners and operators of dental facilities shall ensure that all staff members who handle amalgam waste are trained in the proper handling, management, and disposal of mercury-containing material and fixer-containing solutions, and shall maintain training records that shall be available for inspection by the city engineer during normal business hours. 
(3)  Amalgam waste shall be stored and managed in accordance with the instructions of the recycler or hauler of such materials. 
(4)  Bleach and other chlorine-containing disinfectants shall not be used to disinfect the vacuum line system. 
(5)  The use of bulk mercury is prohibited. Only pre-capsulated dental amalgam is permitted. 
(B)  All owners and operators of dental vacuum suction systems, except as set forth in paragraphs (C) and (D), below, shall comply with the following: 
(1)  An ISO 11143 certified amalgam separator device or comparable device shall be installed for each dental vacuum suction system on or before one year of the effective date of this title provided, however, that all dental facilities that are newly constructed on and after the effective date of this sewer use ordinance shall include an installed ISO 11143 certified amalgam separator device. The installed device must be ISO 11143 certified as capable of removing a minimum of ninety-five percent of amalgam. The amalgam separator system shall be certified at flow rates comparable to the flow rate of the actual vacuum suction system operation. Neither the separator device nor the related plumbing shall include an automatic flow bypass. For facilities that require an amalgam separator that exceeds the practical capacity of ISO 11143 test methodology, a non-certified separator will be accepted, provided that smaller units from the same manufacturer and of the same technology are ISO-certified. Alternative materials and methods may be proposed to the city engineer for approval. 
(2)  Proof of certification and installation records shall be submitted to the city engineer within thirty days of installation. 
(3)  Amalgam separators shall be maintained in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations. Installation, certification, and maintenance records shall be available for immediate inspection upon request by the city engineer during normal business hours. 
(C)  Facilities with vacuum suction systems that meet all of the following conditions may apply to the city engineer for an exemption to the requirements of paragraph (B), above: 
(1)  The system was installed before the effective date of this title. 
(2)  The system is a dry vacuum pump system with an air-water separator. 
(3)  The sedimentation tank is non-bottom draining, with the drain above the anticipated maximum level of accumulated sludge. 
(4)  Evidence of regular pump outs (a minimum of once a year, or more often if either directed by the manufacturer or necessary to keep solids from exiting through the drain) is maintained and open to inspection by the city engineer during normal business hours. 
(5)  The system has no direct discharge pipe to the sewer on the bottom of the sedimentation tank. 
An owner or operator whose facility meets all five conditions in this subdivision may apply for an exemption by written letter to the city engineer. The city engineer will review the system and, if the exemption is approved, shall provide a written letter of exemption. An exemption obtained pursuant to this subdivision section shall expire upon installation of a new vacuum system. Upon expiration of the exemption, the facility shall comply with paragraph (B) of this section before commencing further operation. 
(D)  The following types of dental practice are exempt from this Section, provided that removal or placement of amalgam fillings occurs at the facility no more than three days per year: orthodontics, periodontics, oral and maxillofacial surgery, radiology, oral pathology or oral medicine, and endodontistry and prosthodontistry. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 8, 2-22-2011)  
13.48.320 - Right of entry—Inspection and sampling. 
The city engineer shall have the right to enter the premises of any user announced or unannounced, to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of city ordinances and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the city engineer ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. Any entry upon private property shall be in accordance with Section 13.52.135 of this ordinance. 
(A)  Where a user has security measures in force that require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the city engineer shall be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(B)  The city engineer shall have the right to set up or require installation of, on the user's property, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
(C)  If deemed necessary by the city engineer, the city engineer may require the industrial user to install sampling and monitoring equipment. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its expense. the city engineer may require the installation of such facilities on the premises of the user at a location that will be accessible to the city engineer at all times. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated and certified periodically to ensure their accuracy. 
(D)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the city engineer and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be the responsibility of the user. 
(E)  When the owner of premises fails to comply with an order to cease and desist, allowing the entrance of surface or subsurface drainage water from the owner's premise to the city sewer system, the city engineer shall have the right to enter the premises and to block the flow of drainage water. 
(F)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city engineer access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this sewer use ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 8, 2-22-2011)  
13.48.330 - Unmetered waste flows. 
Sewage and industrial wastewater flows from nonresidential and industrial users not required to install control manholes shall be determined as follows: 
(A)  For premises where no significant portion of the water received from any source is consumed in the principal activity of the user, or is removed from the premises by means other than the city sewerage system, the volume of waste flow shall be equal to the total volume of water used from all sources. Water received from each source shall be determined by the registration shown in the corresponding water meter. When required by the city engineer, unmetered water sources shall be equipped with meters at the user's expense. Size and type of water meters and frequency of testing shall be as specified in the sewer use permit. 
(B)  For premises where a portion of the water received from any source does not flow into the sewerage system, either because of the principal activity of the user or because of its removal by other means, the volume of waste flow shall be equal to the volume of water used from all sources less the volume of water removed by the user's activity. Water received from each source, as well as water removed, shall be determined by the registration shown in the corresponding water meters or by other means approved by the city engineer. Unmetered water removals shall be equipped with meters at the user's expense. Size and type of water meters and frequency of testing shall be as specified in the sewer use permit. 
(C)  All meters required in subsections (A) and (B) of this Section shall be installed in accordance with city standards at the user's expense. Existing private meters installed by the user prior to the effective date of the ordinance shall continue in service until they are required to be replaced. A monthly service charge may be assessed to the user to cover city meter reading and maintenance costs. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 8, 2-22-2011)  
13.48.340 - Timing. 
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports that are not mailed, the date of receipt of the report will govern. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 8, 2-22-2011)  
13.48.350 - Record keeping. 
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this sewer use ordinance shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this sewer use ordinance and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records will include the date, precise location, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples, the dates analyses were performed, who performed the analyses, the analytical techniques or methods used, and the results of such analyses. These records must be retained for a period of at least five years. This period will be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 8, 2-22-2011)  
13.48.360 - Confidential information. 
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the city engineer's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public in accordance with state law. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR Part 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 8, 2-22-2011)  
Chapter 13.52 - SEWERS—ENFORCEMENT[12] 
Sections: 
Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 834, § 9, adopted Feb. 22, 2011, repealed Ch. 13.52, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, Ch. 13.52 pertained to similar subject matter. See Ordinance List and Disposition Table for derivation. 
 
Article 1. - General Enforcement 
 
13.52.010 - Intent. 
The enforcement provisions specified in this sewer use ordinance apply to all classes of users to the extent such user violates any provision of this sewer use ordinance or administrative order of the city engineer pursuant to this sewer use ordinance. In order to achieve the maximum degree of compliance desired, the city may use a variety of enforcement mechanisms. The enforcement mechanisms may range from informal administrative action, to a request for criminal prosecution. The city may, at its discretion, implement the use of any mechanism or the concurrent use of several mechanisms in order to enforce the provisions of this sewer use ordinance. The enforcement mechanisms provided herein may be cumulative in respect to such other enforcement mechanisms or civil and criminal penalties as may be otherwise available under the laws of the State of California and the United States of America. Nothing in this sewer use ordinance is intended to prevent state and/or federal regulatory agencies from undertaking enforcement actions as may otherwise be available due to a violation of this ordinance that also constitutes a violation of federal or state statutes and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 9, 2-22-2011)  
13.52.020 - Enforcement response plan. 
Rules for enforcement. The city engineer may adopt procedures and rules for the implementation and administration of this sewer use ordinance. 
When the city engineer finds that a discharge of industrial wastes is taking place or threatening to take place in violation of this ordinance, wastewater source control requirements, or the provisions of a sewer use permit, the City Engineer may initiative any of the following enforcement actions without limitation: 
A.  Notice of Violation (NOV). When the city engineer finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this sewer use ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city engineer may serve upon that user a written Notice of Violation. Within ten days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the City Engineer. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the Notice of Violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city engineer to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a Notice of Violation. 
B.  Administrative Orders (AO). The city engineer may issue administrative orders and/or enter into assurances of compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for the noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. 
(1)  Consent Order. The city engineer may enter into consent orders, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and affect as administrative orders issued and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(2)  Show Cause Order. The city engineer may order a user that has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this sewer use ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the City Engineer and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(3)  Compliance Orders. When the city engineer finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this sewer use ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the City Engineer may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge, directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(4)  Cease and Desist Orders. When the city engineer finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this sewer use ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the City Engineer may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
(a)  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
(b)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 9, 2-22-2011)  
13.52.025 - Violation—Penalty. 
No person shall violate any provisions of or fail to comply with any of the requirements of Chapters 13.08 through 13.52. Any person intentionally or negligently violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the requirements of Chapters 13.08 through 13.52 is guilty of a infraction. Each person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of Chapters 13.08 through 13.52 is committed, continued, or permitted by such person. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 9, 2-22-2011)  
13.52.030 - Administrative fines—Civil penalties. 
(A)  When the city engineer finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this sewer use ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city engineer may fine such user in an amount determined pursuant to the city enforcement response plan. Pursuant to the authority of California Government Code Sections 54739 to 54740.6, the city may issue administrative complaints, conduct administrative hearings, and/or impose civil penalties in accordance with the procedures set forth in these sections for violation of the city's requirements set forth in this sewer use ordinance. The amount of any civil penalties imposed under this section that have remained delinquent for a period of 60 days shall constitute a lien against the real property of the discharger from which the discharge originated resulting in the imposition of the civil penalty. 
(B)  Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after thirty calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter. A lien against the user's property may be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties. 
(C)  Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the city engineer to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within ten days of being notified of the fine. Where the city engineer believes a request has merit, the city may convene a hearing on the matter within fifteen days after receiving the request from the user. The city engineer may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders to assess the fine. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. 
(D)  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 9, 2-22-2011)  
13.52.040 - Judicial enforcement remedies. 
Any user who violates any order issued by the city engineer for violation of provisions of this sewer use ordinance regulating or prohibiting discharge of wastewater that causes or threatens to cause a condition of contamination, pollution, or nuisance, as defined in Section 13.12.020 may be liable civilly in a sum not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for each day in which such violation occurs. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 9, 2-22-2011)  
13.52.050 - Injunctive relief. 
When the city engineer finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this sewer use ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or otherwise causes or threatens to cause a condition of contamination, pollution or nuisance, the city engineer may seek the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, to restrain or compel the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this sewer use ordinance on activities of the user. The city engineer may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 9, 2-22-2011)  
13.52.060 - Performance bonds. 
The city engineer may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this sewer use ordinance, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the city engineer to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 9, 2-22-2011)  
13.52.070 - Liability insurance. 
The city engineer may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this sewer use ordinance, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW and/or the city sewerage system caused by its discharge. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 9, 2-22-2011)  
13.52.080 - Water supply severance. 
Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this sewer use ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, potable water service to the user may be terminated. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 9, 2-22-2011)  
13.52.090 - Public nuisances. 
A violation of any provision of this sewer use ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the city engineer. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the city code governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the city for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 9, 2-22-2011)  
13.52.100 - Cost reimbursement. 
When the owner of premises fails to comply with an order to cease and desist the entrance of surface or subsurface drainage water from his premises to the public sewer, the city engineer shall have the right to enter the premises and to block the flow of drainage water. T he costs of blocking such flow shall become a lien upon the premises. Any entry upon private property shall be in accordance with Section 13.52.135 of this ordinance. 
(A)  When the discharge of wastewater causes an obstruction, damage, or other impairment to the city sewer system or treatment plant, the city engineer may tabulate the expenses incurred for the work required to clean or repair the facility and correct the treatment process. Such expenses shall be reimbursed to the city by adding said expenses to the user's billing for industrial service charges. 
(B)  All costs associated with the city's undertaking of enforcement actions pursuant to this sewer use ordinance, including attorney's fees for civil or administrative actions undertaken or any fines incurred, shall be paid by the user. These costs may include but not be limited to the costs for termination of service, reinstitution of service, compliance sampling and analysis, and administrative activities undertaken by the city. However, if the user prevails in an appeal or a civil action taken to nullify an enforcement action pursued by the city under this sewer use ordinance, the user shall not be responsible for the costs incurred by the city in pursuing said enforcement action. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 9, 2-22-2011)  
13.52.110 - Responding to significant noncompliance. 
Any violation of pretreatment standards or requirements (limits, sampling, analysis, reporting, and meeting compliance schedules and regulatory deadlines) is an instance of noncompliance for which the significant industrial user is liable for enforcement, including penalties per this ordinance. However, the city is required to identify violations or patterns of violations by SIUs that are deemed to be instances of significant noncompliance (SNC). Additionally, the determination of significant noncompliance shall be used as the basis for reporting the SNC to the regulatory authorities and publishing of the list of industries in SNC as is required of the city by pretreatment program standards. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 9, 2-22-2011)  
13.52.120 - Publication of users in significant non-compliance. 
The city engineer shall publish annually in accordance with 40 CFR 403, in any paper of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdiction served by the POTW, a list of the users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance (SNC) with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. For the purposes of this provision, a significant industrial user (or any industrial user that violates paragraphs (C), (D), or (H) of this section) is in significant noncompliance if its violations meet one or more of the following criteria: 
(A)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
(B)  Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC criteria (TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(C)  Any other discharge violation that the city engineer believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(D)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the city engineer's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(E)  Failure to meet, within ninety days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(F)  Failure to provide within forty-five days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(G)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(H)  Any other violation(s) or group of violations, including a violation of best management practices, which the city engineer determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 9, 2-22-2011)  
13.52.130 - Compliance schedules. 
A Notice Of Violation Or Administrative Order may contain a compliance schedule. The following conditions shall apply to the schedule. 
(A)  The schedule shall contain increments of progress or milestones in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events, including the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the industrial user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards or city local limits. 
(B)  No increment referred to in paragraph (A) shall exceed nine months. 
(C)  Not later than fourteen days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a progress or milestone report to the city engineer including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the industrial user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the city. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 9, 2-22-2011)  
13.52.135 - Search/inspection warrants. 
(A)  If the city engineer has been refused access to a building, structure or property or any part thereof, and if the city engineer has probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of city ordinance or that there is a need to inspect or sample as part of a routine inspection/sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with city ordinance or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the city engineer may seek issuance of a search, seizure, or inspection warrant. In the event of an emergency that reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, or if the user consents, inspections shall be made without the issuance of a warrant. 
(B)  To the extent that the owner or possessor of the premises requires that a warrant be received, the city may, in its discretion, suspend the permit and/or any other right to discharge to sanitary facilities immediately, and such suspension may continue until such time as a warrant has been received and the inspection has been completed. If no violation of this sewer use ordinance or the permit, if applicable, is found, the suspension shall be lifted. In the event that violations of this sewer use ordinance or the permit, if applicable, are found, then the suspension may, at the discretion of the city, be continued or terminated, or other enforcement remedies may be sought. 
(C)  The city may choose to inspect the facility to determine compliance with all standards as set forth in this sewer use ordinance or permit if applicable, and additionally, such inspections may be undertaken to verify the wastewater flows and strengths reported by the discharger. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 9, 2-22-2011)  
13.52.140 - Emergency suspensions of discharge. 
The city engineer may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge that reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The city engineer may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or that presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
(A)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its discharge. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city engineer may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The city engineer may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city engineer that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in Section 13.52.150 are initiated against the user. 
(B)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the city engineer prior to the date of any show cause hearing. 
(C)  After reasonably attempting to informally notify the user, the city may take all necessary steps to halt or prevent such discharge including, but not limited to, plugging or physically disconnecting the user's access to the city sewer system. 
(D)  Nothing in this Section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 9, 2-22-2011)  
13.52.150 - Wastewater discharge permit revocation/termination of service. 
(A)  Wastewater discharge permits may be revoked or users' service may be terminated when any provision of this sewer use ordinance is violated or if a discharge of industrial waste causes or threatens to cause a condition of contamination, pollution, or nuisance, as defined in Chapters 13.08 through 13.52. This provision is in addition to other statutes, rules, or regulations authorizing termination of service for delinquency in payment, or for any other reason. 
(B)  Such users will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under Section 13.52.020.B. why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the city engineer shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(C)  Whenever a premises has been disconnected from the city sewerage system for a violation of this sewer use ordinance, reconnection of said premises shall be per requirements as set forth by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 9, 2-22-2011)  
13.52.160 - Upset. 
(A)  For the purposes of this section, upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(B)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of paragraph (C), below, are met. 
(C)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
(1)  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
(2)  The facility was, at the time, being operated in a prudent and competent manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
(3)  The user has submitted the following information to the city engineer within twenty-four hours of becoming aware of the upset if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days: 
(a)  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
(b)  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
(c)  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(D)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(E)  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(F)  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 9, 2-22-2011)  
13.52.170 - Bypass. 
(A)  For the purposes of this section, 
(1)  Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
(2)  Severe Property Damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities that causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources that can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(B)  A user may allow any bypass to occur that does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of paragraphs (C) and (D) of this section. 
(1)  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit written prior notice to the city engineer, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
(2)  A user shall submit oral notice to the city engineer of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty-four hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the bypass. The city engineer may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within twney-four hours. 
(C)  Bypass is prohibited, and the city engineer may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
(1)  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
(2)  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineer judgment to prevent a bypass that occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or maintenance; and 
(3)  The user submitted notices as required under paragraph (B) of this section. 
(D)  The city engineer may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the city engineer determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in paragraph (C) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 9, 2-22-2011)  
13.52.180 - Affirmative defense. 
A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the prohibitions set forth in section 13.36.020 (excluding subsections (B)(1), (2), and (8)) if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass-through or interference and that either: 
(A)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass-through or interference; or 
(B)  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 9, 2-22-2011)  
13.52.190 - Disputes—Request for ruling. 
If any user or applicant for a permit disputes the interpretation or application of this sewer use ordinance, it may request a ruling by the city engineer, who will set forth his or her determinations on the request. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 9, 2-22-2011)  
13.52.200 - Appeals. 
If the discharger or applicant for a permit is dissatisfied with the determinations so made by the city engineer, under Sections 13.48.080, 13.48.140, or 13.52.190, within thirty days after receipt of said ruling by the city engineer, he shall appeal said ruling by giving written notice of the basis of his appeal to the city manager. The city manager shall, within thirty days after receipt of said written notice of appeal, make a determination of the issue submitted. The determination of the city manager shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 9, 2-22-2011)  
13.52.210 - Fraud and false statements. 
Pursuant to the provisions of 18 U.S.C. § 1001, relating to fraud and false statements, and the provisions of Section 309(c)(2) of the Act governing false statements, representations, or certification in reports required under the Act, any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation, or certification in any application, record, report, plan, or other document filed or required to be maintained for this sewer use ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, or who falsifies or tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this sewer use ordinance, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 9, 2-22-2011)  
13.52.220 - Pretreatment charges and fees. 
Subject to the limitations set forth in state law, the city may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program that may include: 
(A)  Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing such applications; 
(B)  Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users; 
(C)  Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(D)  Fees for filing appeals; and 
(E)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. 
(F)  In the absence of specific fees, the city may recover actual time and materials costs plus a seven percent administrative fee for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program including but not limited to all actions listed in A, B, C and D above. 
(Ord. No. 834, § 9, 2-22-2011)  
Chapter 13.64 - STORM WATER DISCHARGE 
Sections: 
 
13.64.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to ensure the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the city of Rohnert Park, and protect and enhance the water quality of watercourses and water bodies in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and NPDES Phase II storm water regulations for small municipal separate storm sewer systems, by reducing pollutants in storm water discharges to the maximum extent practicable and by prohibiting non-storm water discharges to the storm drain system. 
(Ord. 714 § 1 (part), 2004)  
13.64.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
"Best Management Practices" ("BMP") means activities, practices, and procedures implemented to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to the municipal storm drain system and waters of the United States. Best Management Practices include but are not limited to: treatment facilities to remove pollutants from storm water; operating and maintenance procedures; facility management practices to control runoff, spillage or leaks of non-storm water, waste disposal, and drainage from materials storage; erosion and sediment control practices; and the prohibition of specific activities, practices, and procedures and such other provisions as the city determines appropriate for the control of pollutants. 
"City" means the city of Rohnert Park. 
"Clean Water Act" means the federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
"Construction Activity" means activities subject to National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System ("NPDES") Construction Permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one or more acres. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating and demolition. 
"Hazardous Materials" means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed (California Health and Safety Code § 25117). 
"Illegal Discharge" means any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the storm drain system, except as exempted in subsections 13.64.050(B) (1)—(3). 
An "Illicit Connection" is defined as either of the following: 
1.  Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system, including but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any non-storm water discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by a government agency; or 
2.  Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the city. 
"National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water Discharge Permits" means general, group, and individual storm water discharge permits which regulate facilities defined in federal NPDES regulations pursuant to the Clean Water Act. The California Regional Water Quality Control Board, North Coast Region (hereinafter, Regional Board) and the State Water Resources Control Board have adopted general storm water discharge permits, including but not limited to the general construction activity and general industrial activity permits. 
"Non-Storm Water Discharge" means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of storm water or any release of pollutants that potentially or actually discharges to the city's storm drain system. 
"Pollutant" means anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure (including but not limited to sediments, slurries, and concrete rinsates); and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
"Pollution" means the human-made or human-induced alteration of the quality of waters by waste to a degree which unreasonably affects, or has the potential to unreasonably affect, either the waters for beneficial uses or the facilities which serve these beneficial uses (California Water Code § 13050). 
"Porter-Cologne Act" means the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act as amended (California Water Code § 13000 et seq.). 
"Premises" means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
"Storm Drain System" means publicly-owned facilities operated by the city by which storm water is collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, creeks, reservoirs, and other drainage structures which are within the city and are not part of a publicly owned treatment works as defined at 40 Code of Federal Regulations Section 122.2. 
"Storm Water" means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from rainstorm events. 
"Waters of the United States" means surface watercourses and water bodies as defined at 40 Code of Federal Regulations § 122.2 including all natural waterways and definite channels and depressions in the earth that may carry water, even though such waterways may only carry water during rains and storms and may not carry storm water at and during all times and seasons. 
(Ord. 714 § 1 (part), 2004)  
13.64.030 - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands lying within the city including any amendments or revisions thereto. 
(Ord. 714 § 1 (part), 2004)  
13.64.040 - Administration. 
The city manager of the city shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the city manager may be delegated in writing by the city manager to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the city. 
(Ord. 714 § 1 (part), 2004)  
13.64.050 - Prohibition of illegal discharges. 
A.  The release of non-storm water discharges to the city's storm water system is prohibited. 
B.  The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition set forth in subsection (A) of this section: 
1.  Any discharge in compliance with an NPDES permit issued to the discharger and administered by the State of California under the authority of the United States Environmental Protection Agency; 
2.  Discharges from the following activities will not be considered a prohibited discharge to the city's storm water system when properly managed: flushing of potable water from potable water lines and other discharges from potable water sources, landscape irrigation and lawn watering, irrigation water, diverted stream flows, rising ground waters, uncontaminated ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation and footing drains, water from crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, runoff from individual residential car washing, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, flows from emergency fire fighting, and other flows necessary for implementing BMPs directed or approved by the city manager. 
3.  With written concurrence of the Regional Water Quality Control Board, the city may exempt, in writing, other non-storm water discharges that are neither a source of pollutants to the storm drain system nor waters of the United States. 
C.  Any discharge that would result in, or contribute to, a violation of any NPDES permit for storm water discharges from within the city and any amendment, revision, or reissuance of such permit, either separately considered or when combined with other discharges, is prohibited. Liability for any such discharge shall be the responsibility of the person(s) causing or responsible for the discharge, and such persons shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees in any administrative or judicial enforcement action relating to such discharge. 
D.  It is unlawful to establish, use, maintain, or continue unauthorized drainage connections to the city's storm water system. 
E.  It is unlawful to establish, use, maintain, or continue drainage connections to the city's storm water system that are or may be a source of prohibited discharges. 
F.  It is unlawful to commence or continue any unauthorized and/or prohibited discharges to the city's storm water system. 
G.  No person shall throw, deposit, leave, keep or permit to be thrown, deposited, placed, left or maintained, any refuse, household hazardous wastes or other hazardous wastes, garbage, debris, or other wastes, or other discarded or abandoned objects or articles in or upon any storm water system or upon any public or private plot of land in the city so that the same might become a pollutant, except in lawfully established waste disposal facilities. 
(Ord. 714 § 1 (part), 2004)  
13.64.060 - Requirements for reducing pollutants in storm water. 
A.  Any person engaging in activities that may result in pollutants entering the city's storm water system shall undertake all practicable measures to reduce and/or eliminate such pollutants. All activities that do actually, or may potentially, result in the deposit of pollutants in or on the city's storm water system, in any tributary of this system, and all land which drains to either this system or any of its tributaries shall be construed as activities which may result in pollutants entering the city's storm water system. Examples of such activities include, but are not limited to, ownership and use of premises that may be a source of pollutants such as parking lots, gasoline stations, industrial facilities, business enterprises, and dwelling units. 
B.  Any construction contractor performing work in the city shall implement appropriate best management practices to prevent the discharge of construction wastes or debris or contaminants from construction materials, tools, and equipment from entering the storm water system. 
C.  Persons owning, operating, or maintaining a paved parking lot, the paved areas of a gas station, a paved private street, road, or driveway and related storm water systems shall clean those structures as frequently and thoroughly as practicable in a manner that does not result in discharge of pollutants to the storm water system. 
D.  Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property reasonably free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. The owner or lessee shall not remove healthy bank vegetation beyond that actually necessary for maintenance, nor remove said vegetation in such a manner as to increase the vulnerability of the watercourse to erosion. The property owner shall be responsible for maintaining and stabilizing that portion of the watercourse that is within his or her property lines in order to protect against erosion and degradation of the watercourse originating or contributed from their property. 
E.  The occupant or tenant, or in the absence of occupant or tenant, the owner or proprietor of any real property in the city in front of which there is a paved sidewalk shall maintain that portion of the sidewalk in front of the property free of dirt or litter to the maximum extent practicable. Sweepings from the sidewalk shall not be swept or otherwise made or allowed to go into the gutter or roadway or any element of any drainage system, but shall be disposed of in receptacles maintained as required for the disposal of solid waste. 
F.  Each discharger associated with construction activity disturbing more than one acre, or other discharger described in any general storm water permit addressing such discharges as may be adopted by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the State Water Resources Control Board, or the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, North Coast Region, shall provide the notice of intent, comply with, and undertake all other activities required by any general storm water permit applicable to such dischargers, and shall provide a copy of the notice of intent and of each annual report pursuant to any general storm water permit to the city manager, and shall pay any associated monitoring and enforcement fees to the city that may be set by the city council. Each discharger identified in an individual NPDES permit relating to storm water discharges shall comply with and undertake all activities required by such permit. 
G.  Where best management practice guidelines or requirements have been adopted or published by the Environmental Protection Agency, the Regional Water Quality Control Board, or the city, for any activity, operation or facility which may cause or contribute to prohibited discharges, every person undertaking such activity or operation or owning or operating such commercial facility shall comply with such guideline or requirement. 
H.  The city manager may require any business in the city that is engaged in activities which may result in prohibited discharges to develop and implement a storm water pollution prevention plan, which must include an employee training program. Business activities which may require a storm water pollution prevention plan include, but are not limited to, maintenance, storage, manufacturing, assembly, equipment operations, vehicle loading or fueling, or cleanup procedures which are carried out partially or wholly out of doors. 
I.  The city may adopt requirements identifying appropriate best management practices to control the volume, rate, and potential pollutant load of storm water runoff from new development and redevelopment projects as may be appropriate to minimize the generation, transport and discharge of pollutants. The city shall incorporate such requirements in any land use entitlement and construction or building-related permit to be issued relative to such development or redevelopment. The owner and developer shall comply with the terms, provisions, and conditions of such land use entitlements and building permits as required in the ordinance. 
(Ord. 714 § 1 (part), 2004)  
13.64.070 - Requirement to eliminate illegal discharges. 
The city manager may require by written notice that a person responsible for an illegal discharge immediately, or by a specified date, discontinue the discharge and, if necessary, take measures to eliminate the source of the discharge to prevent the occurrence of future illegal discharges. 
(Ord. 714 § 1 (part), 2004)  
13.64.080 - Requirement to eliminate or secure approval for illicit connections. 
A.  The city manager may require by written notice that a person responsible for an illicit connection to the storm drain system comply with the requirements of this chapter to eliminate or secure approval for the connection by a specified date, regardless of whether or not the connection or discharges to it had been established or approved prior to the effective date of this ordinance. 
B.  If, subsequent to eliminating a connection found to be in violation of this ordinance, the responsible person can demonstrate that an illegal discharge will no longer occur, said person may request city approval to reconnect. The reconnection or reinstallation of the connection shall be at the responsible person's expense. 
(Ord. 714 § 1 (part), 2004)  
13.64.090 - Requirement to remediate. 
Whenever the city manager finds that a discharge of pollutants is taking place or has occurred which will result in, or has resulted in, pollution of storm water, the storm drain system, or waters of the U.S., the city manager may require by written notice to the owner of the property or the responsible person that the pollution be remediated and the affected property restored within a specified time. 
(Ord. 714 § 1 (part), 2004)  
13.64.100 - Requirement to monitor and analyze. 
The city manager may require by written notice of requirement that any person engaged in any activity or owning or operating any facility which may cause or contribute to storm water pollution, illegal discharges, or non-storm water discharges to the storm drain system or waters of the U.S., to undertake at said person's expense such monitoring and analyses and furnish such reports to the city as deemed necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 714 § 1 (part), 2004)  
13.64.110 - Notification of spills. 
A.  The owner of a commercial facility or the persons responsible for emergency response for a commercial facility have the responsibility to train facility personnel and maintain notification procedures to assure: 
1.  Immediate notification is provided to the city department of public works of any suspected, confirmed, or unconfirmed release of material, pollutants, or waste creating a risk of discharge into the city storm water system; 
2.  Immediate notification is given to the "911" emergency response system if said discharge poses an immediate threat to the public health or safety and/or the environment; 
3.  Written notification is provided to the city manager within five working days. 
B.  Training of personnel shall assure that all BMPs are being fully and correctly implemented and that all releases of any non-storm water discharge or of any pollutant that threatens to enter the city's storm water system are immediately recognized and that appropriate response is taken in the event of such release. 
C.  As soon as any person in charge of a commercial facility or who is responsible for emergency response for a commercial facility has knowledge of, or reasonably could be expected to have knowledge of, any suspected, confirmed or unconfirmed release of a non-storm water discharge entering, or of any pollutant that is threatening to enter, the city storm water system from such facility, such person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the early discovery and containment and clean up such release and shall immediately notify the city department of public works. In addition, written notification shall be given to the city manager within five working days. This written notification shall contain, as a minimum, a narrative describing the circumstances resulting in the release, or threatened release, the effort taken to clean up the release and the measures being taken to prevent reoccurrence. This notification requirement is in addition to, and not in lieu of, other required notifications. 
(Ord. 714 § 1 (part), 2004)  
13.64.120 - Authority to inspect. 
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provision of this ordinance, or whenever the city manager has cause to believe that there exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a violation of this ordinance, the city manager may enter such premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same and to inspect and copy records related to storm water compliance. In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter and inspect has been made, the city is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
(Ord. 714 § 1 (part), 2004)  
13.64.130 - Authority to sample, establish sampling devices, and test. 
During any inspection as provided herein, the city manager may take any samples and perform any testing deemed necessary to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or to record site activities. 
(Ord. 714 § 1 (part), 2004)  
13.64.140 - Notice of violation. 
Whenever the city manager finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this ordinance, the city manager may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation: 
A.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
B.  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
C.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
D.  The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
E.  Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; or 
F.  The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. 
If abatement of a violation or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by the city or a contractor designated by the city manager and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
(Ord. 714 § 1 (part), 2004)  
13.64.150 - Appeal of notice of violation. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 13.64.190 below, any person receiving a notice of violation under Section 13.64.140 above, may appeal the determination of the city manager to the city council. The notice of appeal must be received by the city clerk within five days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the city council shall take place within fifteen days from the date of city's receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. 714 § 1 (part), 2004)  
13.64.160 - Abatement by city. 
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal under Section 13.64.150, within ten days of the decision of the city council upholding the decision of the city manager, then the city or a contractor designated by the city manager shall enter upon the subject private property and is authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent, or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the city or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(Ord. 714 § 1 (part), 2004)  
13.64.170 - Charging cost of abatement/liens. 
Within thirty days after abatement of the nuisance by the city, the city manager shall notify the property owner of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs and attorneys' fees. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment with the city clerk within fifteen days. The city clerk shall set the matter for public hearing by the city council. The decision of the city council shall be set forth by resolution and shall be final. 
If the amount due is not paid within ten days of the decision of the city council or the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal under this section, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment in accordance with Government Code § 38773.5. A copy of the resolution shall be turned over to the county auditor so that the auditor may enter the amounts of the assessment against the parcel as it appears on the current assessment roll, and the tax collector shall include the amount of the assessment on the bill for taxes levied against the parcel of land. 
(Ord. 714 § 1 (part), 2004)  
13.64.180 - Urgency abatement. 
The city manager is authorized to require immediate abatement of any violation of this ordinance that constitutes an immediate threat to the health, safety or well being of the public. If any such violation is not abated immediately as directed by the city manager, the city is authorized to enter onto private property and to take any and all measures required to remediate the violation. Any expense related to such remediation undertaken by the city shall be fully reimbursed by the property owner and/or responsible party. Any relief obtained under this section shall not prevent the city from seeking other and further relief authorized under this ordinance. 
(Ord. 714 § 1 (part), 2004)  
13.64.190 - Violations. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. A violation of or failure to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor, except that, notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, any such violation constituting a misdemeanor under this chapter may, in the discretion of the enforcing authority, be charged and prosecuted as an infraction. 
B.  Any person who submits a report required by this chapter, which she or he knows, or should have reason to know, contains falsified data shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the amount that the city may be fined by the State Water Resources Control Board or the amount of any civil liability imposed on the city for noncompliance with the municipal storm water discharge permit for the city. 
C.  Every day or any portion thereof any violation of this ordinance continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
D.  Concealing, aiding, or abetting a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a violation of such provision. 
(Ord. 714 § 1 (part), 2004)  
13.64.200 - Compensatory action. 
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this chapter, the city manager may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions, including, but not limited to, storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, and creek cleanup. 
(Ord. 714 § 1 (part), 2004)  
13.64.210 - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties herein provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored by the city at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken by the city. 
(Ord. 714 § 1 (part), 2004)  
13.64.220 - Acts potentially resulting in a violation of the federal Clean Water Act and/or California Porter-Cologne Act. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any provision of any requirement issued pursuant to this chapter, may also be in violation of the federal Clean Water Act and/or the Porter-Cologne Act and may be subject to the sanctions of those acts including civil and criminal penalties. Any enforcement action authorized under this chapter shall also include written notice to the violator of such potential liability. 
(Ord. 714 § 1 (part), 2004)  
Title 15 - BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— For statutory provisions authorizing cities to regulate the construction and materials of buildings, see Gov. Code 38660: for provisions authorizing cities to adopt codes by reference, see Gov. Code S50022.1 et seq.: for provisions regarding the adoption of building and other codes by cities, see Health and Safety Code §§ 17958-17958.7. 
 
Chapter 15.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS AND PENALTIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 902 , § 2, adopted Nov. 22, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 15.04, §§ 15.04.010—15.04.020, and enacted a new Ch. 15.04 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.04 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 652 § 2, adopted 1999; Ord. 691 § 2 (part), adopted 2002; Ord. 794 § 3, adopted 2007; Ord. No. 816, § 1, adopted May 12, 2009; and Ord. No. 870, § 2, adopted Nov. 26, 2013. See the Ordinance List and Disposition Table for prior ordinance history. 
 
15.04.010 - Local administrative authority defined. 
Excepting California Building Code Appendix J—Grading, which is administered by the city engineer, and state fire marshal regulated sections of California Building Code and California Residential Code, which is administered by the fire code official, whenever the term "local administrative authority" or "authority having jurisdiction" is used in the codes adopted by Chapters 15.04 through 15.32, excepting Chapters 15.28 and 15.30, in reference to a local official charged with the responsibility of carrying out the regulations adopted by said code, such local official shall be the building official. Said building official shall have all authority given to such official by said code. 
( Ord. No. 902 , § 2, 11-22-2016)  
15.04.020 - Penalties for violation. 
In addition to any other penalties that may be provided at law, any person, firm, corporation, or other entity violating any of the provisions of Chapters 15.04 through 15.32, or any of the provisions of the codes, as amended, adopted by reference in Chapters 15.04 through 15.32, is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both. In the discretion of the citing officer, the penalties set forth above may not apply to violations of Chapters 15.04 through 15.32 where more specific penalty provisions exist. Every such violation shall be deemed a separate offense for each day or portion thereof during which such violation continues. 
( Ord. No. 902 , § 2, 11-22-2016)  
15.04.030 - References to prior code. 
Unless superseded and expressly repealed, references in the local jurisdictions forms, documents and regulations to the chapters and sections of the past adopted regulations of the Rohnert Park Municipal Code, Title 15 - Building and Construction shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contain within the currently adopted Rohnert Park Municipal Code, Title 15 - Building and Construction and all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby superseded and expressly repealed. 
( Ord. No. 902 , § 2, 11-22-2016)  
15.04.040 - Adopted—Administrative provisions. 
2016 California Building Code, Chapter 1, Division II - "Scope and Administration," adopted in its entirety: 
The provisions of the 2016 California Building Code, Chapter 1, Division II — Scope and Administration is adopted by reference, subject to the following additions and amendments to certain sections thereof which shall read and provide as set forth in this Chapter, and shall apply to all locally enforced parts of California Code of Regulations, Title 24. 
Section 105.8 - Added - Permit application date. 
Subject to California Building Code, Chapter 1, Division I Section 1.1.9 — Effective date of this code, only those standards approved by the California Building Standards Commission and amended by Rohnert Park Municipal Code, Title 15 — Building and Construction that are effective at the time an application for building permit is submitted shall apply to the plans and specifications for, and to the construction performed under, that permit. 
Production home permit application submissions for which a master home permit application has been submitted to the enforcing agency, which contains all required documents referenced in the local jurisdiction's Residential Plan Submittal Requirements Guidelines, prior to the effective date of any new code may not be required to comply with such new code, but that of the code effective when the master home permit application was submitted, provided the master home permit application is submitted within one year of the effective date of the new code. 
Section 109.6 - Added - Refunds. 
Refunds of fees paid may be made, subject to the following: 
A.  Applications for refunds must be made in writing to the building official within one hundred eighty (180) days of the date the fee is paid. All applicants made after one hundred eighty (180) days will be rejected. 
B.  One hundred per cent (100%) of a fee erroneously paid or collected may be refunded. 
C.  Ninety percent (90%) of the plan review fee may be refunded when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or cancelled or expires or becomes void before any plan review effort has been expended. No portion of the plan review fee shall be refunded when any plan review effort has been performed. 
D.  Ninety percent (90%) of the building, plumbing, electrical, and/or mechanical permit fee may be refunded when a permit for which some or all of these permit fees have been paid is withdrawn or cancelled or expires or becomes void before any work was done and before any inspections are performed. No portion of these fees shall be refunded when any work was done and/or any inspections have been performed. 
E.  The building official may authorize the refund of all or part of a fee in order to correct an error by the department. The details of such a refund shall be retained in project file. 
Section 109.7 - Added - Fee adjustments. 
Any adjustments to fees are subject to the following: 
A.  Application for a fee adjustment must be made in writing to the building official within thirty (30) days of the date the fee is issued. 
B.  The building official may authorize the adjustment of all or part of a fee in order to correct an error by the department. The details of such an adjustment shall be retained in project file. 
Section 109.8 - Added - Fee collections. 
Any unpaid fees shall be subject to the same collection measures outlined in Section 1.27 of this Title. 
Section 110.7 - Added - Concealed construction. 
Any and all portions of work covered or concealed without authorization by the building official shall be uncovered or unconcealed to allow for inspections set forth in Sections 110.3.1 - 110.3.10. The local jurisdiction's "Concealed Construction Verification Guidelines" shall be used to determine compliance with this section. 
Section 113.4 - Added - Appeals applications. 
All applications for appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code shall be subject the local jurisdiction's "Board of Appeals (Building Department) Guidelines" as prepared by the building official and fees as outlined in the Building Plan Check, Inspection and Permit Fees Schedule as established or amended by City Council resolution. 
Section 114.2 - Amended - Notice of violation. 
The building official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition or occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of this code, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. Method of service shall be subject to Section 116.4. 
Section 114.3 - Added - Prosecution of violation. Added after first paragraph. 
In addition if the notice of violation is not complied with within thirty (30) days the local jurisdiction may deem the structure unsafe and subject to the terms of Section 116. 
Section 114.4 - Amended - Violation penalties. 
All persons and construction shall be subject to the following: 
A.  Any and all portions of work shall be complete and free of correction notices and or violations prior to the expiration of the permit or certificate authorizing said work or occupancy. The local jurisdiction's Outstanding Correction Notifications and Expired Permits or Certificates Guidelines shall be used to determine compliance with this section and the applicability of fines for non-compliance. 
B.  Any and all portions of work completed without required permits shall be charged a fine of twice the cost of the plan review and inspection fee. 
C.  Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
Section 114.5 - Added - Fee or fine adjustments. 
Any adjustments to fines are subject to the following: 
A.  Application for a fine adjustment must be made in writing to the building official within thirty (30) days of the date the fine is issued. 
B.  The building official may authorize the adjustment of all or part of a fine in order to correct an error by the department. The details of such an adjustment shall be retained in project file. 
Section 114.6 - Added - Fine collections. 
Any unpaid fines shall be subject to the same collection measures outlined in Section 1.27 of this Title. 
Section 117.1 - Added - Licensed contractor required. 
When a permit is taken out by the property owner or their authorized representative both of which are without a valid California contractor's license, the building official is authorized to require the work, or portion of work, authorized by a the permit to be performed by a licensed California contractor if the building official determines the public safety and welfare is at risk. 
( Ord. No. 902 , § 2, 11-22-2016)  
Chapter 15.08 - BUILDING CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 902, § 3, adopted Nov. 11, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 15.08, §§ 15.08.010—15.08.100, and enacted a new Ch. 15.08 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.08 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 691 § 2(part), adopted 2002; Ord. 734, § 1, adopted 2005; Ord. 794, §§ 6—10, adopted 2007, Ord. No. 829, §§ 3—8, adopted Nov. 23, 2010; Ord. No. 870, §§ 3—6, adopted Nov. 26, 2013. See Ordinance List and Disposition Table for prior ordinance history. 
 
15.08.010 - Adopted—2016 California Building Standards Code, Title 24, Part 2, "California Building Code. 
The 2016 Edition of the California Building Standards Code, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 2, incorporating the International Building Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Code Council, one copy of which has been filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the building official, is adopted by reference, subject to the following additions and amendments to certain sections thereof which shall read and provide as set forth in this chapter. 
Section 501.2 — Amended — Address Numbers. 
Address numbers shall meet the requirements specified in Section 15.28.505.1.1- 15.28.505.1.3 of this Title. 
Section 1503.7 - Added - Splash Protection. 
All buildings of Group R Occupancy shall include a concrete landing at the exterior of garage side doors. The landing area shall be a minimum of nine sq. ft. (3' x 3'). Group R and U structures shall include rain gutters, downspouts, rain leaders and splash blocks. 
Section 1705A.13.5 - Added - Special seismic inspector. 
Third-Party Inspection. All new structures consisting of R-1, R-3 & R-6 Occupancies or A, B, E, F, H, I, M Occupancies with an occupant load of fifty or greater, shall employ a third-party inspector for the purpose of inspecting the components of the lateral load system. Third-party inspectors, similar to special inspectors as required elsewhere in Chapter 17A, shall be approved by the building official. All costs associated with the special seismic inspection process shall be borne by the developer. 
Section 1808.6.2.1 - Added - Slab-on-grade foundations. 
A.  Unless conforming to Section 1808 in its entirety and other than pre- or post-tensioned slabs and engineered pier and grade beam foundations systems, buildings utilizing slab on grade construction shall be constructed on a building pad consisting of a minimum of thirty inches of engineered non-expansive fill material meeting the requirements of Table 1 below. The building pad area to receive the engineered non-expansive fill shall include an area at least five feet beyond the outside edge of the building foundation. The building pad area shall be over excavated to the proper depth and the grade scarified to a minimum depth of eight inches and shall be moisture conditioned and re-compacted to a minimum of ninety percent over optimum. The engineered non-expansive fill shall be placed in lifts not exceeding eight inches, brought to near optimum moisture content and compacted to a minimum of ninety percent of maximum dry density at or within two percent of the optimum moisture content. The depth of the engineered non-expansive fill shall be increased as necessary to maintain a minimum of twelve inches of the engineered non-expansive fill material under all footings, unless determined otherwise by the soils report/geotechnical engineer and approved by the building official. Lime treatment is an acceptable alternative to engineered non-expansive fill, providing that it is described within the project geotechnical report as an allowable alternative. 
Table 1 
Non-expansive Fill Requirements 
Plasticity Index 	less than 13 
Liquid Limit 	less than 50 
Percent Soil Passing #200 Sieve 	between 5% & 45% 
Maximum Aggregate Size 	3 inches 
Maximum Dry Density 	as determined by ASTM-D1557 test procedures 
 
B.  Except for residential additions of five hundred square feet or less and Group U buildings of five hundred square feet or less, all foundation designs shall reference a current site specific soils investigation report. The allowable area requirements of this subsection may be increased to one thousand square feet for R-3 construction when a request is submitted in writing to the building official and the building official approves such request. 
Section 1907.2 - Added - Nonstructural concrete minimum reinforcement. 
All nonstructural concrete slabs within the building the building envelope are subject to the following. 
1.  All slabs shall have a minimum reinforcement of #3 rebar placed eighteen inches on center, each way. Reinforcement shall be placed on suitably sized supports, concrete cubes, or similar material approved by the building official, so as to suspend the reinforcement to mid plane in the slab. All exterior concrete slabs shall have weakened plane joints at a maximum of ten feet intervals each way. 
2.  All slabs shall have a minimum sand or approved rock base cushion of not less than four inches in thickness placed immediately below the slab. 
Exception: Sidewalks and surfaces required under Section 1503.7 — Splash Protection. 
( Ord. No. 902 , § 3, 11-22-2016)  
15.08.020 - Fire protection systems. 
Fire protection systems must comply with the requirements specified in Chapter 15.28 of this title. To the extent there is any conflict between the provisions of Chapter 15.28 of this title and the provisions of Chapter 9 of the 2016 California Building Standards Code, the provisions of Chapter 15.28 of this title shall govern. 
( Ord. No. 902 , § 3, 11-22-2016)  
15.08.030 - Appendix chapters added. 
Appendix Chapter I, Patio Covers and Appendix Chapter J, Grading shall be considered as part of the body of the code as adopted in Section 15.08.010. 
( Ord. No. 902 , § 3, 11-22-2016)  
Chapter 15.12 - RESIDENTIAL CODE 
 
15.12.010 - Adopted—2016 California Building Standards Code, Title 24, Part 2.5, "California Residential Code." 
The 2016 Edition of the California Building Standards Code, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 2.5, incorporating the International Residential Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, one copy of which has been filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the building official, is adopted by reference, subject to the following additions and amendments to certain sections thereof which shall read and provide as set forth in this chapter. When there is a conflict with or omission of the provisions of the Division II — Administration and that of Chapter 15.04 of this title, the provisions of Chapter 15.04 of this title shall govern. 
Section R313.2 - Amended One- and two-family dwellings automatic fire systems. 
An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed and maintained in all newly constructed one and two family dwellings and accessory structures thereto, including U and S occupancies. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Detached Group U occupancies 1000 sq. ft. or less in floor area. 
2.  Detached pool houses 1000 sq. ft. or less in floor area within 50 feet of the pool and limited to a single bathroom. 
Section R313.2.1 - Added - Additions and alterations. 
Sprinkler systems shall be installed as required when California Fire Code, Section 903.3.21 and Chapter 15.28 of this title are exceeded. 
Section R313.2.2 - Added - Design and Installation. 
Automatic residential fire sprinkler systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with Section R313 or NFPA 13D. 
( Ord. No. 902 , § 5, 11-22-2016)  
15.12.020 - Appendix chapters added. 
Appendix Chapter H, Patio Covers and Appendix Chapter J, Existing Buildings and Structures and V, Swimming Pool Safety Act shall be considered as part of the body of the code as adopted in Section 15.12.010. 
( Ord. No. 902 , § 5, 11-22-2016)  
Chapter 15.16 - ELECTRICAL CODE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 902 , § 6, adopted Nov. 22, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 15.16, §§ 15.16.010, 15.16.020, and enacted a new Ch. 15.16 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.16 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 794 § 12, adopted 2007; Ord. No. 829, § 11, adopted Nov. 23, 2010; and Ord. No. 870, § 10, adopted Nov. 26, 2013. See the Ordinance List and Disposition Table for prior ordinance history. 
 
15.16.010 - Adopted—2016 California Building Standards Code, Title 24, Part 3, "California Electrical Code". 
The 2016 Edition of the California Building Standards Code, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 3, incorporating the "National Electrical Code," 2014 Edition, published by the National Fire Protection Association, one copy of which has been filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the building official, is adopted by reference, subject to the following additions and amendments to certain sections thereof which shall read and provide as set forth in this chapter. 
Sections 230.79(C) - Amended - One- or Two-Family Dwelling. 
For a one-family dwelling or two-family dwellings, the service disconnecting means shall have a rating of not less than 100 amperes, with an enclosure and bus bar rating of not less than 200 amperes, 3-wire. The service disconnecting means, enclosure, and bus bar combination may require upgrades when any of the following requirements are exceeded: 
1.  When any other permit is applied for and the existing main service enclosure was manufactured by Federal Pacific or Zinsco. 
2.  When five (5) or more circuits are modified. 
3.  When any secondary power source is added. 
4.  When an addition increases the existing gross floor area by 50% or 
5.  When a remodel, alteration or repair to an existing building includes demolition, removal or repair of more than 50% of the structure (including walls, columns, beams or girders, floor or ceiling joists and coverings, roof rafters, roof diaphragms, foundations or similar components). For the purpose of applying this section, the following criteria shall be considered in the 50% threshold evaluation: 
a.  The removal or demolition of more than 50% of the exterior or interior load bearing walls. 
b.  Removal of the roof structure or ceiling thereby permitting installation of new circuits. 
Note: The rating requirements of the bus bar and enclosure for the service disconnecting means do not require the main service entrance conductors to be upgraded as long as the main service disconnect is rated to match the rating and sizing of the existing main service entrance conductors. 
( Ord. No. 902 , § 6, 11-22-2016)  
15.16.020 - Added—Article 91—Administration and enforcement. 
Annex H — Administration and Enforcement, excepting articles 80.15 and 80.27, of the Appendix to the California Electrical Code is adopted. Annex H is retitled as Article 91 - Administration and Enforcement. When there is a conflict with or omission of the provisions of this section and that of Chapter 15.04 of this title, the provisions of Chapter 15.04 of this title shall govern. 
( Ord. No. 902 , § 6, 11-22-2016)  
Chapter 15.18 - MECHANICAL CODE 
 
15.18.010 - Adopted—2016 California Building Standards Code, Title 24, Part 4, "California Mechanical Code". 
The 2016 Edition of the California Building Standards Code, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 4, incorporating the "Uniform Mechanical Code," 2015 Edition, published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, one copy of which has been filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the building official, is adopted by reference. When there is a conflict with or omission of the provisions of the Division II - Administration and that of Chapter 15.04 of this title, the provisions of Chapter 15.04 of this title shall govern. 
( Ord. No. 902 , § 7, 11-22-2016)  
Chapter 15.20 - PLUMBING CODE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 902 , § 8, adopted Nov. 22, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 15.20, §§ 15.20.010—15.20.030, and enacted a new Ch. 15.20 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.20 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 870, § 12, adopted Nov. 26, 2013. 
 
15.20.010 - Adopted—California Building Standards Code, Title 24, Part 5, "California Plumbing Code". 
The 2016 Edition of the California Building Standards Code, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 5, incorporating the "Uniform Plumbing Code," 2012 Edition, published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, one copy of which has been filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the building official, is adopted by reference. When there is a conflict with or omission of the provisions of the Division II - Administration and that of Chapter 15.04 of this title, the provisions of Chapter 15.04 of this title shall govern. 
Sections 301.2.6 - Added - Water supply materials 
All underground service supply lines shall be of non-metallic material consisting of either polyethylene, minimum class 160, Poly Vinyl Chloride (PVC), minimum schedule 40, PEX or PEX-AL-PEX. Metallic materials may be used when suitable protection, approved by the building official, is provided. 
Section 604.1 — Amended - Pipe, Tube, and Fittings. 
Material for building water piping shall comply with the applicable standard referenced in Table 604.1. All underground service supply lines shall be of non-metallic material consisting of either polyethylene, minimum class 160, Poly Vinyl Chloride (PVC), minimum schedule 40, PEX or PEX-AL-PEX. Metallic materials may be used when suitable protection, approved by the building official, is provided.  
15.20.020 - Added—Appendix chapters. 
Appendix Chapter A, Sizing Water Supply, Appendix Chapter B, Explanatory Notes on Combination Waste & Vent Systems, Appendix Chapter D, Sizing Storm-Water Systems and Appendix Chapter I, Installation Standards, of the Appendix to the 2016 California Plumbing Code shall be considered as part of the incorporation of the code as referenced in Section 15.20.010. 
( Ord. No. 902 , § 8, 11-22-2016)  
Chapter 15.22 - ENERGY CODE[7] 
Section: 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 902, § 9, adopted Nov. 22, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 15.22, § 15.22.010, and enacted a new Ch. 15.22 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.22 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 870, § 13, adopted Nov. 26, 2013. 
 
15.22.010 - Adopted—California Building Standards Code, Title 24, Part 6, "California Energy Code". 
The 2016 Edition of the California Building Standards Code, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 6, published by the California Building Standards Commission, one copy of which has been filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the building official, is adopted by reference. 
( Ord. No. 902 , § 9, 11-22-2016)  
Chapter 15.24 - EXISTING BUILDING CODE[8] 
Section: 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 902, §§ 10, 11, adopted Nov. 22, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 15.24, § 15.24.010, and enacted a new Ch. 15.24 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.24 pertained to mechanical code, and derived from Ord. No. 870, § 14, adopted Nov. 26, 2013. See the Ordinance List and Disposition Table for prior ordinance history. 
 
15.24.010 - Adopted—California Building Standards Code, Title 24, Part 10, "California Existing Building Code". 
The 2016 Edition of the California Building Standards Code, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 10, published by the California Building Standards Commission, one copy of which has been filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the building official, is adopted by reference. 
( Ord. No. 902 , §§ 10, 11, 11-22-2016)  
Chapter 15.26 - GREEN BUILDING CODE[9] 
Section: 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 902, § 12, adopted Nov. 22, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 15.26, § 15.26.010, and enacted a new Ch. 15.26, as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.26 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 870, § 15, adopted Nov. 26, 2013. 
 
15.26.010 - Adopted—California Building Standards Code, Title 24, Part 11, "Green Building Standards Code" or "CALGreen". 
The 2016 Edition of the California Building Standards Code, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 11, published by the California Building Standards Commission, including Appendix Chapter A4, Residential Voluntary Measures at Tier I level for New Residential Construction except Division A4.2 Energy Efficiency and Appendix Chapter A5, Nonresidential Voluntary Measures at Tier I level for New Non-Residential Construction except Division A5.2 Energy Efficiency, one copy of which has been filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the building official, is adopted by reference. 
( Ord. No. 902 , § 12, 11-22-2016)  
Chapter 15.28 - FIRE CODE[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 902, § 13, adopted Nov. 22, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 15.28, §§ 15.28.010—15.28.3308.150, and enacted a new Ch. 15.28 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.28 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 871, § 2, adopted Nov. 26, 2013. 
 
15.28.010 - Penalties for violations. 
Any violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor. Each day a violation of Chapter 15.28 of this title exists constitutes a separate offense.  
15.28.020 - Adopted—2016 California Building Standards Code, Title 24, Part 9, "California Fire Code". 
The 2016 Edition of the California Building Standards Code, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 9, incorporating the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Code Council, one copy of which has been filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the building official, is adopted by reference, subject to the following additions and amendments to certain sections thereof which shall read and provide as set forth in this chapter. 
Section 101.6 - Added - Applicable standards. 
Where no applicable standards or requirements are set out in Chapter 15.28 of this Title, or contained within other laws, codes, regulations, ordinances or rules adopted by the City or its officials, compliance with applicable standards of the National Fire Protection Association or other nationally recognized fire safety standards or other recognized good engineering practices, as approved by the fire code official shall constitute compliance with Chapter 15.28 of this Title. Nothing herein shall derogate from the power of the fire code official to determine compliance with codes or standards for those activities or installations within the fire code official's jurisdiction or responsibility. 
Section 103.1.1 - Added - Fire code official. 
Whenever the term "fire code official" is used in Chapter 15.28 of this Title, it shall mean the Fire Marshal or his/her designee. 
Section 104.3 - Amended - Right of entry. 
A.  The fire code official in the performance of duties prescribed in Chapter 15.28 of this Title, may enter upon and into any and all premises under his/her jurisdiction, at all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspecting the same to determine whether or not the provisions of Chapter 15.28 of this Title and all applicable laws or ordinances pertaining to the protection of persons and property from fire, explosion or exposure to hazardous materials are observed. However, an inspection warrant must be secured where entry is refused, except in an emergency situation. No owner, occupant or any other person having charge, care or control of any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made and consent given, or an inspection warrant is obtained, to promptly permit the fire code official's entry for the purpose of inspection and examination. 
B.  The fire code official may enter any building or premises to extinguish or control any fire, perform rescue operations, investigate the existence of suspected or reported fires, gas leaks or other hazardous conditions or take any other action necessary in the reasonable performance of his/her duties. 
Section 104.11.4 - Added - Emergency response penalty. 
In the event that the fire code official responds to any emergency caused by failure to comply with Chapter 15.28 of this Title and within the responsibility for enforcement of the fire code official as given in Section 104.11 of the California Fire Code, the person who caused the emergency will pay a penalty. The penalty shall constitute a debt of such person to the City and shall be collectable by the fire code official. Penalties shall be based on the current Rohnert Park Fire Division Fee Schedule as established or amended by City Council resolution. 
Section 105.1.1 - Added - Additional required fire permits. 
The Director of Public Safety or the fire code official may require additional prescribed operational and construction permits as identified in the Fire Division Fee Schedule. Permit fees shall be based on the current Rohnert Park Fire Division Fee Schedule as established or amended by City Council resolution. 
Section 105.2.5 - Added - Fees. 
All applications for a permit required by Chapter 15.28 of this Title shall be made to the Fire Division of the Department of Public Safety or Building Department in the form and detail, including any required plans, required by the City of Rohnert Park Fire Division. The City Council may establish fees, by resolution, for permit applications. 
Section 108 - Amended - Appeals process. 
Whenever the Fire Prevention Division denies an application or permit, the applicant may appeal in writing the decision of the fire code official to the Director of Public Safety within 15 days. The Director shall review the written appeal and render a decision within 30 days of its receipt. The decision of the Director shall be final. 
Section 202 - Added - ALARM. 
A signal from a residence or business location in the City of Rohnert Park which ends at the City Department of Public Safety offices, or at a central alarm company's office which in turn relays it to the Department of Public Safety offices and which causes City personnel to respond, or through any other means that result in Department of Public Safety personnel responding to the signal. 
Section 202 - Added - EMERGENCY. 
An incident which requires a response by Department of Public Safety personnel. A response due to a failure, malfunction or other error, whether human or mechanical, which results in the transmission of an alarm to the Department of Public Safety is not an emergency. In the event that a question arises as to whether a response by City personnel was a response to an emergency as defined herein, the fire code official shall determine whether an incident constituted an emergency and his or her decision is final. 
Section 202 - Amended - FALSE ALARM. Added after the first paragraph as follows: 
Or 
An alarm to which City personnel or equipment have responded because of a report that an emergency existed and which did not require a response because the incident for which the alarm was given did not occur. 
Section 320 - Added - COMBUSTIBLE VEGETATION. 
Section 320.1 - Added - Defensible space and neighboring property. 
Persons owning, leasing, or controlling property within areas requiring defensible space are responsible for maintaining a defensible space on the property owned, leased or controlled by said person, within a distance of not less than 30 feet from any neighboring building or structure. Distances may be modified by the fire code official because of a site-specific analysis based on local conditions. 
Section 505.1 - Amended - Address numbers. 
New and existing buildings shall have approved illuminated address numbers, building numbers or approved building identification placed in a position that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. Where access is by means of a private road and the building cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole, or other approved sign or means shall be used to identify the structure. The numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Size and location of the Address Numbers shall be approved by the fire code official. 
Section 505.1.1 - Added - One- and two-family dwellings. 
Address numbers for one and two family dwellings shall be a minimum of 4 inches in height with a minimum stroke width of one half (0.5) inches. 
Section 505.1.2 - Added - Numbers for other than one- and two-family dwellings. 
Each address identification character shall be not less than twelve (12) inches high with a minimum stroke of one inch. Suite and unit numbers shall not be less than six (6) inches high with a minimum stroke of three-quarters (0.75) inch or as approved by the fire code official. 
Section 505.1.3 - Added - Complex directory. 
Where two or more buildings cannot be viewed from the public way or when determined by the fire code official, an illuminated complex directory, monument, pole or other approved sign or means shall be used to identify the structures at the main entrances to the property. 
Section 507.5.1 - Amended - Fire hydrant and fire main required locations. 
Where a portion of the facility or building hereafter constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction is more than 150 feet from a hydrant on a fire apparatus access road, as measured by an approved route around the exterior of the facility or building, on-site fire hydrants and fire mains shall be provided where required by the fire code official. 
Section 901.6.1.1 - Added - False fire alarm. 
The expenses incurred as a result of responding to a false alarm, as defined herein, shall be reimbursed if the number of responses exceeds an annual amount or consecutive period, as prescribed in the current Rohnert Park Fire Division Fee Schedule as established or amended by City Council resolution. 
Section 901.6.1.2 - Added - New alarm installations. 
In the case of new alarm installations, there will be a thirty day grace period in which responses will not be monitored for purposes of enforcement under this Chapter. 
Section 901.6.1.3 - Added - Commercial alarm responsibility. 
In determining responsibility for commercial alarms, the persons who contract with the alarm company for service, or the lessee or occupant of the structure which has installed and maintains said alarm shall be ultimately responsible for that alarm system. 
Section 901.6.1.4 - Added - Residential alarm responsibility. 
Responsibility for the alarm system in multi-family residential dwellings and condominiums shall rest with the persons who contracts with the alarm company for service to the system. 
Section 901.7 - Added - Out of service fire protection systems. Added after the second paragraph as follows: 
When a system is deemed out of service, the operator shall immediately provide current insurance documents and insurer's contact information to the fire code official. The operator or impairment coordinator shall also be responsible for contacting the insurer to inform them of changes in operation of the fire protection system. 
Section 903.2 - Amended - Automatic sprinkler system. 
An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed and maintained in all newly constructed buildings. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Detached Group U occupancies 1000 sq. ft. or less, as approved by the fire code official. 
2.  Detached pool houses up to 1000 sq. ft. in floor area within 50 feet of the pool and limited to a single bathroom. 
3.  Detached non-combustible motor vehicle fuel dispensing canopies classified as a Group M occupancy. 
4.  Detached Group B or M occupancies 500 sq. ft or less. 
Section 903.2.20 — Added — Changes of occupancy. 
When the fire code official determines, based on life and fire risk, that a proposed use or occupancy classification is more hazardous than an existing use or occupancy classification, including the conversion of residential buildings to condominiums, then no change of use or occupancy shall be made unless such structure is made to comply with the requirements for a newly constructed building. 
Section 903.2.21 - Added - Additions, remodels, alterations or repairs. 
An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided as follows: 
1.  In an existing one- or two-family dwelling when an addition increases the existing gross floor area by 50% or more. 
2.  In an existing non-residential building when an addition increase the existing gross floor area by 25%. 
3.  Additions to existing Residential Group R-1 occupancies that result in additional guest rooms or dwelling units, the building shall meet the requirements for a newly constructed building. 
4.  When a remodel, alteration or repair to an existing building includes demolition, removal or repair of more than 50% of the structure (including walls, columns, beams or girders, floor or ceiling joists and coverings, roof rafters, roof diaphragms, foundations or similar components). For the purpose of applying this section, the following criteria shall be considered in the 50% threshold evaluation: 
a.  The removal or demolition of more than 50% of the exterior or interior load bearing walls. Or, 
b.  Removal of the roof structure or ceiling thereby permitting installation of overhead piping. Or, 
c.  Removal of interior tenant improvements reducing the building to a "shell" condition shall require the future build-out to comply with fire sprinkler requirements. 
Exception: Alterations or additions made solely for the purpose of complying with the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
5.  Any combination of items above where the improvements equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the structure, the entire building shall meet the requirements for a newly constructed building. 
Note: The percentage of work shall be determined and added to any successive remodels that may occur within a subsequent three (3) year period. If the combined percentage totals 50% or more, this work shall constitute a substantial improvement and the building shall be subject to the fire sprinkler requirement. 
Section 903.3.1 - Amended - Design criteria. 
Fire sprinkler systems installed in buildings of undetermined use shall be designed and installed to have a design density of 0.33 gallons per minute per square foot over a minimum design area of 3,000 square feet. Where a subsequent occupancy change requires a system with greater capacity, it shall be the building owners' responsibility to upgrade the system to the required density and meet any additional requirements of Chapter 15.28 of this Title at the time of such change. 
Section 903.3.1.1 - Added - Installation requirements. Added after the first line as follows: 
NFPA 13 sprinkler systems shall be required. NFPA 13D sprinkler systems as amended in Chapter 80 may be substituted for NFPA 13 when approved by the fire code official, and as adopted by City standards. 
Section 903.3.1.1.1 - Exempt locations, is deleted in its entirety. 
Section 903.3.1.2 - NFPA 13R sprinkler systems, is deleted in its entirety. 
Section 903.4 - Amended - Sprinkler system monitoring and alarms. 
Except for one- and two-family dwellings, all valves controlling the water supply for automatic sprinkler systems, and associated pumps, tanks, water levels and water flow switches shall be electronically supervised. Valves when used for standpipes are excluded from this provision unless required by the fire code official. 
Section 903.4.1 - Amended - Monitoring. 
Alarm, supervisory, and trouble signals shall be distinctly different and shall be automatically transmitted to an approved central station, remote supervising station or proprietary supervising station as defined in NFPA 72, or when approved by the fire code official, shall sound an audible alarm at a constantly attended location. 
Section 903.4.2.1 - Added - Alarms notification. 
Every new fire alarm system installed for the purpose of notification, including those systems activated solely by fire sprinkler systems, shall be designed so that all occupants of the building shall be notified audibly and visually for each separate occupancy or each separate residential dwelling unit. 
Section 907.2 - Amended - Required fire alarm installations. 
An approved fire alarm system installed in accordance with the provisions of this code and NFPA 72 shall be provided as follows: 
A.  All newly constructed commercial buildings shall be provided with a complete manual and automatic fire alarm system approved by the fire code official which when activated will sound an alarm which is audible throughout the building and will notify all occupants. 
B.  In any commercial occupancy where a use creates a change of occupancy classification as listed in the California Building Code, the entire structure shall be provided with a fire alarm system approved by the fire code official. 
C.  An exterior horn/strobe alarm device is required to be installed in all buildings with fire sprinkler systems. The horn/strobe alarm shall be located on the street frontage side, or as approved by the fire code official. 
Section 907.2.9 — Amended — Manual fire alarm systems. Exceptions: 2.2. 
The notification devices installed in the common areas serving the residential units shall operate upon sprinkler water flow or manual pull station activation. 
Appendix B, Section B105.1 - Amended - One- and two-family dwellings. 
The minimum fire flow requirements for one and two family dwellings having a fire-flow calculation area which does not exceed 3,600 square feet shall be 1,500 gallons per minute at 20 psi. Fire flow and flow duration for dwellings having a fire flow calculation area in excess of 3,600 square feet shall not be less than that specified in Table B105.1. 
Appendix B, Section B105.2 - Amended - Buildings other than one- and two-family dwellings. 
The minimum fire flow and flow duration for buildings other than one and two family dwellings shall be as specified in Table B105.1 of the California Fire Code. 
Exception: A reduction in required fire flow of up to 50 percent is allowed when the building is provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with other sections of Chapter 15.28 of this Title. The resulting fire flow shall not be less than 1,500 gallons per minute for the prescribed duration as specified in Table B105.1. 
Appendix B, Table B105.2, Footnote A, is deleted in its entirety. 
Appendix C, Table C102.1 - Amended - Footnotes f and g. 
Footnotes f and g are deleted and replaced as follows: Table C102.1, Footnote f: 
For commercial, industrial and multifamily residential buildings, average spacing shall be no greater than 300 feet. 
Appendix D, Section D103.2 - Amended - Grade. 
The grade of fire apparatus access roads shall be in accordance with City standards or as approved by the fire code official. 
Appendix D, Section D103.3 — Amended — Turning radius. 
The minimum turning radius shall be in accordance with City standards or as approved by the fire code official. 
Appendix D, Section D103.4 - Amended - Dead ends. 
Dead-end fire apparatus access roads in excess of 150 feet (45,720 mm) shall be provided with width and turnaround provisions in accordance with City standards. 
Appendix D, Section D103.6 - Amended - Signs. 
Where required by the fire code official, fire apparatus access roads shall be marked with permanent NO PARKING-FIRE LANE signs complying with the California Vehicle Code. 
Appendix D, Section D106.1 - Amended - Projects having more than 50 dwelling units. 
Multiple-family residential projects having more than 50 dwelling units shall be provided with two separate and approved fire access roads. Appendix D, Section D106.2, is deleted in its entirety. 
Section 5601.1.1.3(5) - Added - Manufacturing. 
The manufacturing of fireworks is prohibited except under special permits as required by local, county, or state regulations. 
Section 5602.1 - Added - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, as used in this Chapter with regard to the sale of fireworks, are defined as follows: 
AFFILIATED ORGANIZATIONS: 
1.  Organizations incorporated under the same charter or organization and their auxiliaries if the auxiliary is incorporated under the same charter; 
2.  Organizations sharing the same officers and/or place of meetings and/or national parent organization; 
3.  Subdivisions and/or fractional divisions, however named or delineated, of organizations; 
4.  Sub-organizations, one of whose primary purposes is to provide financial and/or staffing support to a parent non-profit organization. 
Dangerous fireworks: Dangerous fireworks as defined in Health and Safety Code Sections 12505 and 12561 and the relevant sections of Title 19, Code of Regulations, Subchapter 6 which are hereby incorporated by reference. 
Non-profit organization: Any non-profit association, charity or corporation or a group which is an integral part of a recognized national organization having such tax-exempt status or an organization affiliated with and officially recognized by an elementary, junior high and/or high school and/or school district that serves, in whole or in part, the residents of the City of Rohnert Park or public and/or private community college, college and/or university which is located within the boundaries of the City of Rohnert Park. 
Person: Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, concern, corporation, state, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
Principal and permanent meeting place: Includes, but not be limited to, a permanent structure, playing field, or geographic area that services a population which resides in or is located within the City of Rohnert Park. 
Public display of fireworks: An entertainment feature where the public is admitted or permitted to view the display or discharge of fireworks. 
Pyrotechnical displays: Public firework displays or displays used in conjunction with special effects, for motion pictures, theatrical and group entertainment productions operated by a professional California State licensed pyrotechnician. All such displays must secure a fire department permit and meet all applicable requirements of California Health and Safety Code. "State-approved fireworks" shall mean state-approved fireworks defined in Health and Safety Code Sections 12529 and 12562 and the relevant sections of Title 19, Code of Regulations, Subchapter 6, which are hereby incorporated by reference. State-approved fireworks are commonly referred to as safe and sane fireworks. Throughout the remainder of this document the term state-approved fireworks will be used to denote safe and sane fireworks. 
Section 5614.1 - Added - Sales. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell state-approved fireworks within the City of Rohnert Park without having obtained a City of Rohnert Park Fire permit. 
Section 5614.2 - Added - General prohibition against possession, sale or use of fireworks. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, no person shall possess, sell, use, display or explode any rocket, including but not limited to, Piccolo Petes, firecrackers, roman candles, squibs, torpedoes, torpedo canes, wire core sparklers, wooden core sparklers, black cartridges or other combustible devices or explosive substances or any kind of fireworks, by whatsoever name known, within the City of Rohnert Park. 
Section 5614.3 - Added - Authorized sale of state-approved fireworks. 
It is unlawful to sell state-approved fireworks within the City of Rohnert Park at any time other than the following: Between eight a.m. on the thirtieth of June and ending at nine p.m. on July 4th of the same year. 
Section 5614.4 - Added - Authorized use of state-approved fireworks. 
The use of state-approved fireworks may occur beginning on the thirtieth of June and ending on the fourth of July between the hours of eight a.m. and ten-thirty p.m. 
Section 5614.5 - Added - Prerequisite for issuance of permit. 
A.  No permit to sell state-approved fireworks shall be issued to any person. This prohibition excludes non-profit organizations as defined in Section 15.28.5602.1. 
B.  Each such non-profit organization shall have its principal and permanent meeting place within the City of Rohnert Park limits. 
C.  No non-profit organization shall submit more than one application for a permit to sell state-approved fireworks within the City of Rohnert Park. If more than one application is submitted on behalf of any non-profit organization, including an affiliated organization, all such requests shall be void. The fire code official will determine whether organizations or groups are affiliated. Any attempt to transfer an application shall void any and all applications filed by or on behalf of both the transferor/non-profit organization and the transferee/non-profit organization. 
D.  Clean-up deposit. Each non-profit organization shall post a two hundred dollar ($200.00) clean-up deposit with the application to sell state-approved fireworks within the City of Rohnert Park. The deposit will be forfeited to the City in the event the permittee fails to remove rubbish from the designated clean-up area by five p.m. on July fifth. The clean-up area will be assigned by the Fire Department upon receipt and approval of the application by the non-profit organization. The clean-up areas are the designated parks and City-owned parking lots within the City of Rohnert Park. The Director of Public Works or his/her designee will check the clean-up site and then report their findings to the Fire Department. The Fire Department will make the final determination if the deposit will be refunded. 
Section 5614.6 - Added - Application for permit. 
A.  All applications for permits to sell state-approved fireworks shall be in writing to the fire code official. Applications may be filed beginning the first day of April of each year up to and through the end of the work day of the last day of May of the same year, at which time the filing period for that year will be closed. Applications shall set forth the proposed location of the fireworks stand being applied for, and other information as may be required by the fire code official. 
B.  Applications shall include: 
1.  A written assurance that, if the permit is issued to the applicant, the applicant shall, at the time of receipt of such a permit, deliver to the fire code official liability insurance in the amount required by the City. 
2.  A copy of the requisite State retail sales permit from the Office of the California State Fire Marshal. 
3.  A statement of the zoning of the real property on which the fireworks stand is to be located. 
4.  A non-refundable application fee in the amount established by resolution of the City Council. This application fee shall be in addition to any fee or tax imposed by Chapter 15.28 of this Title or by City Council resolution. 
5.  The proposed location of the fireworks stand, the name, address and telephone number of one or more responsible adults who will be in charge of and responsible for the fireworks stand during the period that state-approved fireworks are sold, displayed or stored at such location, and written permission from the owner of record of the property upon which the stand will be located. 
6.  The proposed location of night storage of the fireworks. 
7.  Documented evidence, either in the form of a certificate or other similar documentation, that a representative from the non-profit organization attended a state-approved fireworks stand operator safety seminar conducted by the Fire Department and/or the licensed fireworks wholesaler that is supplying the state-approved fireworks to the non-profit organization. 
C.  Applicants for such permits shall be notified by June 22 of each calendar year by the fire code official of the approval or disapproval of such applications for such permit. All organizations whose applications have been approved shall receive their permit at the time their fireworks booth passes a required fire inspection. 
Section 5614.7 - Added - Denial of application. 
A.  The fire code official shall issue the permit to sell state-approved fireworks unless he or she finds that: 
5.  The applicant has failed to provide sufficient plans, information or other data necessary to render a determination respecting compliance with the requirements of Chapter 15.28 of this Title; or 
6.  The applicant is not in compliance with any of the requirements of Chapter 15.28 of this Title; or 
7.  The applicant has failed to pay any and all fees and costs required to operate a fireworks stand in the City of Rohnert Park. 
B. Any denial of a permit pursuant to this section may be appealed pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 15.28 of this Title. 
Section 5614.8 - Added - Operation of fireworks stand. 
A.  No person shall knowingly sell fireworks to any person under the age of eighteen. 
B.  Proof that the fireworks stand operator/organization demanded, was shown, and acted in reliance upon bona fide evidence of age and identity in any sale of fireworks forbidden by this Chapter shall be a defense in any proceedings for suspension or revocation of its state-approved fireworks permit or any criminal proceedings for violations of this Chapter. For purposes of this section, bona fide evidence of age and identity of purchaser is a document issued by a federal, state, county or municipal government which contains a photograph of the purchaser including, but not limited to, a valid California Driver's License or Identification Card issued to a member of the armed forces. 
C.  The sale of state-approved fireworks shall begin no earlier than eight a.m. on June thirtieth and shall not continue after nine p.m. on July fourth of the same year. No person under the age of eighteen shall sell or participate in the sale of state-approved fireworks at such stand. No person under the age of eighteen shall be permitted inside the stand during hours of operation. 
D.  No person other than the permitted nonprofit organization(s) shall operate the stand for which the permit is issued or share or otherwise participate in the profits of the operation of such stand. 
Section 5614.9 - Added - Temporary fireworks stand. 
All retail sales of state-approved fireworks shall be permitted from within a temporary fireworks stand, and retail sales from any other building or structure is hereby prohibited. Temporary stands shall be subject to the following provisions: 
No fireworks stand shall be located within twenty-five feet of any other building or within one hundred feet of any gasoline pump, distribution point of flammable liquid, or flammable/combustible liquid storage. Location of stands is contingent upon approval of the location in writing by the fire code official or his/her designee. Fireworks stands need not comply with the provisions of the Building Code of the City of Rohnert Park. However, all stands shall be erected under the supervision of the fire code official who shall require that the firework stands be constructed in a manner which will reasonably ensure the safety of attendants and patrons. No stand shall have a floor area in excess of three hundred fifty square feet. 
Each stand shall have at least two exits. Each stand in excess of forty feet in length shall have at least three exits spaced approximately equidistant apart. However, in no case shall the distance between the exits exceed twenty-four feet. Exit doors shall be not less than twenty-four inches wide and six feet in height and shall swing in the direction of exit travel. 
Each stand shall be provided with one 2A10BC fire extinguisher, in good working order and easily accessible for use in case of fire. 
All retail sales of state-approved fireworks shall be permitted only from within a temporary stand. Sales from any other building or structure are hereby prohibited. 
Section 5614.10 - Added - General fireworks stand requirements for permittees. 
All weeds and combustible materials shall be cleared from the location of the fireworks stand to a distance of at least twenty-five feet surrounding the fireworks stand. All trash resulting from the operation of the fireworks stand must be removed on a daily basis in accordance with Section 15.28.5614.5(D). "NO SMOKING" signs shall be prominently displayed on and in the state approved fireworks stand. Additional signs shall be posted in a conspicuous location, on the stand, that identifies the required minimum age of persons purchasing fireworks; locations where fireworks are illegal; and restricting the discharge of fireworks near stands. 
Each state-approved fireworks stand must have an adult in attendance and in charge thereof while fireworks are stored therein. Sleeping or remaining in the stand after close of business each day is forbidden. 
All unsold stock shall be removed from the stand and located in an approved storage area immediately after close of business on each day of operation. In addition, all unsold stock of fireworks in the hands of the permittee after nine p.m. on the 4th day of July shall be returned to the wholesaler/distributor within twenty-four hours and removed from the City of Rohnert Park within ten days. On closing of the state-approved fireworks stand, all litter shall be removed from the premises. 
Each state-approved fireworks stand must have available in an accessible place inside the stand its permit to sell state-approved fireworks, its State Fire Marshal Retail Sales Permit and proof of its required insurance. 
No person shall smoke within twenty-five feet of the state-approved fireworks stand. 
No person shall light or cause to be lit or permit to be lit any state-approved fireworks or combustible material within fifty feet of any state-approved fireworks stand. 
Section 5614.11 - Added - Supervision of minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person having the care, custody or control of a minor (under eighteen years old) to permit such minor to discharge, explode, fire or set off any dangerous, illegal fireworks, at any time, or to permit such minor to discharge or set off any state-approved fireworks unless such minor does so under the direct supervision of a person over eighteen years of age and during the time period permitted by this Chapter. 
Section 5614.12 - Added - Transportation of state-approved fireworks. 
Wholesalers of fireworks must obtain a permit to deliver fireworks into the City in accordance with provisions of the California Health and Safety Code. No deliveries may be made on or after July 4 of each year. 
Section 5614.13 - Added - Revocation of Permit-Appeal. 
The fire code official may revoke the permit of any permittee who violates any of the provisions of this chapter. Such revocation shall not occur prior to (1) the permittee being notified of the alleged violation and provided an opportunity to request a hearing; and (2) a hearing taking place before the city manager, if requested by the permittee. If the revocation occurs between June 22nd and July fourth, the fire code official shall inform the permittee that the permittee may seek review of the fire code official's decision by the city manager on the next business day. 
At the earliest opportunity on the next business day after the revocation, the fire code official shall provide the city manager with written notice of the permittee's alleged violation, including the name of the permittee and a brief statement of the grounds for potential revocation. The city manager shall meet with the permittee and the fire code official on that day, upon the permittee's request, to review the fire code official's decision. The decision of the city manager shall be final. 
Chapter 80, NFPA13D, Section 5.1.1.2 - Added - Spare sprinkler heads. 
A supply of at least three sprinklers shall be maintained on the premises so that any sprinklers that have operated or been damaged in any way can be promptly replaced. 
Chapter 80, NFPA13D, Section 8.3.4.1 - Added - Location of sprinklers. 
Sprinklers shall be required in enclosed attached garages and a minimum of a single head in attics, near the attic access hatch.  
15.28.030 - Adopted—Appendix chapters. 
A through N of the Appendix to the California Fire Code shall be considered as part of the incorporation of the code as referenced in Section 15.28.020. 
( Ord. No. 902 , § 13, 11-22-2016)  
Chapter 15.30 - ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS FOR FIREWORKS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 902 , § 14, adopted Nov. 22, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 15.30, §§ 15.30.010—15.30.040, and enacted a new Ch. 15.30 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.30 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 815, § 1, adopted May 12, 2009. 
 
15.30.010 - Purpose and scope. 
A.  This chapter provides for the imposition, enforcement, collection, and administrative review of all administrative fines, related to: (1) the possession, use, storage, sale and/or display of those fireworks classified as "dangerous fireworks" in California Health and Safety Code Sections 12500 et seq., with the exception of a pyrotechnic licensee when operating pursuant to that license; and (2) the sale, use, and/or display of "safe and sane fireworks" as defined in California Health and Safety Code Sections 12500 et seq. on or at dates, times and/or locations other than those permitted by the Chapter 15.28 of this title. 
B.  The issuance of citations imposing administrative fines may be performed at the discretion of the officials of the city authorized hereunder; and the issuance of a citation to any person constitutes but one remedy to redress violations of this code by any person. By adopting this chapter, the city does not intend to limit its authority to employ any other remedy, civil or criminal, to redress any violation of this code or state law by any person. 
C.  The imposition of fines related to "dangerous fireworks" under this chapter shall be limited to persons who possess, sell, use and/or display, or the seizure of, twenty-five pounds or less (gross weight) of such dangerous fireworks. 
D.  Fines collected pursuant to this chapter related to "dangerous fireworks" shall not be subject to Health and Safety Code Section 12706. However, the city shall provide cost reimbursement to the state fire marshal for the transportation and disposal of "dangerous fireworks" seized by the city where applicable. These costs will be included in any administrative fines imposed under this chapter. 
E.  The definitions set forth in Chapter 15.28 of this title are incorporated into this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 902 , § 14, 11-22-2016)  
15.30.020 - Enforcement. 
A.  This chapter shall be enforced pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 1.25 of this title [Code]. The amount of the administrative penalty for violations of this chapter and those sections of Chapter 15.28 pertaining to fireworks shall be governed by Section 15.30.030. 
B.  The fire code official or his/her designee shall enforce the provisions of Chapter 15.30 and those sections of Chapter 15.28 of this title pertaining to fireworks. 
( Ord. No. 902 , § 14, 11-22-2016)  
15.30.030 - Penalties for violations. 
A.  In addition to the penalties provided for in Chapter 15.04 of this title, each person who violates any provisions of this chapter and/or Chapter 15.28 of this title as they relate to the possession, use, storage, sale, and/or display of "dangerous fireworks" shall be subject to the imposition and payment of an administrative fine of one thousand dollars per occurrence, a late charge of two hundred fifty dollars if the fine is not paid within thirty days of the date of citation, and all costs incurred by the office of the state fire marshal for the transportation and disposal of any dangerous fireworks seized from the person. The costs incurred by the office of the state fire marshal will be calculated based upon the regulations promulgated by that office. If those regulations have not been adopted by the office of the state fire marshal at the time a person is cited for possession of dangerous fireworks under this code, the city will reserve twenty-five percent of any fine collected under this provision to cover the cost of reimbursement to the office of the state fire marshal. 
B.  In addition to the penalties provided for in Section 15.04 of this title, each person who sells, uses, and/or displays "safe and sane fireworks" on or at dates, times, and/or locations other than those permitted by Chapter 15.28 of this title shall be subject to the imposition of payment of an administrative fine as provided below: 
Number of Offenses
in One Year 	Amount of
Administrative
Penalty	Late Charge 	Total Amount
of Penalty
Plus
Late Charge 
First 	$250.00 	$ 75.00 	$ 325.00 
Second 	500.00 	150.00 	650.00 
Third 	750.00 	300.00 	1,050.00 
 
( Ord. No. 902 , § 14, 11-22-2016)  
15.30.040 - Additional violation. 
Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any provision of this chapter or Chapter 15.28 of this title relating to fireworks shall also constitute a violation. 
( Ord. No. 902 , § 14, 11-22-2016)  
Chapter 15.32 - SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM REVIEW PROCESS 
 
15.32.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases as used in this section are defined as follows: 
A.  "Association" means a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association created for the purpose of managing a common interest development. 
B.  "Common interest development" means any of the following: 
1.  A community apartment project. 
2.  A condominium project. 
3.  A planned development. 
4.  A stock cooperative. 
C.  "Feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid a specific, adverse impact" includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. The city shall use its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation meets the conditions of Civil Code Section 714(d)(1)(A)—(B), defining restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance. 
D.  "Small residential rooftop solar energy system" means all of the following: 
1.  A solar energy system that is no larger than ten kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or thirty kilowatts thermal. 
2.  A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical and other building codes as adopted or amended by the city and Civil Code Section 714(c)(3), as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered or redesignated from time to time. 
3.  A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling. 
4.  A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the city. 
E.  "Solar energy system" means either of the following: 
1.  Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating. 
2.  Any structural design feature of a building, whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or for water heating. 
F.  "Specific, adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified and written public health or safety standards, policies or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
( Ord. No. 890 , § 1, 10-27-2015)  
15.32.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this section is to provide an expedited, streamlined permitting process for small residential rooftop solar energy systems as required by California Civil Code Section 714 and California Government Code Section 65850.5. 
( Ord. No. 890 , § 1, 10-27-2015)  
15.32.030 - Applicability. 
A.  This ordinance applies to the permitting of small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the city. 
B.  Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of the small rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit. 
( Ord. No. 890 , § 1, 10-27-2015)  
15.32.040 - Solar energy system requirements. 
A.  All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the state and the city. 
B.  Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code. 
C.  Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the California Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. 
( Ord. No. 890 , § 1, 10-27-2015)  
15.32.050 - Applications and required documents. 
A.  All documents required for the submission of an expedited solar energy system application shall be made available on the city's website. 
B.  Applications for small residential rooftop solar energy system permits, and any supporting documents, may be submitted by email, facsimile, or the internet. 
C.  An applicant's electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature. 
D.  The department of development services shall adopt a standard plan and checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review. 
E.  The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard plans and checklist shall substantially conform to recommendations for expedited permitting contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research. 
( Ord. No. 890 , § 1, 10-27-2015)  
15.32.060 - Permit review and inspection requirements. 
A.  An application that satisfies the information requirements in the checklist provided under Section 15.32.050(d), as determined by the building official, shall be deemed complete. 
B.  If the building official receives an incomplete application, the building official shall issue a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance. 
C.  Upon confirmation by the building official of the application and supporting documentation being complete, the building official shall review the application. The building official's review of the application shall be limited to whether the application meets local, state and federal health and safety requirements. The requirements of local law shall be limited to those standards and regulations necessary to ensure that the solar energy system will not have a specific, adverse effect on the public health or safety. 
D.  The building official shall require the applicant to apply for an administrative permit pursuant to Section 17.25.050 et seq. of the Rohnert Park Municipal Code if the building official, in consultation with the director of development services, makes a finding based on substantial evidence that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Any conditions imposed on an administrative permit shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon public health and safety at the lowest cost possible. The decision to require an administrative permit may be appealed to the planning commission. 
E.  The city may not deny an application for an administrative permit to install a solar energy system unless it makes written findings based upon substantial evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact. The findings shall include the basis for the rejection of potential feasible alternatives of preventing adverse impact. The decision to deny an administrative permit may be appealed to the planning commission. 
F.  Upon confirmation that the application is complete and that the solar energy system will not have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety, the building official shall approve the application and issue all the necessary permits and authorizations. 
G.  Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost. 
H.  The city shall not condition approval of an application on the approval of an association. 
I.  Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the building division for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review, which shall be scheduled within three business days of a request. 
J.  If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized but need not conform to the requirements of subsection I. 
( Ord. No. 890 , § 1, 10-27-2015)  
15.32.070 - Fees. 
Permit and plan check fees for small residential rooftop solar systems shall be set forth by resolution of the city council. Such fees shall comply with Government Code Sections 65850.55 and 66015, and any other applicable state laws. 
( Ord. No. 890 , § 1, 10-27-2015)  
Chapter 15.34 - ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS REVIEW PROCESS 
 
15.34.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases as used in this section are defined as follows: 
A.  "Electric vehicle charging station (EVCS)" or "charging station" means any of the following: 
1.  Any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with Article 625 of the California Electrical Code, as it reads on the effective date of this chapter, and delivers electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle. 
2.  One or more electric vehicle charging spaces served by electric vehicle charger(s) or other charging equipment allowing charging of electric vehicles. Electric vehicle charging stations are not considered parking spaces. 
B.  "Electric vehicle (EV)" means an automotive-type vehicle for on-road use, such as passenger automobiles, buses, trucks, vans, neighborhood electric vehicles, electric motorcycles, and the like, primarily powered by an electric motor that draws current from a rechargeable storage battery, fuel cell, photovoltaic array, or other source of electric current. Plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEV) are considered electric vehicles. For purposes of the California Electrical Code, off-road, self-propelled electric vehicles, such as industrial trucks, hoists, lifts, transports, golf carts, airline ground support equipment, 
C.  "Electric vehicle (EV) charger" means off-board charging equipment used to charge an electric vehicle. 
D.  "Electric vehicle charging space (EV space)" means a space intended for future installation of EV charging equipment and charging of electric vehicles. 
E.  "Electric vehicle supply equipment (EVSE)" means the conductors, including the ungrounded, grounded, and equipment grounding conductors and the electric vehicle connectors, attachment plugs, and all other fittings, devices, power outlets, or apparatus installed specifically for the purpose of transferring energy between the premises wiring and the electric vehicle. 
F.  "Specific, adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
G.  "Electronic submittal" means the utilization of one or more of the following: 
1.  Electronic mail or email. 
2.  The internet. 
3.  Facsimile. 
H.  "Electric vehicle (EV) checklist" means a document containing objective requirements for the installation of an electric vehicle charging station and a process for electronic submittal of permit applications. The content of the checklist requires the permit applicant to check the features of the existing electrical service such as rating in amperes, system voltage, connected or calculated load, spare capacity in amperes, voltage and ampere rating of the electric vehicle supply equipment, circuit rating of the electric vehicle supply equipment, location of the electric vehicle supply equipment, if ventilation is/or is not required, and clearances of the charging equipment to comply with all applicable building and fire safety laws. The checklist also assists the applicant in confirming that the location of the electric vehicle supply equipment will comply with any vehicle clearance requirements in the city's zoning ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 909 , § 2, 9-12-2017)  
15.34.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this section is to provide an expedited, streamlined permitting process for EVCS as required by California Government Code Section 65850.7. 
( Ord. No. 909 , § 2, 9-12-2017)  
15.34.030 - Applicability. 
EVCS legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of the EVCS in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance shall not require a permit. 
( Ord. No. 909 , § 2, 9-12-2017)  
15.34.040 - EVCS requirements. 
A.  All EVCSs shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the state and the city. 
B.  EVCSs shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code as modified by this title, the Society of Automotive Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the public utilities commission regarding safety and reliability. 
C.  Prior to submitting an application for processing, the applicant shall verify that the installation of an electric vehicle charging station will not have specific, adverse impact to public health and safety and building occupants. Verification by the applicant includes but is not limited to: electrical system capacity and loads; electrical system wiring, bonding and overcurrent protection; building infrastructure affected by charging station equipment and associated conduits; areas of charging station equipment and vehicle parking. 
( Ord. No. 909 , § 2, 9-12-2017)  
15.34.050 - Applications and required documents. 
A.  All applications will be subject to Chapter 15.04 General Provisions and Penalties of this title. 
B.  All documents required for the submission of an expedited EVCS application shall be made available on the city's website. 
C.  Applications for EVCS permits, and any supporting documents, may be submitted by email, facsimile, or the internet. 
D.  An applicant's electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature. 
E.  The city manager or designee shall implement an EV checklist with all of the requirements for which EVCS shall comply to be eligible for expedited review. 
F.  The EVCS permit process, standard plans and checklist shall substantially conform to recommendations for expedited permitting contained in the most in the most current version of the "Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist" of the "Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook" as published by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research, in effect at the time of permit application. 
( Ord. No. 909 , § 2, 9-12-2017)  
15.34.060 - Permit review and inspection requirements. 
A.  An application that satisfies the information requirements in the checklist provided under Section 15.34.050(e) and (f), as determined by the building official, shall be deemed complete. 
B.  If the building official receives an incomplete application, the building official shall issue a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance. 
C.  Upon confirmation by the building official of the application and supporting documentation being complete, the building official shall review the application. The building official's review of the application shall be limited to whether the application meets local, state and federal health and safety requirements. The requirements of local law shall be limited to those standards and regulations necessary to ensure that the EVCS will not have a specific, adverse effect on the public health or safety. 
D.  The building official shall require the applicant to apply for an administrative permit pursuant to Section 15.04.040 et seq. of the Rohnert Park Municipal Code if the building official makes a finding based on substantial evidence that the EVCS could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Any conditions imposed on an administrative permit shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon public health and safety at the lowest cost possible. The decision to require an administrative permit may be appealed to the planning commission. 
E.  The city may not deny an application for an administrative permit to install an EVCS unless it makes written findings based upon substantial evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact. The findings shall include the basis for the rejection of potential feasible alternatives of preventing adverse impact. The decision to deny an administrative permit may be appealed to the planning commission. 
F.  Upon confirmation that the application is complete and that the EVCS will not have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety, the building official shall approve the application and issue all the necessary permits and authorizations. 
G.  Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost. 
H.  The city shall not condition approval of an application on the approval of an association. 
I.  Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the building division for EVCS eligible for expedited review, which shall be scheduled within three business days of a request. 
J.  If EVCS fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized but need not conform to the requirements of subsection I. 
( Ord. No. 909 , § 2, 9-12-2017)  
15.34.070 - Fees. 
Permit and plan check fees for EVCS shall be set forth by building plan check, inspection and permit fees for circuits. Such fees shall comply with Government Code Sections 65850.7, and any other applicable state laws. 
( Ord. No. 909 , § 2, 9-12-2017)  
Chapter 15.48 - REGULATIONS OF DEVELOPMENT, BUILDING AND IMPROVEMENT IN FLOOD HAZARD AREAS[13] 
Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Prior ordinance history: Ord. 483. 
 
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
15.48.010 - Statutory authorization. 
The legislature of the state of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon local governments the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council of the city of Rohnert Park does adopt the following floodplain management regulations. 
(Ord. 791 § 1 (part), 2007)  
15.48.020 - Findings of fact. 
A.  The flood hazard areas of the city of Rohnert Park are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
B.  These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities also contributes to flood losses. 
(Ord. 791 § 1 (part), 2007)  
15.48.030 - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by legally enforceable regulations applied uniformly throughout the community to all publicly and privately owned land within flood-prone, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) or flood-related erosion areas. These regulations are designed to: 
A.  Protect human life and health; 
B.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
C.  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
D.  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
E.  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
F.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage; 
G.  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
H.  Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
(Ord. 791 § 1 (part), 2007)  
15.48.040 - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes regulations to: 
A.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities; 
B.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
C.  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters; 
D.  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
E.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. 791 § 1 (part), 2007)  
15.48.050 - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
A Zone. See "Special flood hazard area." 
"Accessory structure" means a structure that is either: 
1.  Solely for the parking of no more than two cars; or 
2.  A small, low cost shed for limited storage, less than one hundred fifty square feet and one thousand five hundred dollars in value. 
"Accessory use" means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located. 
"Alluvial fan" means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration. 
"Apex" means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
"Appeal" means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
"Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO or AH zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of Special Flood Hazard. See "Special flood hazard area." 
"Base flood" means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood"). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter. 
"Base flood elevation (BFE)" means the elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map for Zones AE, AH, A1-30, VE and V1-V30 that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
"Basement" means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (i.e., below ground level) on all sides. 
Building. See "Structure." 
"Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
"Encroachment" means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
"Existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before February 1981. 
"Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
"Flood, flooding or floodwater" means: 
1.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and 
2.  The condition resulting from flood-related erosion. 
"Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway. 
"Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
"Flood Insurance Study" means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
"Floodplain administrator" is the community official designated by title to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
"Floodplain or flood-prone area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See "Flooding." 
"Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
"Floodplain management regulations" means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
"Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. For guidelines on dry and wet floodproofing, see FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93. 
"Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as "regulatory floodway." 
"Floodway fringe" is that area of the floodplain on either side of the "regulatory floodway" where encroachment may be permitted. 
"Fraud and victimization" as related to Article IV of this chapter, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the city council will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty to one hundred years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates. 
"Functionally dependent use" means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
"Governing body" is the local governing unit, i.e., county or municipality, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. 
"Hardship" as related to Article IV of this chapter means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The city council requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended. 
"Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
"Historic structure" means any structure that is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
4.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
"Levee" means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
"Levee system" means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices. 
"Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement (see "basement" definition). 
1.  An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation design requirements, including, but not limited to: 
a.  The flood openings standard in Section 15.48.170(C)(3); 
b.  The anchoring standards in Section 15.48.170(A); 
c.  The construction materials and methods standards in Section 15.48.170(B); and 
d.  The standards for utilities in Section 15.48.180. 
2.  For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see "basement" definition). This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas. 
"Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
"Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
"Market value" is defined in Section 15.48.140(B)(1), substantial damage/improvement procedures. 
"Mean sea level" means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
"New construction," for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after February 1981, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
"New manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after February 1981. 
"Obstruction" means and includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
One-hundred-year flood or 100-year flood. See "Base flood." 
"Program deficiency" means a defect in a community's floodplain management regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation of those floodplain management regulations. 
"Public safety and nuisance" as related to Article IV of this chapter, means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin. 
"Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
"Regulatory floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
"Remedy a violation" means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
"Riverine" means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
Sheet flow area. See "Area of shallow flooding." 
"Special flood hazard area (SFHA)" means an area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99 or AH. 
"Start of construction" includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
"Structure" means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home. 
"Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
"Substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
2.  Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
"Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
"Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
"Water surface elevation" means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
"Watercourse" means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
(Ord. 791 § 1 (part), 2007)  
15.48.060 - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of city of Rohnert Park. 
(Ord. 791 § 1 (part), 2007)  
15.48.070 - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for city of Rohnert Park, titled "Flood Insurance Study for the City of Rohnert Park" dated June 1, 1981, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFMs), dated June 1, 1981, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the city council by the floodplain administrator. The study, FIRMs and FBFMs are on file at the city of Rohnert Park. 
(Ord. 791 § 1 (part), 2007)  
15.48.080 - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards) shall constitute an infraction. Nothing herein shall prevent the city council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. 791 § 1 (part), 2007)  
15.48.090 - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. 791 § 1 (part), 2007)  
15.48.100 - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
A.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
B.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
C.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. 791 § 1 (part), 2007)  
15.48.110 - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of city council, any officer or employee thereof, the state of California, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. 791 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Article II. - Administration 
 
15.48.130 - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
The city manager is appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions. 
(Ord. 791 § 1 (part), 2007)  
15.48.140 - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
A.  Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine: 
1.  Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied, including determination of substantial improvement and substantial damage of existing structures; 
2.  All other required state and federal permits have been obtained; 
3.  The site is reasonably safe from flooding; 
4.  The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. This means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the city; and 
5.  All letters of map revision (LOMRs) for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the "start of construction" definition. 
B.  Development of Substantial Improvement and Substantial Damage Procedures. 
1.  Using FEMA publication FEMA 213, "Answers to Questions About Substantially Damaged Buildings," develops detailed procedures for identifying and administering requirements for substantial improvement and substantial damage, to include defining "market value." 
2.  Assure procedures are coordinated with other departments/divisions and implemented by community staff. 
C.  Review, Use and Development of Other Base Flood Data. 
When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 15.48.070, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer Article III. 
NOTE: A base flood elevation may be obtained using one of two methods from the FEMA publication, FEMA 265, "Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas—A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year) Flood Elevations" dated July 1995. 
D.  Notification of Other Agencies. 
1.  Alteration or relocation of a watercourse: 
a.  Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation; 
b.  Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency; and 
c.  Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained. 
2.  Base flood elevation changes due to physical alterations: 
a.  Within six months of information becoming available or project completion, whichever comes first, the floodplain administrator shall submit or assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR). 
b.  All LOMRs for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the "start of construction" definition. 
Such submissions are necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements are based on current data. 
3.  Changes in Corporate Boundaries. Notify FEMA in writing whenever the corporate boundaries have been modified by annexation or other means and include a copy of a map of the community clearly delineating the new corporate limits. 
E.  Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following: 
1.  Certification required by Sections 15.48.170(C)(1) and 15.48.210 (lowest floor elevations); 
2.  Certification required by Section 15.48.170(C)(2) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures); 
3.  Certification required by Section 15.48.170(C)(3) (wet floodproofing standard); 
4.  Certification of elevation required by Section 15.48.170(A)(3) (subdivisions and other proposed development standards); 
5.  Certification required by Section 15.48.210(B) (floodway encroachments); and 
6.  Maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
F.  Map Determination. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 15.48.160. 
G.  Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 15.48.080. 
H.  Biennial Report. Complete and submit biennial report to FEMA. 
I.  Planning. Assure community's general plan is consistent with floodplain management objectives herein. 
(Ord. 791 § 1 (part), 2007)  
15.48.150 - Development permit. 
A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development, including manufactured homes, within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 15.48.070. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the city of Rohnert Park. The applicant shall provide the following minimum information: 
A.  Plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing: 
1.  Location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, storage of materials and equipment and their location; 
2.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and other utilities; 
3.  Grading information showing existing and proposed contours, any proposed fill, and drainage facilities; 
4.  Location of the regulatory floodway when applicable; 
5.  Base flood elevation information as specified in Section 15.48.070 or 15.48.140(C); 
6.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; and 
7.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, as required in Section 15.48.170(C)(2) of this chapter and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-93. 
B.  Certification from a registered civil engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed building meets the floodproofing criteria in Section 15.48.170(C)(2). 
C.  For a crawl-space foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in Section 15.48.170(C)(3) of this chapter and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7-93. 
D.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
E.  All appropriate certifications listed in Section 15.48.140(E) of this chapter. 
(Ord. 791 § 1 (part), 2007)  
15.48.160 - Appeals. 
The city council of the city of Rohnert Park shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. Appeals shall be filed in writing to the city clerk within ten days of the floodplain administrator's decision. 
(Ord. 791 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Article III. - Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction 
 
15.48.170 - Standards of construction. 
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required: 
A.  Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
B.  Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be constructed: 
1.  With flood-resistant materials, and utility equipment resistant to flood damage for areas below the base flood elevation; 
2.  Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
3.  With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and 
4.  Within Zone AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
C.  Elevation and Floodproofing. 
1.  Residential Construction. All new construction or substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement: 
a.  In AE, AH, A1-30 zones, elevated one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height at least one foot above the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified. 
c.  In an A zone, without BFEs specified on the FIRM (unnumbered A zone), elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation; as determined under Section 15.48.140(C). 
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
2.  Nonresidential Construction. All new construction or substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall either be elevated to conform to subsection (C)(1) of this section or: 
a.  Be floodproofed, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below the elevation recommended under subsection (C)(1) of this section, so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
b.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
c.  Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect that the standards of subsections (C)(2)(a) and (C)(2)(b) of this section are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
3.  Flood Openings. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must meet the following minimum criteria: 
a.  For non-engineered openings: 
i.  Have a minimum of two openings on different sides having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
ii.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; 
iii.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; and 
iv.  Buildings with more than one enclosed area must have openings on exterior walls for each area to allow floodwater to directly enter; or 
b.  Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect. 
4.  Manufactured Homes. 
a.  See Section 15.48.200. 
5.  Garages and Low Cost Accessory Structures. 
a.  Attached Garages. 
i.  A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with the garage floor slab below the BFE, must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of floodwaters. See subsection (C)(3) of this section. Areas of the garage below the BFE must be constructed with flood-resistant materials. See subsection B of this section. 
ii.  A garage attached to a nonresidential structure must meet the above requirements or be dry floodproofed. For guidance on below grade parking areas, see FEMA Technical Bulletin TB-6. 
b.  Detached Garages and Accessory Structures. 
i.  "Accessory structures" used solely for parking (two-car detached garages or smaller) or limited storage (small, low-cost sheds), as defined in Section 15.48.050, may be constructed such that its floor is below the base flood elevation (BFE), provided the structure is designed and constructed in accordance with the following requirements: 
(A)  Use of the accessory structure must be limited to parking or limited storage; 
(B)  The portions of the accessory structure located below the BFE must be built using flood-resistant materials; 
(C)  The accessory structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement; 
(D)  Any mechanical and utility equipment in the accessory structure must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the BFE; 
(E)  The accessory structure must comply with floodplain encroachment provisions in Section 15.48.210; and 
(F)  The accessory structure must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of floodwaters in accordance with subsection (C)(3) of this section. 
ii.  Detached garages and accessory structures not meeting the above standards must be constructed in accordance with all applicable standards in this section. 
(Ord. 791 § 1 (part), 2007)  
15.48.180 - Standards for utilities. 
A.  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate: 
1.  Infiltration of floodwaters into the systems; and 
2.  Discharge from the systems into floodwaters. 
B.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. 791 § 1 (part), 2007)  
15.48.190 - Standards for subdivisions and other proposed development. 
A.  All new subdivision proposals and other proposed developments (including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions) that are greater than fifty lots or more than five acres shall: 
1.  Identify the special flood hazard areas (SFHA) and base flood elevations (BFE). 
2.  Identify the elevations of lowest floors of all proposed structures and pads on the final plans. 
3.  If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the following as-built information for each structure shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and provided as part of an application for a letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) to the floodplain administrator: 
a.  Lowest floor elevation; 
b.  Pad elevation; 
c.  Lowest adjacent grade. 
B.  All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
C.  All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
D.  All subdivisions and other proposed development shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. 791 § 1 (part), 2007)  
15.48.200 - Standards for manufactured homes. 
A.  All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, on sites located: (1) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (2) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (3) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (4) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall: 
1.  Within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated one foot above the base flood elevation and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
B.  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on-sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map that are not subject to the provisions of subsection A of this section will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, and be elevated so that either the: 
1.  Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood elevation; or 
2.  Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six inches in height above grade. 
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. 791 § 1 (part), 2007)  
15.48.205 - Standards for recreational vehicles. 
A.  All recreational vehicles placed in Zones A1-30, AH, and AE will either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty consecutive days; or 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or 
3.  Meet the permit requirements of Section 15.48.150 of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 15.48.200(A). 
(Ord. 791 § 1 (part), 2007)  
15.48.210 - Floodways. 
Since floodways are an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
A.  Until a regulatory floodway is adopted, no new construction, substantial development, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the city of Rohnert Park. 
B.  Within an adopted regulatory floodway, the city of Rohnert Park shall prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development, unless certification by a registered civil engineer is provided demonstrating that the proposed encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
C.  If Sections 15.48.190(A) and 15.48.190(B) are satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article. 
(Ord. 791 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Article IV. - Variance Procedure 
 
15.48.220 - Nature of variances. 
The issuance of a variance is for floodplain management purposes only. Insurance premium rates are determined by statute according to actuarial risk and will not be modified by the granting of a variance. 
The variance criteria set forth in this section are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners. 
It is the duty of the city council to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. 
(Ord. 791 § 1 (part), 2007)  
15.48.230 - Conditions for variances. 
A.  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Articles II and III of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
B.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of "historic structures" (as defined in Section 15.48.050 of this chapter) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
C.  Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
D.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the "minimum necessary" considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. "Minimum necessary" means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the city council need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the city council believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance. 
E.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of the floodplain administrator that: 
1.  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars for one hundred dollars of insurance coverage; and 
2.  Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the office of the Sonoma County recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. 
F.  The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. 791 § 1 (part), 2007)  
15.48.240 - Appeal board. 
A.  The city council of the city of Rohnert Park shall hear and decide appeals and request for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  The city council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement of administration of this chapter. 
C.  In passing upon such applications, the city council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter: 
1.  Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
2.  Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
3.  Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property; 
4.  Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
5.  Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
6.  Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
7.  Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
8.  Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
9.  Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
10.  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and 
11.  Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges. 
D.  Variances shall only be issued upon a: 
1.  Showing of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional "hardship" to the applicant; and 
3.  Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (see "Public safety and nuisance"), cause "fraud and victimization" of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
E.  Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of subsections A through D of this section are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance. 
F.  Upon consideration of the factors of Section 15.48.230(A) and the purposes of this chapter, the city of Rohnert Park may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 791 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 15.50 - EXCAVATIONS, GRADING AND FILLS 
 
15.50.010 - Purpose, scope and authority. 
A.  Purpose. It is in the public interest, and it is necessary for the promotion and protection of the public safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity, general welfare and the protection of the city's natural resources, to establish minimum requirements for grading on public or private property in order to preserve and enhance the natural beauty of the land, streams and creek banks and; reduce or eliminate the hazards of earth slides, mud flows, rock falls, undue settlement, erosion, siltation and flooding. 
B.  Scope. This section sets forth rules and regulations to control excavation, grading and earthwork construction, including fills and embankments; establishes the administrative procedures for issuance of permits; and provides for approval of plans and inspection of grading activities. Any grading activity, whether or not a permit is required, is subject to erosion and sediment control regulations as provided for in Chapter 15.52. 
C.  Flood Hazards. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to grading, excavation and earthwork construction, including fills and embankments, in floodways within flood hazard areas or in flood hazard areas where design flood elevations are specified but floodways have not been designated, unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed work will not result in any increase in the level of the base flood. 
D.  Authority. The city engineer, or his/her designee, has authority for administering and carrying out the provisions in this chapter. 
(Ord. 798 § 1 (part), 2008: Ord. 734 § 2 (part), 2005)  
15.50.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
"As-graded" means the actual surface conditions present on completion of grading. 
"Bench" means a relatively level step excavated into earth material on which fill is to be placed, or within a cut or fill slope. 
"Borrow" means earth material acquired from an off-site location for use in grading on a site. 
"Certification" means a written engineering or geologist opinion concerning the progress and completion of the work. 
"Compaction" means the densification of earth material by mechanical means. 
"Contour rounding" means the rounding of cut and fill slopes in the horizontal plane to blend with existing contours or to provide horizontal variation, to eliminate the artificial appearance of slopes. 
"Cut." See "Excavation." 
"Down drain" means a device for collecting water from a swale or ditch located on or above a slope, and safely delivering it to an approved drainage facility. 
"Drip line" means a line extending around a tree directly underneath the outermost branches of the tree. 
"Earth material" means any rock, natural soil or fill and/or any combination thereof. 
"Engineering geologist" means a professional engineering geologist registered by the state to practice in the field of engineering geology. 
"Erosion" means the wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement of wind, water, and/or ice. 
"Excavation" means the removal of earth material by artificial means. Excavation is also referred to as a "cut." 
"Fill" means a deposit of earth material placed by artificial means. 
"Geotechnical engineer" means a civil engineer experienced and knowledgeable in the practice of soil engineering, or geotechnical engineering. 
"Grade" means the vertical location of the ground surface. "Existing grade" is the grade prior to grading; "rough grade" is the stage at which the grade approximately conforms to the approved plan. 
Grade, Finished. "Finished grade" means the grade of the site at the conclusion of all grading efforts and which conforms to the approved plan. 
"Grading" means any excavating or filling or combination thereof. 
"Grading inspector" means the city representative that is conducting the inspection of the on-site grading activities, as designated by the city engineer. 
"Key" means the designed compacted fill placed in a trench excavated in earth material beneath the toe of a proposed fill slope. 
"Large-scale projects" means a grading project that affects fifty acres or more or two hundred lots or more. 
"Permittee" means the person who is issued the permit. The permittee may also be the applicant but under all circumstances must either be the owner or an authorized representative of the owner of the property where the grading is being done. 
"Sensitive area" refers to the limits of impervious area that will be located less than two hundred feet away from a natural water quality resource including a wetland, stream, pond, spring or river. 
"Slope" means an inclined surface, the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance. 
"Terrace" means a relatively level step constructed in the face of a graded slope surface for drainage and maintenance purposes. 
"Variable slope" means the variation in steepness of a cut or fill slope in a combination of the horizontal and vertical planes of the slope. 
(Ord. 798 § 1 (part), 2008: Ord. 734 § 2 (part), 2005)  
15.50.030 - Permits required. 
A.  The exceptions outlined in this section shall not apply to grading within or immediately adjacent to natural drainage channels or courses. 
B.  Exemption from the permit requirements of this section shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this Code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. 
C.  No person shall do any grading without first having obtained a grading permit from the city engineer except for the following: 
1.  An excavation for basements and footings of a building, swimming pool, or other structures authorized by a valid building permit. This subsection shall not exempt from permit requirements any excavation having an unsupported height greater than five feet after the completion of such structure; 
2.  The construction of retaining walls or other structures. This subsection shall not exempt from permit requirements any excavation having an unsupported height greater than five feet after the completion of such structure; 
3.  Cemetery graves; 
4.  Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations; 
5.  Excavations for wells or underground storage tanks no greater than ten thousand gallons in size when work is being done under the authority of a valid county well permit or city building permit; 
6.  Excavation for utilities when performed by a public utility; 
7.  Stockpiling of dirt, rock, sand, gravel, aggregate or clay of fifty cubic yards or less for a period of ten days or less; 
8.  Exploratory excavations of fifty cubic yards or less under the direction of a geotechnical engineer or engineering geologist; 
9.  An excavation of fifty cubic yards or less which is less than two feet in depth, at any one given point, or; does not create a cut slope greater than four feet in height and steeper than two horizontal to one vertical and is not part of a phased grading operation; 
10.  A fill of fifty cubic yards or less which is less than two feet in depth and placed on a slope, flatter than five horizontal to one vertical, not intended to support structures, on a single lot or parcel, and does not obstruct a drainage course or alter the drainage of neighboring properties and is not part of a phased grading operation; 
11.  Work conducted in any city street, public right-of-way, or easement when the work is being done under the authority of a valid encroachment permit issued by the city. 
(Ord. 798 § 1 (part), 2008: Ord. 734 § 2 (part), 2005)  
15.50.040 - Application—Fees. 
A.  Plan-Check Fees. Before accepting a set of plans and specifications for checking, a plan-check fee shall be collected. The council shall, by resolution, establish plan-check fees. The council may, from time to time, amend such fees by resolution. 
B.  Grading Permit Fees. A grading permit fee shall be collected prior to issuance of a grading permit. The council shall, by resolution, establish grading permit fees. The council may, from time to time, amend such fees by resolution. The grading permit fee includes a grading inspection fee. 
C.  Additional Work. The fee for a grading permit authorizing additional work to that under a valid permit shall be the difference between the fee paid for the original permit and the fee shown for the entire project. 
D.  Any work which commences without the required permit is a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 798 § 1 (part), 2008: Ord. 734 § 2 (part), 2005)  
15.50.050 - Application—Contents. 
A.  For subdivisions, applications for a grading permit shall be accompanied by plans twenty-two inches by thirty-four inches in size prepared at a scale of one inch equals forty feet or at another scale acceptable to the city engineer. For grading that is not part of a subdivision, the city engineer, at his/her discretion, may allow waivers or deviations from the requirements specified in this paragraph, depending on the site-specific conditions. 
1.  Title page shall identify owner's name, owner's mailing address, owner's phone number, site address, assessor's parcel number, planning application number (if any), cubic yards of cut and cubic yards of fill; 
2.  A vicinity sketch showing roads, adjoining subdivisions and other data to adequately indicate the site location and show its relation to the community; 
3.  Property lines of the property on which the work is to be performed. The widths, location and identity of all existing easements; 
4.  Location of any buildings, structures, drainage devices or public improvements within fifty feet of the proposed grading work; 
5.  Date, north arrow, scale and accurate contours showing the topography of the existing ground of the proposed site and at least fifty feet beyond its boundary. Indicate source and date of existing contours; 
6.  Elevations, dimensions, location, extent and slopes of all proposed grading shown by contours and/or other means. Contours shall be shown at intervals of not greater than five feet, and of not greater than two feet if slope of land is less than ten percent; 
7.  Details of all surface and subsurface drainage devices, walls or other protective devices to be constructed in connection with, or as part of, the proposed work; 
8.  A certificate stating the amount and location of any material to be imported from or exported to areas other than that shown on the plans; 
9.  Type, circumference and drip line of existing trees with a trunk diameter of six inches or more, measured twenty-four inches above existing grade. Any trees or vegetation proposed to be removed shall be so indicated; 
10.  Schedule of work; 
11.  Erosion control plan and other storm water regulations as provided for in Chapter 15.52. 
B.  All grading in excess of five thousand cubic yards, grading for "large projects" or with cuts/fills greater than four feet or when directed by the city engineer as he/she deems necessary due to site conditions, shall be designated as "engineered grading." All other grading is designated "regular grading." In addition to meeting the requirements under subsection A of this section, the application for engineered grading shall also contain the following: 
1.  A map prepared by a civil engineer showing the location of all areas subject to storm water runoff to and from the site and adjacent areas. A complete hydraulic analysis including the location, width, direction and quantity of flow of each watercourse shall accompany the map; 
2.  A soils report prepared by registered soils engineer identifying: the nature and distribution of existing soils; conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures; soil design criteria for any structures or embankments required to accomplish the proposed grading; and, where necessary, slope stability studies, and recommendations and conclusions regarding site geology; 
3.  For sites with mapped maximum considered earthquake spectral response accelerations at short periods greater than 0.5g, a study of the liquefaction potential of the site shall be provided with recommendations incorporated in the plans; 
4.  A geologist report, prepared by an engineering geologist, including an adequate description of the geology of the site and conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed work; 
5.  A letter from a soils engineer or engineering geologist verifying that he/she has been employed by the applicant and agrees to provide inspection, furnish as-built grading plans and submit final approval statement in accordance with this chapter; 
6.  The erosion control plan shall be submitted to the city engineer and shall include the placement of structural and nonstructural storm water pollution prevention controls that prevent erosion during construction and post construction. Erosion control plans for large-scale projects or when directed by the city engineer in sensitive areas shall be prepared by a certified erosion control specialist. 
(Ord. 798 § 1 (part), 2008: Ord. 734 § 2 (part), 2005)  
15.50.060 - Issuance of permit—Prerequisites. 
A.  No permit shall be issued until all of the required data has been submitted for the application, the city engineer has approved the plans and other related documents, and all required fees have been paid. 
B.  In the case of subdivisions, the grading permit may be issued, after grading plans are approved and all required grading bonds, grading permit fees, subdivision improvement agreement and deeds (if applicable) have been received, and after approval of the tentative map by the city council. 
(Ord. 798 § 1 (part), 2008: Ord. 734 § 2 (part), 2005)  
15.50.070 - Bonds. 
A.  Posting Required. A permit shall not be issued unless the permittee shall first post a bond executed by the permittee and a corporate surety authorized to do business in the state as a surety in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of the corrective work necessary to clean up and remove all debris, to eliminate all hazards or to return the land to its natural condition as much as possible should the project be abandoned. This amount shall be based upon an engineer's cost estimate furnished by the applicant and approved by the city engineer. The engineer's cost estimate of the grading work, including installation of erosion control measures, is acceptable as the bond amount, provided said estimate is approved by the city engineer. In lieu of a surety bond, the applicant may file a cash bond, certificate of deposit, or instrument of credit in an amount equal to that which would be required in the surety bond. Every bond or other surety shall: 
1.  Comply with all of the provisions of the applicable laws, ordinances and requirements of the city attorney; 
2.  Comply with all terms and conditions of the permit for excavation or fill to the satisfaction of the city engineer; and 
3.  Include conditions that the permittee shall complete all of the work under the permit within the time limit specified in the permit. The city engineer may, for sufficient cause, extend the time specified in the permit, but no such extension shall release the surety. 
B.  Term. The term of each bond shall begin upon the date of issuance of the grading permit and shall remain in effect until released by the city engineer upon acceptance of completed grading improvements. 
C.  Failure to Complete Work. In the event of failure to complete the work and failure to comply with all of the conditions and terms of the permit, the city engineer may order the work required by the permit to be completed to his/her satisfaction. The surety executing such bond or deposit shall continue to be firmly bound under a continuing obligation for the payment of all necessary costs and expenses that may be incurred or expended by the governing agency in causing any and all such required work to be done. If the work is not completed within the time period specified in Section 15.50.080, the permittee shall be deemed to have abandoned the project, and the city engineer may, in his/her discretion, order the land to be returned, as much as possible to its natural condition, and the surety shall continue to be firmly bound under a continuing obligation for the payment of all necessary costs and expenses that may be incurred or expended by the governing agency in causing such restoration work to be done. In the case of cash deposit, said deposit, or any unused portion thereof, shall be refunded to the permittee in whatever amount is not necessary to complete the work described. 
(Ord. 798 § 1 (part), 2008: Ord. 734 § 2 (part), 2005)  
15.50.080 - Permit duration and expiration. 
If the work authorized by any permit under this chapter is not commenced within six months of the date of issuance, or as otherwise indicated on the permit, or if the work is not completed (including permittee's submission of final reports and drawings in accordance with Section 15.50.110) within one year of the date of issuance, or sooner if indicated on the permit, the permit shall expire and become null and void. 
(Ord. 798 § 1 (part), 2008: Ord. 734 § 2 (part), 2005)  
15.50.090 - Excavating, grading and filling—Regulations. 
A.  The following regulations shall apply to all excavating, grading and filling activities: 
1.  One copy of the approved plans and approved revisions thereof, the storm water pollution prevention plan, and grading permit shall be kept on the site at all times during the progress of the grading and shall be made available during inspections. 
2.  All grading and noise therefrom, including but not limited to, warming of equipment motors, shall be limited to the hours stated in Section 9.44.120, Construction of buildings and projects. 
3.  All graded surfaces and materials, whether filled, excavated, transported or stockpiled, shall be wetted, protected, covered or contained in such a manner as to prevent any nuisance from dust, sediment site runoff, or spillage onto adjoining property or streets. Best management practices in accordance with Chapter 15.52, Erosion and Sediment Control, shall be incorporated in the grading activities. 
4.  The faces of cut and fill slopes shall be prepared and maintained to control erosion. Erosion control for slopes shall be installed as soon as possible and prior to calling for final inspection. 
5.  No grading shall be conducted so as to encroach upon or alter the established gradient and riparian habitat of natural drainage courses except when a valid permit and other necessary approvals are obtained from the appropriate state and federal authorities and the necessary environmental review and approvals are received. 
6.  Whenever any portion of the work requires entry onto adjacent property for any reason, the permittee or applicant shall obtain a right of entry from the adjacent property owner in a form acceptable to the city attorney. 
7.  Grading shall be designed so that lot lines are at the top of slope and with adequate property line setback from the slope to provide for required vertical slope rounding. The tops and toes of cut lines and structures shall be designed to be as far as necessary to provide for safety of adjacent property, safety of pedestrians, and vehicular traffic, required slope rounding adequate foundation support, required swales, berms and drainage facilities and applicable zoning requirements. Except for pier-type foundations or other special foundation design, setback from property lines shall be not less than shown in Figure J108.1, of the California Building Standards Code. 
8.  Cut and fill slopes shall be set back from the property lines in accordance with this subsection. Setback dimensions shall be measured perpendicular to the property line and shall be as shown in Figure J108.1, of the California Building Standards Code unless substantiating data is submitted justifying reduced setbacks. The setback at the top of a cut slope shall not be less than that shown in Figure J108.1, or less than is required to accommodate any required interceptor drains, whichever is greater. Where required to protect adjacent properties at the toe of a slope from adverse effects of the grading, additional protection, approved by the city engineer, shall be included. Such protection may include but shall not be limited to: 
a.  Setbacks greater than those required by Figure J108.1; 
b.  Provisions for retaining walls or similar construction; 
c.  Erosion protection of the fill slopes; and 
d.  Provisions for the control of surface waters. 
9.  The permittee and the grading contractor shall be responsible for the protection of adjacent properties during grading operations. Prior to commencing any grading of the site, the exterior boundaries shall be marked as required by the grading inspector. Boundary markers shall be maintained throughout the grading operation. Temporary barriers and/or protective fencing shall be used when necessary to protect adjacent properties. 
10.  Proper soil stabilization is required for all graded areas. Slopes, both cut and fill, shall be provided with subsurface drainage as necessary for stability. 
11.  Slopes, both cut and fill, shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use, and shall be no steeper than two horizontal to one vertical, unless special circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings would cause the strict application of the standard to deprive such property of reasonable use. If these conditions are met, a thorough geological and engineering analysis shall verify that steeper slopes are safe and appropriate erosion control measures are specified. 
12.  A cut surface may be at a slope of one and one-half horizontal to one vertical (sixty-seven percent) provided that all the following are met: 
a.  It is not intended to support structures or surcharges; 
b.  It is adequately protected against erosion; 
c.  It is not more than eight feet in height; 
d.  It is approved by the city engineer. 
13.  Cut and fill slopes shall be contour-rounded unless the city engineer finds special circumstances applicable to the property that would require deviation from this requirement. 
14.  Variable slopes shall be used to mitigate environmental and visual impacts of grading unless the city engineer finds special circumstances applicable to the property that would require deviation from this requirement. 
15.  Unless otherwise recommended by a registered design professional, drainage facilities and terracing shall be provided, except that terracing need not be provided where the ground slope is not steeper than three horizontal to one vertical (thirty-three percent). 
16.  Terraces at least six feet in width shall be established at not more than thirty-foot vertical intervals, subject to maximum height limitations, to control surface drainage and debris on cut or fill slopes. Suitable access shall be provided to permit proper cleaning and maintenance. 
17.  Where more than two terraces are required, one terrace located at approximately mid-height, shall be at least twelve feet in width. 
18.  Swales or ditches shall be provided on terraces. They shall meet the following requirements: have a minimum gradient of twenty horizontal to one vertical (five percent); be made with materials suitable to the application; and, have a minimum width of five feet. 
19.  All drainage facilities shall be designed to carry waters to the nearest practical drainageway approved by the city, the Sonoma County water agency and other appropriate jurisdiction as a safe place to deposit such waters. If drainage facilities discharge on natural ground, riprap and/or energy dissipaters shall be constructed. 
20.  Drainage across property lines shall not exceed the drainage which existed prior to grading. Excess or concentrated drainage shall be contained on-site or directed to an approved drainage facility. Erosion of the ground in the area of discharge shall be prevented by installation of nonerosive down drains or other devices. 
21.  A single run of swale or ditch shall not collect runoff from a tributary area exceeding thirteen thousand five hundred square feet (projected) without discharging into down drain. 
22.  Interceptor drains shall be installed along the top of cut slopes receiving drainage from a tributary width greater than forty feet measured horizontally. They shall have a minimum depth of one foot and a minimum width of three feet. The slope shall be approved by the city engineer, but shall not be less than fifty horizontal to one vertical (two percent). The drain shall be lined with concrete materials suitable to the application. Discharge from the drain shall be accomplished in a manner to prevent erosion and shall be approved by the city engineer. 
23.  All building sites shall be graded and sloped away from the building foundation with a minimum slope of two percent for a distance of ten feet on all sides of every building except where yard requirements are less than twenty feet, in which case the soil shall be graded away from the foundation to a minimum of two-tenths of a foot in elevation at a distance not less than one-half the required yard width; or if the lot size and site conditions are such that this requirement cannot be met, the city engineer may allow a minimum slope of two percent away from the building for a distance of four feet. Lot surface drainage shall be directed toward approved drainage facilities at a minimum gradient of one-half percent and shall not cross property lines without the appropriate drainage facilities and/or easement. 
24.  No cut or fill may intrude closer than the drip line of any tree to be retained on the site. 
B.  Unless otherwise recommended in the approved soils report, fills shall conform to the following provisions: 
1.  The ground surface shall be prepared to receive fill by removing vegetation, non-complying fill, topsoil and other unsuitable materials, then scarifying surface to provide a bond with new fill. 
2.  Fill on slopes steeper than five horizontal to one vertical and higher than five feet shall require benching into sound bedrock or other competent material as determined by the soils engineer. Bench shall be a minimum width of ten feet and two feet in depth. The area beyond the top of fill shall be sloped for sheet overflow or an approved drainage facility provided. 
3.  When fill is placed over a cut, the bench under the top of fill shall be at least ten feet wide and the cut shall be made before placement of the fill and acceptance by the soils engineer or engineering geologist as a suitable foundation for fill. 
4.  Detrimental amounts of organic material shall not be permitted in fills. No rocks or similar irreducible material with a minimum dimension greater than twelve inches shall be buried or placed in fills. The city engineer may permit placement of larger rock only upon receipt and approval of a method of placement prepared by a soils engineer and under his/her direction. The following conditions shall also apply: 
a.  Rock disposal areas shall be delineated on grading plan. 
b.  Rock sizes greater than twelve inches in maximum dimension shall be ten feet or more below finished grade, measured vertically. 
c.  Rocks shall be placed so as to assure filling of all voids with fines. 
5.  All fills shall be compacted to a minimum ninety percent of maximum density as determined by ASTM D 1557, Modified Proctor, in lifts not exceeding twelve inches in depth. In place density shall be to the satisfaction of the city engineer. 
(Ord. 798 § 1 (part), 2008: Ord. 734 § 2 (part), 2005)  
15.50.100 - Inspection. 
A.  General. All grading operations for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the grading inspector. Special inspection of grading operations and special testing shall also be performed in accordance with the provisions of subsection C of this section. The permittee shall notify the grading inspector at least forty-eight hours prior to the start of construction. 
B.  Engineered Grading Designation. The city engineer may have cause to believe that hydraulic, geologic or other factors require engineered grading for grading that is less than the amounts defined for engineered grading in Section 15.50.040(B) and shall, at his/her sole discretion, so designate the grading work as engineered grading. 
C.  Engineered Grading Requirements. 
1.  For engineered grading it shall be the responsibility of the civil engineer who prepares the approved grading plan to incorporate all recommendations from the geotechnical engineering and engineering geology reports into the grading plan. He/she shall also be responsible for the professional inspection and approval of the grading within his/her area of technical specialty. The civil engineer shall act as the coordinating agent in the event the need arises for liaison between the other professionals, the contractor, the city engineer, and the grading inspector. The civil engineer shall also be responsible for the preparation of revised plans and the submission of as-built grading plans upon completion of the work. 
2.  Geotechnical engineering and engineering geology reports shall be required in accordance with Section 15.50.050. During grading, all necessary reports, compaction data and geotechnical engineering and engineering geology recommendations shall be submitted to the civil engineer and the grading inspector by the geotechnical engineer and the engineering geologist. 
3.  The geotechnical engineer's area of responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, professional inspection and approval concerning the preparation of ground to receive fills, testing for required compaction, stability of all finish slopes and the design of buttress fills, where required, incorporating data supplied by the engineering geologist. 
4.  The engineering geologist's area of responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, professional inspection and approval of the adequacy of natural ground for receiving fills and the stability of cut slopes with respect to geological matters, and the need for subdrains or other groundwater drainage devices. He/she shall report findings to the geotechnical engineer and the civil engineer for engineering analysis. 
5.  The grading inspector shall inspect the project at the various stages of the work requiring approvals and at more frequent intervals necessary to determine that adequate control is being exercised by the professional consultants. 
D.  Regular Grading Requirements. 
1.  The city engineer, at his/her discretion, may require inspection and testing by an approved testing agency at the permittee's expense. 
2.  The testing agency's responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, certification concerning the inspection of cleared areas and benches to receive fill, and the compaction of fills. 
E.  Notification of Noncompliance. If, in the course of fulfilling their responsibility under this section, the civil engineer, the geotechnical engineer, the engineering geologist or the testing agency finds that the work is not being done in conformance with this section or the approved grading plans, the discrepancies shall be reported immediately in writing to the person in charge of the grading work and the grading inspector. Recommendations for corrective measures, if necessary, shall be submitted. 
F.  Transfer of Responsibility. If the civil engineer, the geotechnical engineer, the engineering geologist, or the testing agency of record is changed during the course of the work, the work shall be stopped until the replacement has agreed to accept the responsibility within the area of their technical competence for approval upon completion of the work. 
(Ord. 798 § 1 (part), 2008: Ord. 734 § 2 (part), 2005)  
15.50.110 - Completion of work. 
A.  Final Reports. Upon completion of the rough grading work and at the final completion of the work, the permittee shall submit the following reports and drawings and supplements thereto to the city engineer no later than the expiration of the permit in accordance with Section 15.50.080 (unless permittee is granted an extension by the city engineer, in his or her sole discretion, to submit such final reports): 
1.  As-built grading plan, including original ground surface elevations, as-graded ground surface elevations, lot drainage patterns and locations and elevations of all surface and subsurface drainage facilities. 
2.  The grading contractor shall submit a statement that his work was in conformance to said as-built grading plan. 
B.  For engineered grading, in addition to meeting the requirements in subsection A of this section, the following shall also be required: 
1.  The geotechnical engineer shall submit a statement certifying that, to the best of his/her knowledge, the work within his/her area of responsibility is in accordance with the approved geotechnical engineering report. 
2.  The civil engineer shall submit a statement certifying that, to the best of his/her knowledge, the work within his/her area of responsibility was done in accordance with the approved grading plan. 
3.  A final soils grading report prepared by the geotechnical engineer including locations and elevations of field density tests, summaries of field and laboratory tests and other substantiating data and comments on any changes, made during grading, and their effect on the recommendations made in the geotechnical engineering investigation report. 
4.  If requested by the city engineer, a final geologic grading report prepared by the engineering geologist including a final description of the geology of the site, including any new information disclosed during the grading and the effect of that geology on recommendations incorporated in the approved grading plan. 
(Ord. 798 § 1 (part), 2008: Ord. 734 § 2 (part), 2005)  
15.50.120 - Enforcement—Stop work order and revocation of permit. 
In the event that any person doing work related to the approved plans pursuant to this chapter violates the terms of the approved plans or performs the work in such a manner as to materially adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood or the site so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, the city engineer may order the construction stopped by notice in writing, or may suspend or revoke the grading permit. 
(Ord. 798 § 1 (part), 2008: Ord. 734 § 2 (part), 2005)  
15.50.130 - Violation and penalties. 
No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair, or maintain any grading, excavation, or fill or cause the same to be done, contrary to, or in violation of, any terms of this chapter. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and each day during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, any person, partnership, or corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be required to bear the expense of such restoration. 
(Ord. 798 § 1 (part), 2008: Ord. 734 § 2 (part), 2005)  
15.50.140 - Appeal procedures. 
Any person under this chapter who may be dissatisfied with the action of the city engineer, planning director, building official or grading inspector on the application or permit may, within five days after such action is taken, file an appeal with the city manager by giving written notice of such appeal to the city clerk. A stop work order shall be effective upon issuance, and shall continue in effect during the pendency of any appeal. The appeal shall state the name and address of the appellant, the nature of the determination being appealed, the reason the appellant believes the determination is incorrect, and what the correct determination of the appeal should be. Failure to file such a statement within the time or in the manner required waives the appellant's objections, and the appeal shall be dismissed. Unless the appellant and city agree to a longer time period, the appeal shall be heard by the city manager within thirty days of receipt of the notice of appeal. At least ten days prior to the hearing, the city shall mail notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant. The city manager shall hear and determine the appeal on the basis of the appellant's written statement and any additional evidence deemed appropriate. The appellant may present testimony and oral argument at the hearing either personally or by counsel. The city manager shall issue a written decision within ten days of the date of the hearing. The decision of the city manager is final. 
(Ord. 798 § 1 (part), 2008: Ord. 734 § 2 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 15.52 - EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL 
 
15.52.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this ordinance is to regulate grading on public and private property in order to control erosion and sedimentation, protect water quality, and safeguard health, safety, and the public welfare, and to establish administrative procedures to carry out these regulations. 
(Ord. 721 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 734 § 3 (part), 2005)  
15.52.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
"Best Management Practices (BMPs)" are construction site controls used to protect water quality. 
"Certified contractor" is a person who has received training and is licensed by the Contractors State License Board to inspect and maintain erosion and sediment control practices. 
"Clearing" is any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover. 
"Erosion control" is a measure that prevents erosion. 
"Erosion and sediment control plan" is a set of plans prepared by, or under the direction of, a licensed professional engineer indicating the specific measures and sequencing to be used to control erosion and sedimentation on a development site during and after construction. 
"Freeboard" is the height above the recorded high water mark of a structure. 
"Grading" is excavation or fill of material, including the resulting conditions thereof. 
"Grading permit" is a permit issued by the city for grading activities to a specific site. 
"Phasing" is clearing a parcel of land in distinct phases, with the stabilization of each phase completed before the clearing of the next. 
"Sediment control measures" are measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving a construction site. 
"Site" is a parcel of land or a contiguous combination thereof. 
"Start of Construction" is the first land-disturbing activity associated with a development, including land preparation such as clearing, grading, and filling; installation of streets and walkways; excavation for basements, footings, piers, or foundations; erection of temporary forms; and installation of accessory buildings such as garages. 
(Ord. 721 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 734 § 3 (part), 2005)  
15.52.030 - Erosion and sediment control plan. 
A.  An erosion and sediment control plan (plan), prepared by a registered civil engineer, or other professional who is qualified to prepare such a plan, shall be submitted with a grading permit application, and shall delineate measures to appropriately and effectively minimize soil erosion and sedimentation, and shall include the following: 
1.  A description and delineation of the vegetative measures to be taken to minimize erosion and sedimentation; 
2.  A description and delineation of the temporary and permanent measures to be taken to protect manufactured or disturbed slopes from erosion by mechanical means, such as with mulches, diversion dikes, etc.; 
3.  The delineation of the drainage control measures to be taken; 
4.  The extent and manner of the cutting of trees and the clearing of vegetation, the disposal of same, and the measures to be taken for the protection of undisturbed trees and vegetation; 
5.  The methods to be used for the disposal of excess materials; 
6.  The methods to be used for the control of dust; 
7.  A description and delineation of the temporary and permanent measures to be taken to retain sediment on the site; 
8.  A description of the measures to be taken to maintain the devices shown on the plan during grading operations and construction on the site; 
9.  The extent of disturbed ground that will exist, what streets will be paved, and what drainage devices will be installed prior to the start of each rainy season; 
10.  A natural resources map identifying soils, vegetative cover, and resources protected under other chapters of this Code. The map shall be at a scale no smaller than one inch equals one hundred feet; 
11.  Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer application, and kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary and permanent vegetative control measures; and 
12.  Any other information required by the city engineering department. 
B.  Exemptions: A plan shall not be required for construction activities which do not require a grading permit. 
C.  For all other construction activities for which a grading permit is not required, property owners are required to comply with the standards for preventing and controlling erosion, sedimentation, and other impacts associated with construction site management practices. The city will make information about these requirements available through a variety of techniques, including public outreach programs, handout materials, and other educational efforts to assist property owners in meeting this obligation. 
D.  The Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook should be used as a guide as to what measures should be taken for any particular set of circumstances. 
E.  An interim plan is required prior to each rainy season during construction for a project for which a final plan is required by this chapter. The plan must be submitted in a timely manner to allow the city to review and approve the plan prior to September 15. The measures delineated and described in the plan must be in place and operational prior to October 15. 
F.  Phasing may be required on all sites disturbing greater than thirty acres, with the size of each phase to be established at plan review and as approved by the engineering department. 
G.  Estimate of the cost of accomplishing the work described and delineated on the final and interim plans. 
(Ord. 721 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 734 § 3 (part), 2005)  
15.52.040 - Design standards for erosion control plans 
A.  Grading, erosion control practices, sediment control practices, and waterway crossings shall meet the design criteria set forth in the most recent version of the California Stormwater Quality Association Best Management Practice Handbook, and shall be adequate to prevent transportation of sediment from the site to any offsite area to the satisfaction of the city engineer. 
B.  Clearing and grading of natural resources shall not be permitted, except when in compliance with all other chapters of this Code. Clearing techniques that retain natural vegetation and drainage patterns, as described in the California Stormwater Quality Association Best Management Practice Handbook, shall be used to the satisfaction of the city engineer. 
C.  Clearing, except that necessary to establish sediment control devices, shall not begin until all sediment control devices have been installed and have been stabilized. 
D.  The following general site and good housekeeping requirements shall be implemented and are special provisions of any grading permit issued: 
1.  Sufficient erosion and sediment control supplies shall be available on site during the rainy season (October through April) to protect areas susceptible to erosion during rain events. Contractors shall be prepared year-round to deploy erosion and sediment treatment control practices; 
2.  Soil disturbance work shall be conducted during dry weather whenever possible; 
3.  The contractor shall provide adequate materials management, including covering, securing, and segregating potentially toxic materials (asphalt, herbicides, pesticides, fertilizer, grease, oils, fuel, paints, stains, solvents, wood preservatives, etc.), and providing secondary containment for hazardous materials; 
4.  The contractor shall provide training and equipment to contain spills of oil and other hazardous materials; 
5.  Designated concrete washout areas shall be established at least fifty feet away from storm drain inlets or drainage facilities and away from the concrete truck access area so that construction traffic will not drive through wash waters. The wash out area shall have a bermed area of sufficient volume to completely contain all liquid and waste concrete material plus a sufficient freeboard for rainwater; 
6.  Paving operations shall be conducted in a manner that properly disposes of wastes and in which measures to control run on and prevent runoff from areas being paved are implemented; 
7.  Sanitary facilities of sufficient number and size to accommodate construction crews shall be located away from storm drain inlets and drainage facilities, and anchored to prevent being blown over or tipped by vandals. The facilities shall be maintained in good working order and emptied at regular intervals by a licensed sanitary waste hauler. 
F.  The following erosion control requirements shall be incorporated in the grading and erosion control plans: 
1.  Soil stabilization shall be completed within five days of clearing or inactivity in construction; 
2.  Projects shall be designed to avoid disturbing land in sensitive areas and to preserve existing vegetation wherever possible; 
3.  Major grading operations shall be scheduled during dry months when practical, and shall allow adequate time before rainfall begins to stabilize the soil with erosion control materials; 
4.  Seeding and mulching shall be done as soon as grading is complete; 
5.  If seeding or another vegetative erosion control method is used, the vegetative cover shall become established within a time-frame approved by the city engineer, or the city engineer may require the site to be reseeded or a non-vegetative option employed; 
6.  Special techniques that meet the design criteria outlined in the California Stormwater Quality Association Best Management Practice Handbook on steep slopes or in drainage ways shall be used to ensure stabilization; 
7.  Soil stockpiles must be stabilized and/or securely covered at the end of each workday; 
8.  In areas where permanent re-seeding and planting is not established at the close of the construction season, additional control measures shall be used, such as a heavy mulch layer or another method that does not require germination, to ensure soil stabilization at the site; 
9.  Where runoff needs to be diverted from one area and conveyed to another, earth dikes, drainage swales, slope drains or other suitable practice shall be constructed in accordance with the design criteria set forth in the most recent version of the California Stormwater Quality Association Best Management Practice Handbook; 
10.  Techniques shall be employed to prevent the blowing of dust or sediment from the site; 
11.  Techniques that deliver upland runoff past disturbed slopes shall be employed when determined necessary by the city engineer. 
G.  The following sediment control requirements shall be incorporated in the erosion control plan: 
1.  Linear sediment barriers shall be placed below the toe of exposed and erodible slopes, down-slope of exposed soil areas, around soil stockpiles, and at other appropriate locations along the site perimeter; 
2.  Street sweeping shall be conducted on an as needed basis to remove sediment from streets and roadways and to prevent the sediment from entering storm drains or receiving waters; 
3.  Every storm drain inlet with the potential to receive sediment-laden runoff shall be protected in accordance with the design criteria set forth in the most recent version of the California Stormwater Quality Association Best Management Practice Handbook. Inlet protection shall be inspected and maintained frequently; 
4.  Sediment basins or sediment traps shall be installed on projects where sediment-laden water may enter the drainage system or watercourses and in association with dikes, temporary channels, and pipes used to convey runoff from disturbed areas; 
5.  Protection for adjacent properties by the use of a vegetated buffer strip in combination with other perimeter controls or other appropriate method, as described in the most recent version of the California Stormwater Quality Association Best Management Practice Handbook. 
H.  The following waterway and watercourse protection requirements shall be implemented: 
1.  A temporary stream crossing installed and approved by the appropriate regulatory agencies if a wet watercourse will be crossed regularly during construction; 
2.  Stabilization of the watercourse channel before, during, and after any in-channel work; 
3.  All on-site stormwater conveyance channels shall be designed according to the criteria outlined in the California Stormwater Quality Association Best Management Practice Handbook; 
4.  Stabilization adequate to prevent erosion located at the outlets of all pipes and paved channels. 
I.  The following construction site access requirements shall be implemented: 
1.  A temporary access road provided at all sites; and 
2.  Other measures, such as track-out prevention devices, or as required by the engineering department inspector in order to ensure that sediment is not tracked onto public streets by construction vehicles or washed into storm drains. 
(Ord. 721 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 734 § 3 (part), 2005)  
15.52.050 - Construction site control measures. 
In addition to compliance with specific requirements contained in an approved permit, all holders of a grading permit shall establish and implement construction site management practices that will prevent toxic materials and other debris from entering the city's storm drainage and waterway systems, and thus cause adverse impacts to water quality. The following construction site practices are prohibited and constitute a violation of this ordinance: 
A.  Improper storage of chemicals (pesticides, fertilizers, fuels, paints, thinners); 
B.  Improper disposal of construction waste material, garbage, rubbish, sanitary waste, plaster, dry-wall, grout and gypsum; 
C.  Failure to immediately clean up spills of toxic materials; 
D.  Washing concrete truck washout or surplus concrete material into a street, catch basin, or other public facility or a related natural resource; 
E.  Leaving stockpiles uncovered; and/or 
F.  Allowing construction vehicles to track or spill soil or debris into or onto a street or public right-of-way. 
(Ord. 721 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 734 § 3 (part), 2005)  
15.52.060 - Inspection. 
A.  The city engineering department inspector, or designated agent, shall make inspections as hereinafter required, and either shall approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the holder of the grading permit wherein the work fails to comply with the erosion and sediment control plan as approved. Plans for grading, stripping, excavating, and filling work bearing the stamp of approval of the city engineering department shall be maintained at the site during the progress of the work. To obtain inspections, the holder of the grading permit shall notify the city engineering department at least two working days before the following: 
1.  Start of construction; 
2.  Installation of sediment and erosion measures; 
3.  Completion of site clearing; 
4.  Completion of rough grading; 
5.  Completion of final grading; 
6.  Close of the construction season; and 
7.  Completion of final landscaping; 
B.  The holder of the grading permit or his or her agent shall make regular inspections of all control measures in accordance with the inspection schedule outlined on the approved erosion and sediment control plan(s). The purpose of such inspections will be to determine the overall effectiveness of the plan and the need for additional control measures. All inspections shall be documented in written form, kept in an on-site file and at the time interval specified in the approved permit. 
C.  The engineering department inspector, or designated agent, shall enter the property of the applicant as deemed necessary to make regular inspections to ensure the validity of the reports filed under subsection B of this section. 
(Ord. 721 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 734 § 3 (part), 2005)  
15.52.070 - Enforcement. 
A.  Stop-Work Order; Revocation of Permit. In the event that any person holding a plan pursuant to this chapter violates the terms of the permit or implements site development in such a manner as to materially adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood or development site so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, the city engineer may suspend or revoke the grading permit. 
B.  Violation and Penalties. No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair, or maintain any grading, excavation, or fill, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any terms of this ordinance. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, except that, notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any such violation constituting a misdemeanor under this chapter may, in the discretion of the enforcing authority, be charged and prosecuted as an infraction. Each day during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense. Upon conviction of any such violation, such person, partnership, or corporation shall be penalized as set forth in Section 1.16.010 of this Code. In addition to any other penalty authorized by this section or Section 1.16.010, any person, partnership, or corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be required to bear the expense of such restoration. 
C.  Appeals. Any person to whom a stop work order or revocation, grading permit or penalty is issued pursuant to these rules may appeal that determination to the city manager. A stop work order shall be effective upon issuance, and shall continue in effect during the pendency of any appeal. The notice of appeal must be in writing, and filed with the city manager within fifteen days from the date of the notice being appealed. The appeal shall state the name and address of the appellant, the nature of the determination being appealed, the reason the appellant believes the determination is incorrect, and what the correct determination of the appeal should be. Failure to file such a statement within the time or in the manner required waives the appellant's objections, and the appeal shall be dismissed. Unless the appellant and the city agree to a longer time period, the appeal shall be heard by the city manager within thirty days of receipt of the notice of appeal. At least ten days prior to the hearing, the city shall mail notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant. The city manager shall hear and determine the appeal on the basis of the appellant's written statement and any additional evidence deemed appropriate. The appellant may present testimony and oral argument at the hearing either personally or by counsel. The hearings official shall issue a written decision within ten days of the date of the hearing. The decision of the city manager is final. 
(Ord. 721 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 734 § 3 (part), 2005)  
Title 16 - SUBDIVISIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 16.02 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
16.02.010 - Citation and authority. 
This chapter is adopted to supplement and implement the Subdivision Map Act (Gov. Code § 66410 et seq.) and may be cited as the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Rohnert Park. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.02.020 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate and control the division of land within the city and to supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act concerning the design, improvement and survey data of subdivisions, the form and content of all maps provided for by the Subdivision Map Act and the procedure to be followed in securing the official approval of the planning commission, the city engineer, the zoning administrator, the building services department and city council regarding the maps. To accomplish this purpose, the regulations outlined in this chapter are determined to be necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare, to promote orderly growth and development and to promote open space, conservation, protection and proper use of land, and to ensure provision for adequate traffic circulation, utilities and services. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.02.030 - Conformity to general plan, specific plans and zoning ordinance. 
No land shall be subdivided and developed for any purpose which is not in conformity with the general plan and any specific plan of the city or permitted by the zoning chapter or other applicable provisions of the Rohnert Park Municipal Code. The type and intensity of land use as shown on the general plan shall determine the type of streets, roads, highways, utilities and public services that shall be provided by the subdivider. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.02.040 - Application. 
The regulations set forth in this title shall apply to all parts of subdivisions within the city and to the preparation of subdivision maps and to other maps provided for by the Subdivision Map Act. Each subdivision and each part thereof lying within the city shall be made and each map shall be prepared and presented for approval as provided for and required by this chapter. A condominium conversion is treated as a subdivision subject to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.02.050 - Exceptions to applicability of title. 
This chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  The financing or leasing of apartments, offices, stores or similar space within apartment buildings, industrial buildings, commercial buildings, mobile home parks or trailer parks. 
B.  Mineral, oil or gas leases. 
C.  Land dedicated for cemetery purposes under the State Health and Safety Code. 
D.  A lot line adjustment between four or fewer existing adjoining parcels, where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not created, provided the lot line adjustment is approved by the city engineer. 
E.  Any separate assessment under Section 2188.7 of the State Revenue & Taxation Code for community apartment or cooperative housing projects. 
F.  The conversion of a community apartment project or a stock cooperative to a condominium if the requirements of Government Code Section 66412(g) and (h) of the Subdivision Map Act are met. 
G.  The financing or leasing of any parcel of land, or any portion, for the construction of commercial or industrial buildings on a single parcel, unless the project is not subject to review under other ordinances regulating design and improvements. 
H.  The financing or leasing of existing separate commercial or industrial buildings on a single parcel. 
I.  The construction, financing or leasing of second family residential units according to the zoning ordinance. 
J.  Leasing for agricultural purposes, cultivation of food or fiber, and grazing or pasturing of livestock. 
K.  Leasing of, or grant of easement to, a parcel of land, or any portion or portions of land, for financing, erection, and sale or lease of a wind-powered electrical generation device which is subject to discretionary action by the city. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.02.060 - Modification of requirements. 
A.  Whenever the subdivider desires to modify any of the provisions of Chapters 16.02 through 16.52 of this title pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the subdivider shall file an application with the proper advisory agency in a form to be prescribed by the advisory agency, which application shall set forth in detail the requested modifications, and shall also set forth a general sketch of the proposed tentative map as proposed to be modified. Each application shall be accompanied by a filing fee as set forth by resolution of the city council. 
B.  Each proposed modification shall be referred to the officer of the department under whose jurisdiction the regulations involved comes and such officer or department shall transmit to the advisory agency his or its written recommendation, which recommendation shall be reviewed, prior to the granting of any modification. 
C.  Whenever, in the opinion of the planning commission, the land in any subdivision is of a size or shape, or is affected by topographical location or conditions, that render it impossible for the subdivider to conform fully to the regulations contained in this chapter, the planning commission may make modifications as, in its opinion, are reasonably necessary or expedient and in conformity with the Subdivision Map Act. In the case of subdivisions of four or fewer units this determination may be made by the subdivision committee. 
D.  An application for modification pursuant to this chapter shall be filed after the completion of the subdivision conference and prior to the filing of a minor subdivision, parcel map or tentative map. 
E.  In the event that any modification to a tentative map as provided herein is made, a written statement of said modification shall be transmitted to the council at the time of approval of the final subdivision map. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.02.070 - Environmental impact. 
No parcel or tentative map filed pursuant to the provisions of this title shall be approved until an environmental impact analysis is prepared, processed and considered in accordance with the provisions of this title. The subdivider shall provide such additional data and information and deposit and pay such fees as may be required for the preparation and processing of environmental review documents. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.02.080 - Grading and erosion control. 
Every map approved pursuant to this title shall be conditioned on compliance with the city grading ordinance. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 16.04 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
16.04.010 - Definitions generally. 
Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions in this chapter govern the construction of this title. The definitions in the zoning ordinance and the Subdivision Map Act also apply and are incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.020 - Acreage. 
"Acreage" means a parcel of land which is not a lot, as defined in this title, and those areas where a legal subdivision has not been made previously, or where a legal subdivision has declared such parcel as acreage. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.030 - Alley. 
"Alley" means a public way to be used primarily for vehicular access to the back or side of a parcel of real property that otherwise abuts a street. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.040 - Block. 
"Block" means an area of land separated from other areas by adjacent streets, rights-of-way, railroads, public areas or the subdivision boundary. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.050 - City engineer. 
"City engineer" means the engineer of the city. The land surveying functions of the city engineer may be performed by a city surveyor if that position is created by the city and if registered by the State of California license board or contracted with an outside land surveyor registered in the State of California. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.060 - Collector street. 
"Collector street" means a public street which is identified as a collector street by the Rohnert Park general plan. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.070 - Community apartment project. 
"Community apartment project" means a common interest development in which an undivided interest in land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of any apartment located on it. (Civil Code § 1351(d), Business and Professions Code § 11004.) 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.080 - Condominium. 
"Condominium" means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of the property together with a separate interest in space called a unit, the boundaries of which are described on a recorded final map, parcel map or condominium plan. The condominium may be residential, industrial or commercial. (Civil Code § 783, 1351(f).) 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.090 - Conversion. 
"Conversion" means the creation of separate ownership interests in an existing building. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.100 - County. 
"County" means Sonoma County. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.110 - County recorder. 
"County recorder" is the Sonoma County recorder. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.120 - Cul-de-sac. 
"Cul-de-sac" means a street which connects to another public street only at one end and is not planned for later extension. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.130 - Days. 
"Days" means calendar days unless this title or state law specifies otherwise. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.140 - Dedication. 
"Dedication" means the transfer by a subdivider to a public entity of title to real property or an interest therein, or of an easement or right in real property, the transfer of facilities, the installation of improvements or any combination of these. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.150 - Department. 
"Department" means the planning and community development department of the city. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.160 - Design. 
"Design" means: 
A.  Street alignments, grades and widths; 
B.  Drainage and sanitary facilities and utilities, including alignments and grades thereof; 
C.  Location and size of all required easements and rights-of-way; 
D.  Fire roads and firebreaks; 
E.  Lot size and configuration; 
F.  Traffic access; 
G.  Grading; 
H.  Land to be dedicated for park or recreational purposes; and 
I.  Such other specific physical requirements in the plan and configuration of the entire subdivision as may be necessary to ensure consistency with, or implementation of, the general plan or any applicable specific plan. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.170 - Development. 
"Development" means the uses to which the land which is the subject of a map shall be put, the buildings to be constructed on it, and all alterations of the land and construction incident thereto. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.175 - Director. 
"Director" means the director of the planning and community development department of the city. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.180 - Environmental quality act. 
"Environmental quality act" means the California Environmental Quality Act and its implementing guidelines. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.190 - Engineering geologist. 
"Engineering geologist" means a geologist who is certified in the state of California to practice engineering geology. "Engineering geology" means the application of geologic knowledge and principles in the investigation and evaluation of naturally occurring rock and soil for use in the design of civil works. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.200 - Final map. 
"Final map" means a map showing a subdivision of five or more lots, prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.210 - Flood control district. 
"Flood control district" means the Sonoma County Water Agency. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.220 - Flood hazard. 
"Flood hazard" is the threat of overflow storm waters having the capability to flood lands or improvements, transport or deposit debris, scour the surface soil, dislodge or damage buildings, or erode the banks of channels. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.230 - General plan. 
"General plan" means the general plan of the city and all amendments to it. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.240 - Grading ordinance. 
"Grading ordinance" means the grading ordinance of the city and all amendments to it. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.250 - Improvements. 
"Improvements" refers to: 
A.  Street work, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, driveways, storm-drainage facilities, water mains, sanitary sewers and facilities, public utilities, landscaping and fences to be installed by the subdivider on the land to be used for public rights-of-way, private streets and easements as a condition of map approval; and 
B.  Any other improvements necessary to implement the general plan or a specific plan and as defined by Section 66419 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.260 - Improvement plan. 
"Improvement plan" means an engineering plan submitted by a registered civil engineer showing the location and construction details of the streets, roads, drainage facilities, sanitary sewers, water mains and the pertinent structures and other on-tract and off-tract improvements required for a subdivision. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.270 - Lot. 
"Lot" means a parcel or portion of land separate from others and delineated or described as a single integral unit on a subdivision map or by such other map approved under the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.280 - Lot line adjustment. 
"Lot line adjustment" means a shift or rotation of an existing lot line between four or fewer existing adjoining parcels, where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjoining parcel and where a greater or lesser number of parcels than originally existed is not created. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.290 - Major street. 
"Major street" means a public street which is identified as a major street by the Rohnert Park general plan. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.300 - Major subdivision. 
"Major subdivision" means the subdivision of land into five or more parcels or lots. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.310 - Merger. 
"Merger" means the joining of two or more contiguous parcels of land under one ownership into one parcel. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.320 - Minor subdivision. 
"Minor subdivision" means the subdivision of land into four or fewer parcels or lots. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.330 - Parcel map. 
"Parcel map" means a map showing a subdivision of four or fewer lots, or a subdivision for which a parcel map is authorized and prepared in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act and this title. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.340 - Planning commission. 
"Planning commission" means the planning commission of the city. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.350 - Private street. 
"Private street" means any street that is not a public street. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.360 - Public street. 
"Public street" means a street for which the right-of-way is owned by or offered for dedication to the public and accepted by the city. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.370 - Registered civil engineer. 
"Registered civil engineer" means a civil engineer registered by the state of California and doing work consistent with the engineer's authority under the California Business and Professions Code and the State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors. (Business and Professions Code §§ 6700, 8700.) 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.380 - Remainder or designated remainder. 
"Remainder" or "designated remainder" means that portion of an existing parcel which is designated on the required map as not a part of the subdivision. It is that portion not divided for the purpose of sale, lease or financing. The remainder is not counted as a parcel for the purpose of determining whether a final or parcel map is required. A remainder of five acres or more need not be shown on the map, and its location need not be indicated as a matter of survey, but only by deed reference to the existing boundaries of the remainder. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.390 - Scenic easement or open space easement. 
"Scenic easement" or "open space easement" means an easement granted to the public whereby the owner relinquishes or limits the right to construct improvements on the land. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.400 - Soil engineer. 
"Soil engineer" means a state of California registered civil engineer whose field of expertise is soil mechanics. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.410 - Standard engineering specifications. 
"Standard engineering specifications" means those standard specifications and standard details for public improvements prepared by the city engineer and adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.420 - Stock cooperative. 
"Stock cooperative" means a common interest development in which a corporation is formed primarily for the purpose of holding title to improved real property, and substantially all of the shareholders receive a right of exclusive occupancy in a portion of the property. (Civil Code § 1351(m), Business and Professions Code § 11003.2.) 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.430 - Street. 
"Street" means a strip of land which provides access to lots. Street includes a public or private street, avenue, road, highway, lane, alley, court, square, crossing or intersection. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.440 - Subdivider. 
"Subdivider" means a person who proposes to divide, divides or causes to be divided real property into a subdivision. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.450 - Subdivision. 
"Subdivision" means the division of land for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future. The land may be improved or unimproved and is that land shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units. Property is considered as contiguous units even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easements or railroad rights-of-way. "Subdivision" includes condominium projects, community apartment projects and stock cooperatives. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.460 - Subdivision committee. 
"Subdivision committee" means a committee of the city consisting of the director or his/her designee, the city engineer or his/her designee and one planning commissioner designated by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.470 - Subdivision Map Act. 
"Subdivision Map Act" is Government Code Section 66410 et seq. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.480 - Tentative map. 
"Tentative map" means a map made for the purpose of showing the design and improvements of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and around it preparatory to the approval of a final map or parcel map. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.04.490 - Vesting tentative map. 
"Vesting tentative map" is a tentative map for a subdivision that has printed conspicuously on its face the words "vesting tentative map" at the time it is filed with the city. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 16.06 - ADMINISTRATION AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
Sections: 
 
16.06.010 - Planning commission. 
The planning commission is designated as the advisory agency regarding major subdivisions under the Subdivision Map Act. It has the powers and duties provided in the Subdivision Map Act and this title including: 
A.  Making investigations and reports on the design and improvement of proposed subdivisions and either imposing requirements and conditions on the subdivisions approved by the planning commission or recommending requirements and conditions on the subdivisions to be considered by the city council; 
B.  For major subdivisions making recommendations to the city council for approval, conditional approval, or denial of applications for tentative maps; 
C.  For minor subdivisions , acting as the appeal board for decisions of the subdivision committee; 
D.  Acting as the appeal board for decisions of the city engineer or department; and 
E.  Approving or denying an application for extensions of any approved tentative subdivision map. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.06.020 - City council. 
The city council has the powers and duties provided by law and this title, including: 
A.  Approving final subdivision maps and improvement agreements; 
B.  Accepting land or improvements which are proposed for dedication; 
C.  Acting as the appeal board for hearing appeals of planning commission actions, including actions on tentative maps; 
D.  For major subdivisions, approving, conditionally approving or denying applications for tentative maps; and 
E.  Establishing of any processing fees necessary to implement the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.06.030 - Subdivision committee. 
The responsibilities of the committee include: 
A.  Approving tentative parcel maps; 
B.  Making investigations and reports on the design and improvement of any proposed minor subdivision. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.06.040 - Department. 
The responsibilities of the department include: 
A.  Processing of tentative maps; 
B.  Determining whether a proposed subdivision conforms to the general plan, any applicable specific plans, and the zoning ordinance; 
C.  Making recommendations to the planning commission for recommendation of approval, conditional approval, or denial of a tentative subdivision map application (including recommendations of other departments and agencies) for a major subdivision; 
D.  Sending proper notice of proceedings under this title; 
E.  Preparing staff report and recommendations and certifying, as secretary of the subdivision committee, that the subdivision committee has approved, conditionally approved, or denied the tentative map for a minor subdivision; 
F.  Scheduling, as secretary of the planning commission, any appeal to a decision on a parcel map, reversion to acreage, merger or lot line adjustment; 
G.  Processing and approval, in consultation with the city engineer, of waiver of tentative parcel map, lot line adjustment, merger and certificate of compliance; 
H.  Collection of all required application fees and deposits; and 
I.  Determining violations of the Subdivision Map Act or this title. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.06.050 - City engineer. 
A.  The responsibilities of the city engineer include: 
1.  Establishing design and construction details, standards and specifications for approval by the city council; 
2.  Determining if proposed subdivision improvements comply with the Subdivision Map Act and this title; 
3.  Examining and certifying that final and parcel maps are in substantial compliance with the approved tentative map; and the processing and certification of final and parcel maps, reversion to acreage maps and amended maps, and the processing and approval of subdivision improvement plans; 
4.  Inspection and approval of subdivision improvements; 
5.  Review and approval of grant deeds for subdivision dedications which are outside a subdivision boundary; and 
6.  Collection of plan check, inspection and development fees. 
B.  When necessary to carry out these responsibilities, the city engineer may designate and authorize a representative to act on his or her behalf. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.06.060 - City attorney. 
The city attorney's responsibilities include reviewing and approving as to form all subdivision improvement agreements and security. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.06.070 - Conflict of interest. 
When the Subdivision Map Act or this title requires the execution of certificate or affidavit or the performance of an act by a person in his official capacity who is also the owner, subdivider or an agent or employee of a subdivider, the certificate or affidavit shall be executed or such act performed by some other qualified person authorized to act by the city council. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 16.08 - MAPS REQUIRED 
Sections: 
 
16.08.010 - General. 
Each subdivision created in the city, including condominium conversions, shall conform to the regulations in this title. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.08.020 - Exception—Lot line adjustment. 
A.  A lot line adjustment is as defined in Chapter 16.04 of this title. 
B.  This title does not apply to a lot line adjustment provided: 
1.  No additional parcels are created; 
2.  The resulting parcels conform to the zoning ordinance and Title (Buildings and Construction) of the Rohnert Park Municipal Code; 
3.  The resulting parcels do not interfere with existing utilities, infrastructure or easements; 
4.  Real property taxes have been prepaid; 
5.  The adjustment is approved by the department; 
6.  The owner prepares a deed and plat map. However, if a record of survey is required under Business and Professions Code Section 8762, the owner shall prepare a record of survey; and 
7.  The city approves and the county recorder records a deed and plat map or a record of survey. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.08.030 - Division of land—Five or more parcels. 
A.  Tentative and final maps—Major subdivisions. A tentative map and a final map are required for a major subdivision, that is, a division of land proposed to be divided into five or more parcels (including five or more condominiums, a community apartment project containing five or more parcels, or for the conversion of a dwelling to a stock cooperative containing five or more dwelling units) as determined by the department. 
B.  However, a tentative map and a parcel map (but not a final map) are required for a major subdivision where: 
1.  The land before division contains fewer than five acres, each parcel created by the division abuts upon a maintained public street or highway, and no dedications or improvements are required by the city council; or 
2.  Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of twenty acres or more and has an approved access to a maintained public street or highway; or 
3.  The land consists of a parcel or parcels of land having approved access to a public street or highway which comprises part of a tract of land zoned for industrial or commercial development and which has the approval of the city council as to street alignments and widths; or 
4.  Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of not less than forty acres or is not less than a quarter of a quarter section. 
5.  The land being subdivided is solely for the creation of an environmental subdivision. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.08.040 - Division of land—Four or fewer parcels. 
A.  Tentative and parcel maps—Minor subdivisions. A tentative map and parcel map are required for minor subdivisions. 
B.  Tentative and parcel maps are not required for: 
1.  The subdivision of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation, defined by Section 230 of the State Public Utilities Code, which is created by a short-term lease terminable by either party on not more than thirty days notice in writing; 
2.  Land conveyed to or from a governmental agency, public entity or public utility, or for land conveyed to a subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to such public utility for right-of-way, unless a showing is made by the department in individual cases, upon substantial evidence, that public policy necessitates a parcel map. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.08.050 - Plat maps. 
A plat map, in a form as required by the city engineer, and a certificate of compliance, in accordance with Section 16.08.020 above, shall be required for lot line adjustments, mergers, certificates of compliance and parcel map waivers. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.08.070 - Fees and deposits. 
All persons submitting maps as required by this chapter shall pay all fees and/or deposits as set by council resolution. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 16.10 - SUBDIVISION OF FIVE OR MORE PARCELS 
Sections: 
 
16.10.010 - Designated remainder. 
A.  A subdivider of unimproved land may designate as a remainder that portion which is not divided for the purpose of sale, lease or financing. The designated remainder shall not be counted as a parcel for the purpose of determining whether a parcel map or final map is required. 
B.  For a designated remainder parcel, the fulfillment of construction requirements for improvements is not required until: 
1.  A permit or other grant of approval for development of the remainder parcel is issued by the city; or 
2.  The construction of the improvements is required under an agreement between the subdivider and the city; or 
3.  The city makes a finding that fulfillment of the construction requirements is necessary for reasons of: 
a.  The public health and safety; or 
b.  The required construction is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area. 
C.  When fulfillment of the construction requirements is to be delayed, the subdivider shall record an agreement approved by the city attorney with the county recorder, stating: 
1.  What the required improvements are; and 
2.  That the subdivider or a successor owner is required to complete them all before the city will grant a permit or other approval for development. 
D.  If a designated remainder is subsequently sold, the subdivider or the owner must obtain a certificate of compliance or conditional certificate of compliance. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.10.020 - Public hearings—When required. 
A.  The planning commission and city council shall hold a public hearing on the tentative map for a major subdivision for which a final or parcel map will be filed. 
B.  If a decision regarding a major subdivision is appealed from the planning commission, the city council shall hold a public hearing. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.10.030 - Public hearings - Notice. 
Unless otherwise specified in this title, notice of a public hearing shall be given as set forth in this section. 
A.  Notice shall be given at least ten days before the hearing. 
B.  The notice shall include the date, time and place of the hearing, the identity of the hearing officer or body, a general explanation of the matter to be considered, and a general description by text or diagram of the location of the property. The notice shall also include the following: "If you challenge the proposed action in court, you may be limited to raising only those issues you or someone else raised at the public hearing described in this notice, or in written correspondence delivered to the (planning commission or city council) at, or prior to, the public hearing." 
C.  1.  Notice shall be given in the manner required by Government Code Sections 65090 and 65091, as follows: 
a.  Publication once in a newspaper of general circulation; 
b.  Mailing or delivery to the property owner and project applicant; 
c.  Mailing or delivery to each local agency expected to provide water, sewage, streets, roads, schools or other essential facilities or services to the project; and 
d.  Mailing or delivery to all owners of real property within three hundred feet of the property. If the number of owners exceeds one thousand, the city may instead publish notice of at least one-eighth page in a newspaper of general circulation. 
2.  In addition, the city may give notice in any other manner it deems necessary or desirable. 
3.  If the proposed project is a conversion of residential real property to a condominium, community apartment, or stock cooperative, notice shall be given to each tenant of the property consistent with Chapter 17.07.020(34) of this code and Government Code Sections 66451.3 and 66452.5(e). 
D.  Continued Hearings. A public hearing may be continued from time to time and, if continued to a specific date, time and place, no new notice is required. 
E.  Appeal or Request for Modification. If a decision under this title is appealed or if a subdivider requests a change in a condition of approval either before or after a final or parcel map is filed, notice of the appeal or request shall be given in the manner described in this title. 
F.  Staff Reports. A report of recommendation on a tentative map by the department shall be in writing and provided to the subdivider and to each tenant in the case of a proposed condominium, community apartment project or stock cooperative, at least three days before any hearing or action. 
G.  Costs. The subdivider is responsible for the costs incurred in giving proper notice. 
H.  Substantial compliance with these notice requirements is sufficient. A technical failure to comply shall not affect the validity of any action taken according to the procedures in this title. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.10.040 - Appeals. 
A.  A decision pertaining to the tentative map by a city staff member or the subdivision committee under this title may be appealed to the planning commission. A decision pertaining to the tentative map by the planning commission under this title may be appealed to the city council. 
B.  The subdivider or other person may file an appeal of a decision of the subdivision committee, city engineer, department or any other city administration official to the planning commission by filing with the secretary of the planning commission on a form prescribed by the city within ten days after the action is taken. The subdivider or other person may file an appeal of a decision of the planning commission to the city council by filing with the city clerk on a form prescribed by the city within ten days after the action is taken. 
C.  The hearing on the appeal shall be held by the planning commission or the city council, whichever has jurisdiction, within thirty days of the filing of the notice of appeal, and notice of the hearing shall be given as prescribed in Section 16.10.030. 
D.  The appeal body shall make its decision on the appeal in writing within ten days after the hearing is concluded. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.10.050 - Time limits, expirations and extensions. 
A.  The time limits specified in this section and the Subdivision Map Act for reporting and acting on maps may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the person or body required to act. However, the city may not require a routine waiver of time limits except as necessary to permit concurrent processing of related approvals or an environmental impact report on the same project. 
B.  If the city council does not act within the time limits set forth in this section, the tentative map shall be deemed to have been approved or conditionally approved as set forth in the planning commission's report if it complies with all other applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, this code and the general plan. 
C.  The approval or conditional approval of a tentative map shall expire twenty-four months after the date of approval by the subdivision committee, planning commission or, if applicable, the city council. However, the expiration date shall be extended in accordance with Government Code Section 66452.6 (a) if the filing of multiple final maps is authorized under this chapter and if the subdivider is required to provide off-site improvements in the amounts specified in Government Code Section 66452.6(a). An extension to the expiration date may be approved as provided in this section. 
1.  The period of time specified shall not include any period of time during which a development moratorium is in effect according to Section 66452.6 (b) of the Subdivision Map Act. 
2.  The period of time specified above shall not include any period of time during which a lawsuit has been filed and is pending in a court of competent jurisdiction involving the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map only if a stay of the time period is approved by the city council. Within ten days of the service of the initial petition or complaint upon the city, the subdivider shall, in writing, to the director, request a stay in the time period of the tentative map. Within forty days after receiving the request, the city council shall either stay the time period for up to five years or deny the requested stay. The request for the stay shall be a hearing with notice to the subdivider and to the appellant, and upon conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall, within ten days, declare its findings. 
3.  Expiration of an approved or conditionally approved tentative or vesting tentative map shall terminate all proceedings and no final or parcel map of all or any portion of the real property included within the tentative map shall be filed without first processing a new tentative map. 
4.  If the signed final map and subdivision improvement agreement have been delivered to the city engineer prior to the expiration of the tentative map, processing, approval and recording may occur after the expiration date of the tentative map. 
D.  Extensions. 
1.  Request by subdivider. The subdivider or the engineer may request an extension of the expiration date of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map by written application to the department prior to expiration of the map. The map shall automatically be extended for sixty days or until the application for the extension is approved, conditionally approved, or denied, whichever occurs first. 
2.  Planning commission action. The director shall review the request and submit the application for the extension, together with a report, to the planning commission for approval, conditional approval or denial at the next scheduled planning commission meeting. A copy of the director's report shall be forwarded to the subdivider prior to the planning commission meeting on the extension. The resolution adopted by the planning commission approving or conditionally approving an extension shall specify the new expiration date of the tentative map. 
3.  Time limit of extension. The expiration date may be extended pursuant to this section for a period or periods totaling no more than three years. 
4.  Conditions of Approval. As a condition of the extension of a tentative map, the planning commission may impose new conditions or revise existing conditions on the approved tentative map as recommended by the department in its report or as it may find necessary. 
5.  Appeal. The subdivider or any interested person adversely affected may appeal any action of the planning commission on the extension to the city council within fifteen days of such action in conformance with Section 16.10.040 (A) of this chapter. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.10.060 - Review by other agencies. 
A.  Agency Within Three Miles. A local agency within three miles of a proposed subdivision may make recommendations to the city regarding a tentative map if it does so within twenty days after the notice and map are mailed by the city. A local agency which desires to make such recommendations shall file with the city a written request and map indicating the territory in which it wishes to make such recommendations. 
B.  State Department of Transportation. The State Department of Transportation may make recommendations regarding a tentative map if the proposed subdivision is within one mile of a state highway route and if the recommendations are submitted to the city within twenty days after the notice and map were mailed by the city. 
C.  School Districts. 
1.  Within five days after the application for a tentative map is accepted as complete, the department shall send a notice of the filing to the governing board of any affected school district. The notice shall contain information about the location, number of units, density, and other relevant information. Within ten working days after the notice was mailed, the board may submit to the city a report and recommendation regarding the proposed subdivision and its impact on the school district. Failure of the school district to respond within the fifteen days is considered a recommendation for approval. 
2.  If the proposal shows an area for a public school site, the city shall notify the State Department of Education. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.10.070 - Tentative maps—Form and content. 
The form and contents, submittal and approval of a tentative map or a vesting tentative map for a major subdivision shall be governed by the provisions of this section. The tentative map shall be prepared in a manner acceptable to the department and shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. The tentative map shall be clearly and legibly drawn. The map shall be drawn to an engineer's scale, large enough to show all information clearly, but no less than one inch equals one hundred feet. 
The map shall contain not less than the following: 
A.  A title including the subdivision number obtained from the city engineer, and type of subdivision; 
B.  Name and address of legal owner, subdivider and person preparing the map, including registration or license number; 
C.  Sufficient legal description to define the boundary of the proposed subdivision; names and locations of streets adjacent to the proposed subdivision shall be indicated; 
D.  The numbers of adjacent subdivisions and the names of owners of adjacent properties; 
E.  Boundary lines of the city, school district, and other taxing districts when within or contiguous to the subdivision; 
F.  Date of map preparation and map revision, if the map is revised after the initial submittal to the city, north arrow, scale; 
G.  A vicinity map showing streets, adjoining subdivisions, shopping centers, schools, and other data sufficient to locate the proposed subdivision and show its relation to the community; 
H.  Existing topography of the proposed site and at least one hundred feet beyond its boundary, and proposed changes in topography. The contours of the land shall be shown at intervals of not more than one foot for ground slopes between level and five percent, and not more than five feet for ground slopes in excess of five percent. Elevations shall be according to U.S. Geodetic Survey datum, commonly termed mean sea level; 
I.  Existing improvements to be shown include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Type, circumference and drip line of all existing trees; other significant vegetation with a trunk diameter of four inches or more, measured twenty-four inches above existing grade. Any trees or other significant vegetation proposed to be removed shall be so indicated; 
2.  The location and outline of existing structures to scale identified by type. Structures to be removed shall be so marked; 
3.  Existing drainage channels, culverts, irrigation ditches, wells and springs, and the approximate location of all areas subject to inundation or stormwater overflow, and the location, width and direction of flow of each watercourse; 
4.  The location, pavement and right-of-way width, typical section, grade and name of existing streets, highways and driveways within and/or contiguous to the proposed subdivision; 
5.  The widths, location and identity of all existing easements; and 
6.  The location and size of existing sanitary sewers, fire hydrants, water mains and storm drains within and/or contiguous to the proposed subdivision. The approximate slope of existing sewers and storm drains shall be indicated. The location of existing overhead and underground utility lines and poles within and/or contiguous to the proposed subdivision shall be indicated; 
J.  Proposed improvements to be shown include, but are not limited to: 
1.  The location, grade, centerline radius, arc length of curves, pavement, and right-of-way width of all streets. Typical sections of all streets shall be shown, including pavement widths, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, medians, and slopes of cuts and fills. Proposed private streets shall be clearly indicated; 
2.  The location and radius of all curb returns and cul-de-sacs; 
3.  The location, width and purpose of all easements; 
4.  The angle of intersecting streets if such angle deviates from a right angle by more than four degrees; 
5.  Engineering plan and data showing the approximate finished grading of each lot, the preliminary design of all grading, the elevation of proposed building pads, and the top and toe of cut and fill slopes, to scale; 
6.  Areas to be used for public purposes or facilities; 
7.  Proposed recreation sites, trails and parks for private or public use. If park dedication is proposed, the tentative map application is not complete unless accompanied by the parks and recreation commission written comments on the proposed location; 
8.  Proposed common areas and areas to be dedicated to public open space; 
9.  The location and size of sanitary sewers, fire hydrants, water mains, and storm drains, including all necessary provisions for handling water supply, stormwater and sewage. Proposed slopes, approximate elevation, direction of flow and type of facility for sanitary sewers, storm drains, and overland drainage releases shall be indicated; and 
10.  A planting plan for slopes, erosion control, street trees, other landscaping and fencing; 
K.  Lot numbers beginning with the numeral "1" and continuing consecutively throughout the subdivision; 
L.  The name or names of any engineering geologist or soil engineer whose services were required in the preparation of the design of the tentative map; 
M.  The approximate lot layout and the approximate dimensions of each lot and each building site; 
N.  The approximate boundaries of areas subject to inundation or stormwater overflows, the location, width and direction of flow of all watercourses; 
O.  The size and lot number of the smallest and largest lots; 
P.  If the subdivider plans to develop the site in phases, the proposed phases and their proposed sequence of construction; 
Q.  Proposed street names; 
R.  Energy conservation information. The design of a subdivision for which a tentative map is required, excluding a conversion, shall provide, to the extent feasible, for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the subdivision; and 
S.  The department may waive any of the above tentative map requirements if the type of subdivision does not need to comply with these requirements or if other circumstances justify a waiver. The department may require other drawings, data, or information as deemed necessary by the department to accomplish the purposes of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. 
T.  Any proposed phasing of the development showing size, location and order of final map phasing. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.10.080 - Tentative maps—Accompanying data and reports. 
At the time of filing, a tentative map shall be accompanied by the following data and reports: 
A.  A statement of present zoning and of existing and proposed uses of the property, and any proposed zoning changes, whether immediate or future; 
B.  A description of the proposed subdivision, including the number of lots, their average size, and nature of proposed development; 
C.  A description of landscaping, fences, bridges, gates or other proposed improvements which may not be fully shown on the map; 
D.  A preliminary title report, not more than six months old and acceptable to the department, showing the legal owners at the time of filing the tentative map; 
E.  A statement of the time when improvements are proposed to be completed; 
F.  Proposed tract or deed restrictions, if any; 
G.  Description, location and existing elevation of an established city bench mark or other bench marks within the immediate vicinity; 
H.  Information as required by the department to allow a determination on environmental review to be made in accordance with the environmental quality act; 
I.  A signed statement of compliance indicating whether the proposed project is located on a hazardous waste and substance site as defined in the Government Code (Gov. Code §§ 65940, 65962.5 (f)); 
J.  For a vesting tentative map, in addition to the requirements set forth in this section, the subdivider shall also submit all of the following information: 
a.  Proposed building envelope(s) including dimensions, height, size, setbacks and location of buildings; 
b.  A preliminary grading plan including the approximate finished grade of each building pad; 
c.  Building elevations; 
d.  Drawing sheets containing the above requirements shall be supplemental to the vesting tentative map sheet and shall be consecutively numbered. The preliminary grading plan shall be placed on a separate sheet and placed last in the numbering system. 
K.  Any other data or reports deemed necessary by the department or the planning commission in order to review the tentative map; 
L.  For major subdivisions, design review related materials as required by the city zoning ordinance; 
M.  Preliminary Soil Report and Preliminary Engineering Geology Report. 
1.  Preliminary Soil Report. A preliminary soil engineering report prepared by a soil engineer, based upon adequate test borings or excavations, shall be filed with each application for a tentative subdivision map. The report shall include any information appropriate for the site, including any information required by the city engineer. 
2.  Preliminary Engineering Geology Report. A preliminary engineering geology report prepared by an engineering geologist shall be submitted with each application for a tentative subdivision map, unless waived by the city engineer. The report shall include any information appropriate for the site, including any information required by the city engineer. 
3.  Expanded Investigation. If the preliminary soil report or the preliminary engineering geology report indicates, or the city engineer has knowledge of, the presence of soil or geologic conditions which, if corrective measures are not taken, could lead to structural defects, then a soil or engineering geology investigation of each proposed lot shall be submitted with the final map. 
4.  Compliance Required. A tentative subdivision map application is not considered as filed until the required preliminary reports have been submitted with the map. 
N.  Hazardous Waste and Substances Statement. Government Code Section 65962.5 requires the California Secretary for Environmental Protection to consolidate information regarding land where certain hazardous wastes or contaminants are present, and to distribute a list to each city and county in which sites on the list are located. An applicant for any development project must consult the list sent to the city and submit a signed statement to the city indicating whether the project and any alternatives are located on the list. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.10.090 - Tentative maps—Department review and referral. 
A.  A subdivider shall file a completed tentative map application with the department. The application shall include a sufficient number of prints of the tentative map as required by the department, together with the filing fee established by city council resolution. The department, in consultation with the engineering division, shall within thirty days after submittal of the application determine whether the application is complete in accordance with the requirements of this title and the Permit Streamlining Act. 
B.  Within five days after the application is accepted as complete, the department shall forward copies of the tentative map to the affected public agencies and utilities which have fifteen days to submit their findings and recommendations to the department. 
C.  Notice of Public Hearings. The department shall set a date for a public hearing before the subdivision committee, planning commission and/or city council, provide notice as required by Section 16.10.030 of this chapter, and prepare a report with recommendations. The department shall send a copy of the report to the subdivider at least three days before the public hearing. 
D.  For minor subdivisions, the subdivision committee shall approve, or deny the tentative map within fifty days after the tentative map was accepted for filing. For major subdivisions, the planning commission shall make its recommendation to the city council, within fifty days after the tentative map was accepted for filing, for approval, conditional approval or denial of the tentative map; and within 30 days after the planning commission makes its recommendation, the city council shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the tentative map. 
1.  The time periods specified in this subsection begin after certification of the environmental impact report, adoption of a negative declaration, or a determination that the project is exempt from the requirements of the environmental quality act. 
2.  If no action is taken within these time limits or an extension mutually approved under Section 16.10.050 of this chapter, the tentative map is deemed approved insofar as it complies with the general plan, an applicable specific plan, this title, including city-approved policies, standards and requirements, the city zoning ordinance, and the Subdivision Map Act. 
E.  Approval. 
1.  For major subdivisions, the planning commission may recommend approval or denial and the city council may approve or conditionally approve a tentative map and, for minor subdivisions, the subdivision committee may approve or conditionally approve a tentative parcel map, if it finds all of the following: 
a.  The proposed map is consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan, any policy or guideline implementing the general plan (including the city's design guidelines), or other applicable provisions of this code; 
b.  The site is physically suitable for the type of development; 
c.  The site is physically suitable for the proposed density of development; 
d.  The design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements will not cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat, absent a statement of overriding conditions. 
e.  The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will not cause serious public health problems; 
f.  The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will not conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of property with the proposed subdivision, absent alternative, equivalent easements. 
g.  Any proposed phases and their proposed sequence of construction are identified on the submitted map. 
2.  The planning commission or city council (or the subdivision committee for minor subdivisions) may modify or delete a condition of approval recommended in the department's report except a condition required by city code. The planning commission or city council (or the subdivision committee minor subdivisions) may add additional requirements as a condition of its approval. 
3.  The planning commission or city council (or the subdivision committee for minor subdivisions) may require that the subdivider defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the city, its agents, officers, and employees from any claim, action or proceedings against the city to attack the approval of a subdivision. 
4.  If the subdivision proposes five hundred dwelling units or more and is not within an urbanized area previously developed for urban uses and is not a housing project exclusively for low and very low income households, the planning commission or city council shall include as a condition the requirement that sufficient water supply shall be available. 
F.  Denial. The planning commission may recommend denial and the city council may deny approval of the tentative map on any of the grounds provided by the Subdivision Map Act or this code. The subdivision committee may deny approval of the tentative for minor subdivisions. The subdivision committee, planning commission or city council shall deny approval of the tentative map if it makes any of the following findings: 
1.  The proposed map is inconsistent with the general plan or any applicable specific plan, any policy or guideline implementing the general plan (including the city's design guidelines), or other applicable provisions of this code; 
2.  The site is not physically suitable for the type of development; 
3.  The site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development; 
4.  The design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements is likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat; 
5.  The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems; 
6.  The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision; or 
7.  Subject to Section 66474.4 of the Subdivision Map Act, the land is subject to a contract entered into pursuant to the California Land Conservation Act of 1965, and the resulting parcels following a subdivision of the land would be too small to sustain their agricultural use. 
G.  Standards in Effect. In determining whether to approve or disapprove a tentative map application, the city shall apply only those ordinances, policies, and standards in effect at the time the application was accepted as complete. The city may apply ordinances, policies, and standards adopted later if (1) the subdivider applicant requests changes in connection with the same development project, and they are approved, or (2) if the city had formally initiated proceedings to amend the general or specific plan, zoning or subdivision ordinance and published notice of the proposed change before the application was accepted as complete. 
H.  Appeal. Any person may appeal a decision of the planning commission in accordance with Section 16.10.040 of this chapter. 
I.  Form of Approved Tentative Map. Within ninety days after approval of the tentative map, the subdivider shall submit a revised map to the department which conforms to any changes required by the conditions of approval. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.10.100 - Amendments to an approved tentative map. 
A.  Minor Amendments. 
1.  The department may approve minor amendments to the approved or conditionally approved tentative map or conditions of approval; provided, that: 
a.  The changes are consistent with the intent and spirit of the original tentative map approval; 
b.  No feature, facility, or amenity is deleted which affects the project's quality, safety, or function; 
c.  Changes in plans do not reduce natural areas, create new visible retaining or drainage structures, or substantially change pad elevations; 
d.  Changes in the design do not eliminate or add more units or lots; and 
e.  There are no resulting violations of this code. 
Each amendment shall be indicated on the approved or conditionally approved tentative map and certified by the department. Minor amendments under this subsection may include minor amendments to major residential subdivisions relating to exterior elevations, landscaping or amenities (such as minor changes in windows or plant varieties), interior floor plans with no exterior changes, or site circulation plans. 
2.  For major subdivisions the planning commission, or for minor subdivisions the subdivision committee, may approve minor amendments to the approved or conditionally approved tentative map or conditions of approval; provided, that: 
a.  The changes are consistent with the intent and spirit of the original tentative map approval; 
b.  No feature, facility, or amenity is deleted which affects the project's quality, safety, or function; 
c.  Changes in plans do not reduce natural areas, create new visible retaining or drainage structures, or substantially change pad elevations; 
d.  Changes in the design do not eliminate or add more units or lots; 
e.  There are no resulting violations of this code; and 
f.  The amendments are to major residential subdivisions, and relate to architectural elevations, floor plans (with less than a ten percent change in the housing unit size), architectural style, number of stories, or the amount or grouping of landscaping. 
Each amendment shall be indicated on the approved or conditionally approved tentative map and certified by the department. 
B.  Other Amendments. Amendments to the tentative map or conditions of approval which, in the opinion of the department, are not minor, or do not meet the criteria in subsection (A) of this section, shall be presented to the subdivision committee, planning commission or city council, whichever approved the map, for its consideration at a noticed public hearing. Processing shall be in accordance with the provisions for processing a tentative map as set forth in this chapter. An approved amendment does not by itself alter the expiration date of the tentative map. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.10.110 - Vesting tentative maps. 
A.  General. Whenever a tentative map is required, a vesting tentative map may be filed instead. The words "Vesting Tentative Map" must be printed conspicuously on each page of the map. 
B.  Procedures and Requirements. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the procedures and requirements for a tentative map and subdivisions generally apply to a vesting tentative map. 
1.  The subdivider shall submit additional information at the time of filing the tentative map as set forth in subsection 16.10.090 (J) above. 
2.  At the time of filing the vesting tentative map, a subdivider shall also have submitted a complete application for all other discretionary permits pertinent to the development of the project site. Such approvals may include the following permits: site development, development variances or exceptions, conditional use, planned development or specific plan. 
3.  The processing of a vesting tentative map may take place concurrently with the other discretionary permits required. However, the vesting tentative map cannot be approved prior to issuance of any required discretionary permit. 
4.  If the filing of a vesting tentative map is concurrent or subsequent to a discretionary permit, those plans and standards may be included by a reference note on the face of the map. 
C.  Development Rights. 
1.  Duration of Development Rights. The right to proceed with development pursuant to a vesting tentative map continues for one year following the recordation of the final map or parcel map. If a project covered by a single vesting tentative map is divided into phases, and more than one final map is recorded, the one-year period begins for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded. 
2.  Expiration of Development Rights. 
a.  The right to proceed with development of a vesting tentative map expires if a final map is not approved before the vesting tentative map expires. 
b.  If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the one-year period specified in subsection (C)(1) of this section, the right to proceed with development continues until the building permit expires. 
c.  If a final map is recorded based upon a vesting tentative map, and the development rights expire, the final map remains in effect without the development rights. 
3.  Extension of Time for Exercise of Development Rights. 
a.  If the city does not complete processing of an application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review within thirty days of the date the application is complete, the one-year period specified in this subsection is automatically extended by the time exceeding the thirty-day period used by the city to complete processing. 
b.  Before the expiration of the one year specified in this subsection, a subdivider may apply to the planning commission for a one-year extension. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.10.120 - Final maps—General. 
A.  The form, contents, accompanying data, and filing of a final map shall conform to the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter. 
B.  The final map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. 
C.  The city engineer may waive a requirement of this chapter regarding map contents and accompanying information if the city engineer finds that the requirement is not applicable to the subdivision. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.10.130 - (Reserved)  
16.10.140 - Phasing of final maps. 
A.  Multiple final maps relating to an approved tentative map may be filed if: 
1.  The subdivider states in the tentative map application the subdivider's intention to file multiple final maps as provided for in subsection 16.10.070 (T) of this chapter; or 
2.  After filing of the tentative map, the city council and the subdivider concur in the filing of multiple final maps and the city's approval includes a statement defining the location, size, and phasing order. 
B.  Each final map which constitutes a part of the approved tentative map shall have a separate subdivision number. The subdivision improvement agreement executed by the subdivider shall provide for the construction of improvements as required to assure a logical and orderly development of the whole subdivision. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.10.150 - Final maps—Survey required. 
A.  An accurate and complete survey of the land to be subdivided shall be made by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. All monuments, property lines, centerlines of streets, alleys and easements adjoining or within the subdivision shall be tied into the survey. 
B.  At the time of making the survey for the final or parcel map, the engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments, conforming with the standards of Section 8771 of the Business and Professions Code, so that another engineer or surveyor may readily retrace the survey. At least one exterior boundary line shall be monumented prior to recording the final map. Other monuments shall be set as required by the city engineer. At least one monument shall be tied into the California Coordinate System, NAD 83 Zone 2. At least one monument on the final map shall indicate an elevation on United States Coast and Geologic Survey (USC&GS) datum "NGVD '29". 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.10.160 - Final maps—Form. 
The form of the final or parcel map shall conform to the Subdivision Map Act and the following requirements. 
A.  The final or parcel map shall be legibly drawn, printed, or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in black on tracing cloth or polyester base film. Certificates, affidavits and acknowledgments may be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with opaque ink. If ink is used on polyester base film, the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure permanent legibility. 
B.  The size of each sheet shall be eighteen inches by twenty-six inches. A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely blank margin of one inch. 
C.  The scale of the map shall be not less than one inch equals one hundred feet or as may be necessary to show all details clearly, and enough sheets shall be used to accomplish this end. 
D.  The particular number of the sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the map shall be stated on each of the sheets, and its relation to each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown. When two or more sheets including the certificate sheet are used, a key sheet shall be included. 
E.  All printing or lettering on the map shall be of one-eighth-inch minimum height and of such shape and weight as to be readily legible in prints and other reproductions made from the original drawings. 
F.  The boundary of the subdivision shall be designated by a heavy black line one-sixteenth inch thick, in such a manner as not to obliterate figures or other data. 
G.  All dimensions shown on the final map shall be in feet and decimals of a foot. 
H.  All lines shown on the final map which do not constitute a part of the subdivision itself shall be clearly distinguishable and any area enclosed by such lines shall be labeled "not a part of this subdivision." 
I.  There must appear on each map sheet the scale, the north point and the basis of bearings and the equation of the bearing to true north. The basis of bearings shall be approved by the city engineer. 
J.  The final form of the final or parcel map shall be as approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.10.170 - Final maps—Contents. 
The contents of the final or parcel map shall conform to the Subdivision Map Act and the following requirements: 
A.  Title Sheet. The title sheet shall include: 
1.  The subdivision number conspicuously placed at the top of the sheet; 
2.  Affidavits, certificates, acknowledgments, endorsements, acceptances of dedication and notarial seals required by law; 
3.  Where the size of a subdivision permits, in lieu of a title sheet, required information may be shown on the same sheet as the final map; 
4.  The date of preparation and the signed certificate of the subdivider's engineer or surveyor who prepared the map; 
5.  A certificate of dedication signed by those persons having any record title interest in the land subdivided, if any land is to be dedicated for public use; 
6.  A certificate enacted by all parties having any record title interest in the land subdivided, consenting to the preparation and recordation of the map; and 
7.  Certificates for execution by the city engineer and the city clerk. 
B.  Title. Each sheet shall have a title showing the subdivision number and the location of the property being subdivided with reference to maps which have been previously recorded, or by reference to the plat of a United States Survey. The following words shall appear in the title, "City of Rohnert Park, Sonoma County, California." 
C.  Linear, Angular and Radial Data. Sufficient linear, angular and radial data shall be shown to determine the bearings and lengths of monument lines, street centerlines, the boundary lines of the subdivision, the boundary lines on every lot and parcel which is a part of the subdivision, and ties to existing monuments used to establish the boundary. Arc length, radius, and total central angle and radial bearings of all curves shall be shown. Ditto marks shall not be used in the dimensions and data shown on the map. 
D.  Monuments. The location and description of all existing and proposed monuments shall be shown. Standard city monuments shall be set at or on city engineer approved offsets at the following locations: 
1.  The intersection of street centerlines; 
2.  Beginning and end of curves or intersection of tangents on centerlines; and 
3.  Other locations as may be required by the city engineer. 
E.  Lots. Lot numbers shall begin with the number one in each subdivision and shall continue consecutively with no omissions or duplications except where contiguous lands, under the same ownership, are being subdivided in successive units, in which event, lot numbers may begin with the next consecutive number following the last number in the preceding unit. Each lot shall be shown entirely on one sheet of the map, unless approved by the city engineer. The subdivider shall show the area of any lot on the map, calculated excluding the area within any public street or alley (either existing or proposed) abutting the lot, but including the area within any easements for other purposes (either existing or proposed). 
F.  Adjoining Properties. The adjoining corners of all adjoining subdivisions shall be identified by subdivision number and reference to the book and page of the filed map showing such subdivision, and if no subdivision is adjacent, then by the name of the owner and reference to the recorded deed by book and page number for the last record owner. 
G.  City Boundaries. City boundaries which cross or join the subdivision shall be clearly designated as shall locations of boundary lines of the school district or other taxing districts adjacent to or intersecting the subdivision. 
H.  Street Names. The names of all existing and proposed streets, alleys, or highways within or adjoining the subdivision shall be shown. 
I.  Easements and Dedications. 
1.  Every easement and proposed dedication for road or street, path, water main, stormwater drainage, sanitary sewer, utility or other public use as may be required shall be offered for dedication to the public for acceptance by the city or other public agency, and the use shall be specified on the map. If at the time the final map is approved, a street, path, alley or storm drainage easement is not accepted by the city council, the offer of dedication shall remain open and the city council may, by resolution at any later date, accept and open the street, path, alley or storm drainage easement for public use. The acceptance shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder. 
2.  The city may accept or reject (subject to later acceptance) a dedication lying outside the subdivision boundary which requires a separate grant deed. The offer of dedication and the city's acceptance or rejection shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder. 
3.  Every easement of record shall be shown on the map, together with the name of the grantee and sufficient recording data to identify the conveyance, e.g., recorder's serial number and date, or book and page of official records. 
4.  An easement not disclosed by the records in the office of the county recorder and found by the surveyor or engineer to be existing, shall be specifically designated on the map, identifying the apparent dominant tenements for which the easement was created. 
5.  Each easement of record shall be shown by dashed lines on the final map with the widths, lengths and bearings of record. 
J.  Open Space Areas. Open space areas, including greenbelts and open space corridors, may be shown, subject to the approval of the city. These areas shall be dedicated as open space easements unless otherwise specified in the approval of the tentative map, and the subdivider shall agree to allow such land to be included within an open space maintenance assessment district if proposed by the city. 
K.  Statements and Certificates. Each certificate, statement and acknowledgment required by the Subdivision Map Act and this title shall appear on the final or parcel map and may be combined where appropriate. 
L.  Miscellaneous. The map shall also show: 
1.  The location and width of each drainage channel, utility and railroad right-of-way or easement; 
2.  The limitation, if any, on the right of access to and from a street; 
3.  The location and width of nonaccess strips and reserve strips; 
4.  The location of the approved building setback lines; and 
5.  The location of the high water line (one hundred year water surface elevation) if the subdivision is near a creek or stream. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.10.180 - Final maps—Preliminary submittal for city approval. 
The subdivider shall submit four sets of preliminary prints of the final or parcel map to the city engineer for checking. The preliminary prints shall be accompanied by the following data, plans, reports, and documents in a form as approved by the city engineer, and where applicable, the city attorney. 
A.  Improvement plans; 
B.  Preliminary engineering geology report. A preliminary engineering geology report prepared in accordance with the city grading ordinance and this chapter; 
C.  Preliminary soil report. A preliminary soil report prepared in accordance with the city grading ordinance and this chapter; 
D.  Title report. A title report not more than six months old, showing the legal owners at the time of submittal of the final map; 
E.  Guarantee of title. A guarantee of title, in a form acceptable to the city engineer and city attorney, shall be issued by a title company to and for the benefit and protection of the city and shall be continued complete up to the instant of recording of the final map, guaranteeing that the names of all persons whose consent is necessary to pass a clear title to the land being subdivided and all public easements being offered for dedication, and all acknowledgments thereto, appear on the proper certificates and are correctly shown on the map, both as to consents as to the making thereof and affidavits of dedication where necessary; 
F.  Deeds for easements or rights-of-way. A signed deed for each required off-site easement or right-of-way which has not been offered for dedication on the final map and written evidence acceptable to the city in the form of right of entry or permanent easement across private property outside of the subdivision permitting or granting access to perform necessary construction work and permitting the maintenance of the facility; 
G.  Traverse closures. Traverse closures for the boundary blocks, lots, easements, street centerlines and monument lines; 
H.  Hydrology and hydraulic calculations. Complete hydrology and hydraulic calculations for all drainage facilities; 
I.  Governing documents. For a cooperative apartment project, condominium, stock cooperative, or conversion, the proposed declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions containing the provisions described in Section 1353 of the Civil Code, and all other governing documents for the subdivision as are appropriate under Section 1363 of the Civil Code; for all other subdivisions, any declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions proposed in connection therewith. 
J.  Utilities. Evidence satisfactory to the city that the utility easements are appropriate; 
K.  Improvement agreement. If the required improvements are not completed before the presentation of the final map, the subdivider shall file an agreement in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 16.16 of this title. The subdivider shall secure the performance of the agreement in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 16.16; 
L.  All governing documents are subject to review and approval by the city engineer and city attorney. 
M.  Other information. Additional data, reports or information required by the conditions of approval, the city engineer or city attorney. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.10.190 - Final maps—City engineer review and approval. 
Final maps. The city engineer, in consultation with the department, shall review the final map to determine if it conforms to the approved tentative map conditions, the Subdivision Map Act, and this title. The subdivider shall make corrections and additions until the map is acceptable to the city engineer. The subdivider shall submit to the city engineer the original tracing of the map, corrected to its final form and signed by all parties required to execute the certificates on the map. Original signatures shall appear on the original drawing and on any duplicates. Upon receipt of all required certificates and submittals and the subdivider's payment of required fees, the city engineer shall, within twenty days, sign the appropriate certificate and present the corrected final map with accompanying documents to the city council for its consideration and approval. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.10.200 - Final maps—City council approval. 
A.  The date the final map is deemed filed with the city council is the date of the council meeting at which the council receives the map. The council shall consider approval of the improvement agreement and security, and completeness of the tax certificate before approving the map. 
B.  Upon presentation of the final map, the city council shall approve the map if it conforms to the tentative map conditions of approval, the Subdivision Map Act, and this title. If it does not conform, the council shall disapprove the map. The council shall make its decision at the meeting at which it receives the map or at its next regular meeting. 
C.  The city council may not postpone or refuse approval of a final map because the subdivider has failed to meet a tentative map condition requiring construction or installation of off-site improvements on land which neither the subdivider nor the city has sufficient title or interest in to permit the improvements to be made. In this case, the city shall follow the procedure set forth in Government Code Section 66462.5 and Section 16.16.020 of this title. 
D.  At the time of its action on the final or parcel map, the council shall accept, accept subject to improvement, or reject each offer of dedication. A rejected offer remains open to future acceptance under Government Code Section 66477.2 and Code of Civil Procedure Section 771.010. 
E.  Tax Certificate and Security. Before the map is submitted to the city council for approval, the subdivider shall: 
1.  Submit a certificate from the county tax collector stating that all taxes and assessments due have been paid pursuant to Government Code Section 66492; and 
2.  Provide verification that he or she has executed and filed with the clerk of the county board of supervisors security for taxes and assessments pursuant to Government Code Section 66493. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.10.210 - Exception—Judicial partitions. 
When a final map is required to carry out a judicial partition of property which is under a Williamson Act contract, the city may not require the payment of exactions, the undertaking of improvements, or the posting of security for future performance, and may not accept any required offer of dedication until the contract terminates or is canceled as to that parcel. This deferral of exactions and dedications does not apply to fees and assessments for services which are provided to the parcel before termination or cancellation of the contract. The original applicant for the final or parcel map remains personally liable for deferred obligations. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.10.220 - Filing with county recorder. 
A.  Upon approval of the final map by the city council, the city engineer and the city clerk shall execute the appropriate certificate on the certificate sheet and shall, subject to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, transmit the map to the county recorder. If the county recorder rejects the map for filing , the city shall rescind its approval of the map. 
B.  After the filing, the subdivider shall provide to the city a copy of the recorded final map and an electronic copy. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 16.12 - SUBDIVISION OF FOUR OR FEWER PARCELS (MINOR SUBDIVISIONS) 
Sections: 
 
16.12.010 - Public Hearings—When required. 
A.  The subdivision committee shall hold a public hearing on the tentative parcel map for a minor subdivision for which a parcel map will be filed. 
B.  If a decision regarding the tentative parcel map for a minor subdivision is appealed from the subdivision committee, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing. 
C.  If a decision regarding the tentative parcel map for a minor subdivision is appealed from the planning commission, the city council shall hold a public hearing. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.12.020 - Public Hearings—Notice. 
The provisions in Section 16.10.030 of this title shall apply. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.12.030 - Appeals. 
The provisions in Section 16.10.040 shall apply. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.12.040 - (Reserved)  
16.12.050 - Time limits, extensions and expirations. 
The provisions in Section 16.10.050 shall apply. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.12.060 - Review by other agencies. 
The provisions in Section 16.10.060 shall apply. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.12.070 - Tentative parcel map. 
A.  General. The submittal and approval of tentative parcel maps for four or fewer parcels shall conform to the provisions of Chapter 16.10 of this title. The map shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. 
B.  Form and content, accompanying data and reports. The tentative map shall be prepared in a manner acceptable to the department by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. The form and contents shall comply and be consistent with the requirements of Section 16.10.070 and the accompanying data and reports shall comply and be consistent with Section 16.10.080. The department may require additional information or may waive any of these requirements if the location and nature of the proposed subdivision or existing documentation demonstrates that a waiver is justified. 
C.  Department review. The provisions of Section 16.10.090 shall apply. 
D.  Action by the subdivision committee. After the conclusion of the public hearing, the subdivision committee shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the tentative map in the manner set forth in Section 16.10.090. 
E.  Amendments. The provisions in Section 16.10.100 shall apply. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.12.080 - Parcel maps. 
A.  General. The form and contents, submittal, approval and filing of parcel maps shall conform to the provisions of this section and the Subdivision Map Act. 
B.  Survey Required. An accurate and complete survey of the land to be subdivided shall be made by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. All monuments, property lines, centerlines of streets, alleys and easements adjoining or within the subdivision shall be tied into the survey. 
C.  Form. The form of the parcel map shall conform to final map form requirements as set forth in Section 16.10.160. 
D.  Contents. The contents of the parcel map shall conform to final map content requirements as set forth in Section 16.10.170 of this title. In a subdivision of four or fewer lots, if fulfillment of construction requirements is being deferred under Chapter 16.16, the parcel map shall contain a statement which reads substantially as follows: 
Notice: Certain off-site and/or on-site improvements are required in connection with these lots. (City of Rohnert Park File Number ____________ ) No person may obtain a building permit for any lot on this map until all of the required improvements are completed or financial security has been posted with the city to assure completion prior to building occupancy. 
E.  Preliminary Submittal. The subdivider shall submit prints of the parcel map to the city engineer for checking. The preliminary prints shall be accompanied by copies of the data, plans, reports and documents as required for final maps. 
F.  The city engineer may waive any of the requirements if the location and nature of the proposed subdivision or existing documentation demonstrates that compliance with the requirements of Section 16.10.080 is not necessary. 
G.  Review by city engineer. The city engineer shall review the parcel map and the subdivider's engineer shall make corrections and/or additions until the map is acceptable to the city engineer. The sub-divider's engineer shall submit the original tracing of the map, corrected to its final form and signed by all parties required to execute the statements on the map, to the city engineer. 
H.  Approval by city engineer. The city engineer shall approve the parcel map if it complies with the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, this chapter, the tentative map and all conditions thereof. 
I.  Filing with the county recorder. The city clerk or authorized agent shall file the approved parcel map directly with the county recorder. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.12.090 - Waiver of parcel map requirements. 
A subdivider may file an application for a waiver of the requirements for a tentative and/or parcel map in a form acceptable to the director. The director may waive the parcel map for the following: 
A.  Division of real property or interests therein created by probate, eminent domain procedures, partition, or other civil judgments or decrees; or 
B.  A division of property resulting from the conveyance of land or any interest therein to or from the city, public entity or public utility for a public purpose, such as school sites, public building sites, or rights of way or easements for streets, sewers, utilities, drainage, or other facilities or any other division of real property which would otherwise require a parcel map. 
C.  Upon receipt of an application for a parcel map waiver, the director shall give notice in the manner provided by Section 16.10.030. 
D.  The director may waive the parcel map as provided in this section only upon making a finding that the proposed division of land complies with requirements as to area, improvement and design, floodwater drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, environmental protection, and other requirements of this chapter, local ordinance and the Subdivision Map Act. 
E.  The director shall act upon the application for a parcel map waiver with sixty days after the application is deemed complete. 
F.  The director shall deny the parcel map waiver if all public improvements have not been constructed. 
G.  Upon waiving the parcel map requirement, the director shall cause to be recorded with the county recorder a "Certificate of Compliance" for the land to be divided, a plat map showing the division and a legal description of the parcels. 
1.  The certificate shall include a statement regarding payment of taxes for signature by the county clerk. 
2.  A parcel map waived by the director may be conditioned to provide for payment of park land dedication, drainage, and other fees by a method approved by the director. 
H.  lf the director denies an application to waive a parcel map, the subdivider may apply for a tentative and parcel map in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 16.14 - DEDICATION AND RESERVATIONS 
Sections: 
 
16.14.010 - Dedication of rights-of-way and easements. 
A.  Every street, walkway, drainage channel, reserve strip (or waiver of access rights), easement, and other right-of-way shown on the final or parcel map intended for public use shall be offered for dedication at the time the final or parcel map is filed. 
B.  When property is dedicated in fee for public purposes, other than for open space, parks or schools, the city shall record with the county recorder a certificate, attached to the map, which contains: 
1.  The name and address of the subdivider; 
2.  A legal description of the dedicated property; and 
3.  A statement that the city shall reconvey the property if the city determines that the public purpose or the need for the property no longer exists. 
C.  The subdivider shall provide rights-of-way and easements for all on-site and off-site streets, utilities, sidewalks and appurtenant landscaping. The subdivider shall pay all acquisition costs. 
D.  If any off-site rights-of-way or easements are required: 
1.  The subdivider shall enter into the city's standard right-of-way agreement which specifies how and when the necessary title to an interest in the land shall be acquired. The subdivider shall enter into this agreement before the first plan check of the map and improvement plans are submitted to the city. 
2.  Before city council approval of the final map, one of the following must have occurred: 
a.  The city has received signed deeds for all off-site rights-of-way and easements; or 
b.  The subdivider has executed the standard city contract for real property acquisition and deposited the estimated acquisition costs into a city trust account, and the subdivider has formally requested and the city council has approved a resolution of intent to use its powers of condemnation to acquire the rights-of-way and/or easements. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.14.020 - Park dedication. 
A.  Authority. This section is enacted pursuant to Government Code Section 66477. 
B.  Requirements. As a condition of approval of a tentative or parcel map, the subdivider shall dedicate land, pay a fee instead, or do a combination of both for park or recreational purposes according to the standards and formula in this section. 
C.  General Standard. The dedication of land or payment of fees, or both, shall be the proportionate amount necessary to provide five acres of park area per one thousand persons residing within a subdivision. 
D.  Standards and Formula for Dedication of Land. 
1.  Where a park or recreation facility is designated in the open space, parks and public facilities element of the general plan to be located in whole or part within a proposed subdivision, the subdivider is required to dedicate usable land for a local park. All park land shall be dedicated free and clear of all liens and encumbrances to the city and shall conform to the provisions of this section. 
2.  The amount of land to be dedicated shall be five acres of park for each one thousand persons. This acreage shall be in net acres and shall not include any public rights-of-way within or adjacent to the proposed park site. Unless there is evidence to the contrary, the following criteria shall be used to estimate population: For single-family homes, the average population per dwelling unit is three and two-tenths persons per dwelling unit; for multiple family homes, the average population per dwelling unit is two persons per dwelling unit. 
3.  The subdivider shall, without credit, provide: 
a.  Full street improvements and utility connections including curbs, gutters, street paving, traffic control devices, street trees, and sidewalks adjacent to land which is dedicated pursuant to this section; and 
b.  Fencing along the property line of the subdivision contiguous to the dedicated land as approved by the director and the city engineer. Dedication of land is governed by the procedure in subsection K of this section. 
E.  Standards and Formula for Fees in Lieu of Land Dedication. 
1.  If there is no park or recreation facility designated in the general plan within a proposed subdivision, or the dedication of land pursuant to subsection D of this section is not feasible or compatible with the general plan, or the city has previously acquired the necessary park property, or the city council determines that a fee is more appropriate, the subdivider shall pay a fee instead of land dedication. 
2.  The amount of the fee shall be equal to the fair market value of the land prescribed for dedication in subsection D of this section plus the cost of improvements required under subsection (D)(3) of this section. 
3.  For purposes of this section, the public works improvement costs, subsection (E)(2) of this section, shall be determined by the city engineer based on any increase in cost of construction over the phasing period, as determined for that period by the Engineering News Record Cost of Construction Index published by McGraw-Hill Publishing Company. 
F.  Fees in Lieu of Land Dedication-Fifty Parcels or Less. If the proposed subdivision contains fifty parcels or less, the city may only require the payment of fees under this section and may not require the dedication of land. However, this section does not preclude the dedication and acceptance of land for park and recreation purposes in a subdivision of fifty parcels or less if the subdivider proposes dedication voluntarily, and the land is acceptable to the city. 
G.  Combination of Fees and Dedication. The city council may approve a combination of fee payment and land dedication when: 
1.  Only a portion of a proposed park falls within a subdivision. That portion shall be dedicated for park purposes, and a fee is required for any additional amount of land that would otherwise be required for dedication; or 
2.  A major part of the park or recreation site has already been acquired, and only a small portion of land is needed from the subdivision to complete the site. The needed portion shall be acquired by dedication and a fee required for any additional amount of land that would otherwise be required for dedication. 
H.  Determination of Land or Fee. Whether the city approves land dedication or requires a fee, or a combination of both, is determined by considering the following: 
1.  The recommendations of the parks and recreation commission; 
2.  Open space, parks and public facilities element of the general plan; 
3.  Topography, geology, access and location of land in the subdivision available for dedication; 
4.  Size and shape of the subdivision and land available for dedication; 
5.  The feasibility of dedication; 
6.  Whether the city has previously acquired sufficient land for park and recreation purposes; and 
7.  The factors set forth in subsections (F) and (G) of this section. 
I.  Partial Credit for Private Open Space. Where private open space for active park and recreation uses is provided in a common interest development such as community apartments, condominiums, and stock cooperatives, as defined in Section 1351 of the Civil Code, the development shall be eligible to receive a credit as provided in this subsection against the requirement of land dedication or payment of fees for the value of private open space within the development which meets the criteria of this section. 
Where private open space for active park and recreation uses is provided in a proposed subdivision, the city may grant partial credit not to exceed fifty percent against the requirement of land dedication or payment of in-lieu fees for a housing development in which fifteen percent of the units are set aside for persons of low income, as defined by Section 50079.5 of the Health and Safety Code. Partial credit, not to exceed sixty percent, may be given against the requirement of land dedication or the payment of in-lieu fees for a development in which twenty-five percent of the units are set aside for persons of low income. Partial credit, not to exceed forty percent, may be given for other eligible developments. Credit will only be given if the city finds it is in the public interest to do so and that all of the following standards are met: 
1.  Yards, court areas, setbacks and other open area or landscaping required to be maintained by the zoning and building ordinances and regulations are not included in the computation of credit; and 
2.  The private ownership and maintenance of the area is adequately provided for by recorded written agreement, covenants or restrictions; and 
3.  The use of the private area is restricted for park and recreational purposes by recorded covenants which run with the land in favor of the future owners of property within the subdivision and which cannot be amended or eliminated without the city's consent; and 
4.  The proposed private area is reasonably adaptable for use for active park and recreational purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, geology, access and location; and 
5.  The space for which credit is given is a minimum of two acres and provides a minimum of four of the following local park basic elements, or a combination of elements and other recreational improvements, which will meet the specific recreation and park needs of the future residents of the area: 
Elements 	Acres 
1.  Children's play apparatus areas 	0.50 — 0.75 
2.  Family picnic areas 	0.25 — 0.75 
3.  Landscape park-like and quiet areas 	0.50 — 1.00 
4.  Game court areas 	0.25 — 0.50 
5.  Turf play fields 	1.00 — 3.00 
6.  Swimming pool (42' × 75') with adjacent deck and lawn 	0.25 — 0.50 
7. Recreation center buildings 	0.15 — 0.25 
 
J.  Credit for Park and Recreation Improvements. If the subdivider provides park and recreation improvements to the dedicated land (other than improvements required by subsection (E)(3) of this section ) the value of improvements shall be credited against the required payments of fees or dedication of land required by this section. To qualify for credit under this subsection, the subdivider must first obtain a recommendation from the parks and recreation commission and approval from the city council. 
K.  Procedure. 
1.  Preliminary and final development plan and specific plan. 
a.  Parks and Recreation Commission Recommendation. At the time of application for a preliminary or final development plan or specific plan, the parks and recreation commission shall review and make a report to the planning commission regarding the size, layout, and configuration of any proposed park dedication. The parks and recreation commission's recommendation shall be based upon the following: 
i.  Conformance of the size, layout and configuration of any proposed parkland with the city's general plan and the city's zoning ordinance; and 
ii.  Conformance with any applicable parks and recreation commission standards. 
b.  Planning Commission and City Council Review. The planning commission and city council shall review the proposed size, layout, and configuration of any proposed park dedication and accept, reject, or modify the recommendation of the parks and recreation commission. 
2.  Tentative Map. 
a.  Parks and recreation commission recommendation. The parks and recreation commission shall review each application for a tentative map and make a recommendation to the planning commission, which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
i.  Conformance of the size, layout, and configuration of any proposed parkland with the city's general plan, any applicable specific plans, and the city's zoning ordinance; 
ii.  The desirability of giving credits for park improvements; 
iii.  Its preferred improvements for the proposed park; and 
iv.  Conformance of the proposed dedication with any applicable parks and recreation commission standards. 
b.  Planning Commission Review. The planning commission shall forward the recommendation of the parks and recreation commission to the city council for review. 
c.  City Council Review. The city council shall review proposed parkland dedications in conjunction with tentative map review in accordance with Chapter 16.10 of this code for major subdivisions and Chapter 16.12 of this code for minor subdivisions. At the time of approval of a tentative map, the city council shall determine whether to require a dedication of land, payment of an in lieu fee, or a combination of both and condition the tentative map accordingly. The city council shall consider the recommendation of the parks and recreation commission, which shall include those items listed in subsection (K)(2)(a) above as well as the following: 
i.  The amount of land or fee or both to be required; and 
ii.  The location and configuration of the dedicated land or proposed use of in-lieu fees. 
d.  Time for Dedication or payment. 
i.  The subdivider shall dedicate the land required for dedication upon approval of the final map. 
ii.  The subdivider shall pay the required in-lieu fees after approval of the final map and upon issuance of building permits. 
3.  Final Map. 
a.  Parks and Recreation Commission Review. The parks and recreation commission shall review and make a recommendation to the city engineer regarding the specific improvements proposed to satisfy a tentative map condition related to parkland dedication. The parks and recreation commission's recommendation shall be based upon the following: 
i.  The city's need for the specific improvements proposed; 
ii.  The compatibility of the specific improvements proposed with existing city improvements; and 
iii.  Conformance with any applicable parks and recreation commission standards. 
L.  Use of Land and Fees. 
1.  The land, fees, or combination of both may be used only for the purpose of developing new or rehabilitating existing neighborhood or recreational facilities to serve the subdivision. 
2.  Fees and interest collected under this section shall be committed within five years after the payment of the fees or the issuance of building permits on one-half the lots created by the subdivision, whichever occurs later. 
M.  Exemptions. This section does not apply to: 
1.  Subdivisions containing less than five parcels and not used for residential purposes. However, the city shall place the following condition on the parcel map: 
"If, within four years, a building permit is requested for construction of a residential structure on one or more of the parcels, the owner of each such parcel is required to pay a park fee in the amount set forth by city council resolution before the permit is issued." 
2.  Commercial or industrial subdivisions or condominium projects or stock cooperatives which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building which is more than five years old when no new dwelling units are added. 
(Ord. 787 §§ 1—3, 2007; Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.14.030 - School facilities. 
A.  Fee or Dedication. If a school district has levied a fee or other requirement on development, the subdivider shall present to the city a certificate of compliance from the district before a building permit is issued. 
B.  Elementary School Site. The city may require a subdivider to dedicate to the school district land sufficient to construct such elementary schools as are necessary to assure adequate public school service to the residents of the subdivision. The requirement is terminated if the school district does not offer to enter into an agreement to accept the dedication and to repay the subdivider for the land, in conformance with Government Code Section 66478. 
C.  Interim Classroom Facilities. The city may require a subdivider to dedicate land or pay fees, or a combination of both, for interim classroom and related facilities for elementary or high schools to alleviate conditions of overcrowding caused by new residential development, in accordance with State Law. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.14.035 - Affordable housing. 
The provisions of Section 17.07.020 (N) shall apply. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.14.040 - Bicycle paths and transit facilities. 
A.  Bicycle paths. If a subdivision is required to dedicate roadways pursuant to Section 16.14.010, the subdivider may be required to dedicate land to provide bicycle paths for the use and safety of the residents of the subdivision. 
B.  Transit facilities. The city may require a subdivider to dedicate land within the subdivision for local transit facilities, such as bus turnouts, benches, shelters, landing pads, and similar items which directly benefit the residents of the subdivision if the city council finds that transit services are available or will be made available to the subdivision within a reasonable time. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.14.050 - Access to public resources. 
The city may not approve a tentative or final map if the proposed subdivision fronts upon a public waterway, river, stream, bay, shoreline, or publicly owned lake or reservoir unless the subdivision provides reasonable public areas from a public street to that portion of the bank or shoreline bordering or lying within the subdivision. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.14.060 - Other public facilities. 
As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the subdivider may be required to dedicate land, pay fees, or both, for fire stations, library sites, child day care, public art, or any other public facilities pursuant to, and in order to implement, the provisions of the general plan regarding such facilities when and if such dedications and fees are adopted by the city. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.14.070 - Reservations. 
A.  General. Where a park, recreational facility, fire station, library, or other public use is shown on the general plan or specific plan, and the plan contains policies and standards for those uses, the city may require a subdivider to reserve sites for those uses, as a condition of approval of a tentative map. 
B.  Limitations. The reserved area must be of such a size and shape as to permit (1) the balance of the property to develop in an orderly and efficient manner, and (2) the reserved area to be efficiently used or divided if it is not acquired by a public agency. The amount of land reserved may not render development of the remaining land economically unfeasible. 
C.  Acquisition. The public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved shall at the time of final or parcel map approval enter into an agreement to acquire the area within two years, or longer by mutual agreement. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 16.16 - DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENTS 
Sections: 
 
16.16.010 - General standards. 
A.  The subdivider shall design and construct all required improvements on-site and off-site in accordance with city design standards, detail drawings and construction specifications, as provided by this chapter and as adopted by the city. Subject to the Subdivision Map Act, the city engineer may authorize an exception to the construction standards in this chapter. 
B.  A decision or interpretation by the city engineer regarding the specifications, details or design of improvements is final unless appealed as provided for in this title. 
C.  No parcel map or final shall be approved until the subdivider either completes the required improvements or enters into an improvement agreement with the city. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.16.020 - Improvements required. 
A.  General. All improvements required as tentative map conditions of approval or by city ordinance or resolution, together with the required improvements set forth below, are required of all subdivisions. 
B.  Frontage improvements. The frontage of each lot shall be improved to its ultimate adopted geometric section, including, but not limited to, street structural sections, curbs, sidewalks, driveway approaches and transitions. Transit facilities (bus shelters, bus turnouts and bus pads) shall be provided on a collector street or major street when requested by the local transit authority. 
C.  Storm drainage. Stormwater runoff from the subdivision shall be collected and conveyed by an approved storm drain system. The storm drain system shall be designed for ultimate development of the watershed. The storm drain system shall provide for the protection of abutting and off-site properties that would be adversely affected by any increase in run-off attributed to the development. Off-site storm drain improvements may be required to satisfy this requirement. 
D.  Sanitary sewers. Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be served by an approved sanitary sewer system, designed for the ultimate development of the area. 
E.  Water supply. Each unit or lot within the division shall be served by an approved domestic water system. 
F.  Utilities. Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be served by gas, electric, telephone and cable facilities. 
G.  Underground utilities. All existing and proposed utilities within the subdivision and along street frontages adjacent to the subdivision shall be placed underground except those facilities exempted by city council adopted ordinance or resolution. The subdivider is responsible for complying with the requirements of this chapter and shall make the necessary arrangements with each utility company for installation of the facilities. The city council may grant an exception to the undergrounding requirements if topographical soil or other conditions make underground installation of the facilities not feasible. 
H.  Access. Every lot or parcel created shall have access to a public or private street. 
1.  Lots located on public streets in zoning districts other than residential shall have the minimum frontage specified in the zoning ordinance. 
2.  Lots located on private streets are subject to the frontage requirements specified in the zoning ordinance. The subdivider shall submit a development plan showing the alignment, width, grade, and material specifications of a proposed private street, the topography and means of access to each lot, and the drainage, water supply, sewerage and the utilities of the lots served by the private street. 
3.  Reserve strips, or nonaccess at the end of streets or at the boundaries of the subdivision, shall be dedicated unconditionally to the city when required by the city. 
I.  Monuments. 
1.  At the time of making the survey for the final or parcel map, the engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments to conform to (a) the standards described in Business and Professions Code Section 8771 and (b) the city standards, so that another engineer or surveyor may easily retrace the survey. 
2.  Interior monuments need not be set at the time the map is recorded if the engineer or surveyor certifies on the map that the monuments will be set by a specified date and if the subdivider provides security to guarantee the cost. 
3.  Within five days after the final setting of all monuments, the engineer or surveyor shall give written notice of the setting of the monument to the subdivider and to the city engineer. 
J.  Other improvements. Other improvements such as street lights, fire hydrants, signs, street trees and landscaping, or fees in lieu of any of the foregoing, are required as determined by the city engineer in accordance with this title and city standards and specifications. 
K.  Off-site improvements. If the subdivider is required to construct off-site improvements on land in which neither the subdivider nor the city has sufficient title or interest to allow construction, the dedication of the right-of-way shall be assured. The city shall, before approving the final or parcel map, require the subdivider to enter into an agreement to complete the off-site improvements at the time the city acquires title to an interest in the land. The city shall, within one hundred and twenty days of recording the final map, acquire by negotiation or commence condemnation of the land. If the city fails to meet the one hundred and twenty-day time limit, the condition for the construction is waived. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.16.030 - Supplemental improvements. 
A.  Required. The subdivider may be required to install improvements for the benefit of the subdivision which may contain supplemental size, capacity or number for the benefit of property not within the subdivision as a condition precedent to the approval of a subdivision or parcel map, and thereafter to dedicate such improvements to the public. However, the subdivider may be reimbursed for that portion of cost of such improvements equal to the difference between the amount it would have cost the subdivider to install such improvements to serve the subdivision only and the actual cost of such improvements pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. 
B.  Funding Procedures. No charge, area of benefit or local benefit district shall be established unless and until a public hearing in accordance with the provisions of this title is held thereon by the city council and the city council finds that the fee or charge and the area of benefit or local benefit district is reasonably related to the cost of such supplemental improvements and the actual ultimate beneficiaries thereof. In addition to the notice required by this title, written notice of the hearing shall be given to the subdivider and to those who own property within the proposed area of benefit as shown on the latest equalized assessment role, and the potential users of the supplemental improvements insofar as they can be ascertained at the time, such notices shall be mailed by the city clerk at least ten days prior to the date established for hearing. 
C.  Drainage, Sewerage, Bridges and Major Thoroughfares. If the city council has adopted a local drainage or sanitary sewer plan or map as required for the imposition of fees therefor, or has established an area of benefit for bridges or major thoroughfares as provided in this title, the city council may impose a reasonable charge on property within the area benefited and may provide for the collection of said charge as set forth in this title. The city may enter into reimbursement agreements with a subdivider who constructs said facilities, bridges or thoroughfares and the charges collected by the city therefor may be utilized to reimburse the subdivider as set forth herein. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.16.040 - Deferred improvement agreements. 
A.  Minor subdivisions. When improvements are deferred, the owner of the real property shall enter into an agreement with the city in a form acceptable to the city engineer and city attorney for the installation of all frontage improvements at a time in the future as specified by the city. The agreement shall provide that: 
1.  The owner shall begin construction of improvements within ninety days of the receipt of the notice to proceed from the city, or as mutually agreed upon in writing; 
2.  In the event of a default by the owner, the city is authorized to cause construction to be done and charge the entire cost and expense to the owner, including interest from the date of notice of the cost and expense until paid. The interest rate shall be consistent with the requirements of Article 15, Section 1 of the California State Constitution; 
3.  The agreement shall be recorded with the county recorder at the expense of the owner and shall constitute notice to all successors and assigns of title to the real property of the obligations set forth therein, and shall also constitute a lien in such amount necessary to fully reimburse the city, including interest as provided above, subject to foreclosure in the event of a default in payment. The obligations under the agreement shall run with the property and constitute a lien against it; and 
4.  In the event of litigation occasioned by default of the owner, the owner agrees to pay all costs involved, including reasonable attorneys' fees. Those costs shall become a part of the lien against the real property. 
The construction of deferred improvements shall conform to this title and all applicable provisions of this code in effect at the time of construction. 
B.  Remainder. For a designated remainder parcel, the fulfillment of construction requirements for improvements is not required until the city is ready to issue a permit or other grant of approval for development of the remainder parcel or until the construction of the improvements is required under an agreement between the subdivider and the city. In the absence of an agreement, the city may require fulfillment of the construction requirements within a reasonable time following approval of the final map and before the issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for the development of a remainder parcel upon a finding by the city that fulfillment of the construction requirements is necessary for reasons of: 
1.  The public health and safety; or 
2.  The required construction is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area. 
If a designated remainder is subsequently sold, the owner must obtain a certificate of compliance or conditional certificate of compliance from the department before development occurs. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.16.050 - Improvement plans. 
A.  General. Improvement plans shall be prepared under the direction of and signed by a registered civil engineer and shall conform to the conditions of approval and to the city design standards, detail drawings and construction specifications. Improvement plans shall include those improvements specified in this title. 
B.  Form and Contents. The form and contents of the improvement plans shall conform to the city design standards, detail drawings and construction specifications. 
C.  Supplementary Plans and Calculations. Engineering calculations, bond or other security estimates and any structural calculations as may be required by the city engineer shall be submitted with the improvement plans. All calculations shall be legible, systematic, signed and dated by a registered civil engineer and in a form approved by the city engineer. 
D.  Filing—Review by the city engineer. The subdivider shall submit copies of the preliminary improvement plans and all computations to the city engineer for review. Upon completion of the review, one set of the preliminary plans, with any required revisions indicated, will be returned to the subdivider. If any revisions are necessary, the subdivider shall submit the corrected improvement plans and computations to the city engineer. The city engineer shall act on the improvement plans within sixty working days of its submittal, plus extensions agreed to or necessitated by corrections. 
E.  Approval by the City Engineer. 
1.  After the subdivider has completed all required revisions, the subdivider shall transmit the corrected originals of the improvement plans to the city engineer for signature. 
2.  Upon finding that the required revisions have been made and that the plans conform to all applicable city ordinances and plans, design requirements and conditions of approval of the tentative map, the city engineer shall sign and date the plans. The originals will be returned to the subdivider. Approval of the improvement plans shall not be construed as approval of the gas, electric, telephone, and cable television service construction plans. 
3.  Approval by the city engineer in no way relieves the subdivider of the subdivider's responsibility for the design of the improvements or for deficiencies resulting from the design or from any required conditions of approval of the tentative map. The approval of the improvement plans by the city engineer, or the city engineer's certification that no improvements are required, is a condition precedent to the approval of the final or parcel map of the subdivision. 
F.  Revision to Approved Plans. 
1.  By subdivider. A request by the subdivider for a revision to the approved plans appearing necessary or desirable during construction shall be submitted in writing to the city engineer and shall be accompanied by revised drawings showing the proposed revision. If the revision is acceptable to the city engineer and is consistent with the tentative map, the original shall be submitted to the city engineer's office for initialing. The original shall be returned to the subdivider, and the revised plans shall be immediately transmitted to the city engineer. Construction of any proposed revision may not begin until the city engineer receives and approves revised plans. 
2.  Plan checking and inspection costs for revisions. Costs incurred by the city for the checking of plans or calculations or inspection as a result of revisions to the approved plans shall be borne by the subdivider in accord with the schedule of fees adopted by the city. A deposit, when required, shall be submitted with the revised plans and applied toward the costs. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.16.060 - Subdivision improvement agreement. 
A.  Before a final map or parcel map is approved by the city council, the subdivider shall submit a signed subdivision improvement agreement assuring the completion of improvements within a specified time and payment for them. The agreement will be based on the city's standard form of subdivision improvement agreement and shall include the developer's promise to complete certain improvements and to perform repairs or corrective work for one year after acceptance by the city, the time of completion, special conditions, insurance requirements and improvement security requirements for faithful performance, labor and materials and warranty period. 
B.  The agreement must be approved as to form by the city attorney. The executed improvement agreement shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder and shall bind subdivider's successors-in-interest. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.16.070 - Improvement security. 
A.  General. An improvement agreement, contract, or act required or authorized by the Subdivision Map Act or this title for which security is required shall be secured as provided in this section, and subject to city attorney approval. 
B.  Amount of Security. 
1.  The subdivider shall provide a bond or other security in the amount of: 
a.  One hundred percent of the total estimated construction costs to guarantee the construction or installation of all improvements; 
b.  One hundred percent of the estimated construction cost to guarantee payment to subdivider's contractor, and to subcontractors and to persons furnishing labor, materials, or equipment for the construction or installation of improvements; and 
c.  Fifteen percent of the cost of the improvements to guarantee the improvements against any defective work or labor done, or defective materials used in the performance of the improvements for the warranty period of one year following completion and acceptance of the improvements warranty security. The security for this warranty period may be provided either (a) at the time of signing the subdivision improvement agreement or (b) when the construction is completed, before the city accepts the improvements or releases the performance security, at the subdivider's option. 
2.  As a part of the obligation guaranteed by the security, and in addition to the full amount of the security, there shall be included costs and reasonable expenses and fees, including attorneys' fees, incurred by the city in enforcing the obligations secured. 
3.  The estimate of improvement costs shall be as approved by the city engineer and shall provide for: 
a.  Total construction costs; 
b.  Ten percent of the total construction cost for contingencies; 
c.  Increase for projected inflation computed to the estimated end of construction; and 
d.  Enforcement costs calculated as twenty-five thousand dollars or five percent of the estimated construction cost, whichever is greater. These enforcement costs are not added if the bond language includes enforcement costs in addition to the face amount of the bond. 
C.  Forms of Security. The form of security shall be one or a combination of the following at the option of and subject to the approval of the city attorney: 
1.  A bond by an insurer admitted to transact surety insurance in the State of California. The form of the bond or bonds shall be in accordance with Government Code Sections 66499.1, 66499.2, 66499.3 and 66499.4; 
2.  A deposit, either with the city or a responsible escrow agent or trust company, at the option of the city, of money or negotiable bonds of the kind approved for securing deposits of public moneys; 
3.  An irrevocable letter of credit from one or more financial institutions regulated by the state or federal government pledging that the funds necessary to carry out the act or agreement are on deposit and guaranteed for payment and will be released only upon receipt of written instructions from the city. The form of the letter must be approved by the city attorney; 
4.  An instrument of credit from an agency of the state, federal or local government when any agency of the state, federal or local government provides at least 20 percent of the financing of the portion of the project requiring security; 
5.  A lien upon the property to be divided, created by contract between the owner and the city, if the city finds that it would not be in the public interest to require the installation of the required improvement sooner than two years after the recordation of the map; the lien shall conform to Government Code Section 66499(b); 
6.  A deed of trust which shall be recorded in the county recorder's office and which conforms to Government Code Section 66499(b); or 
7.  Any other comparable form of security, acceptable to the city, as provided in Government Code Section 66499. 
D.  Release of Improvement Security. 
1.  Performance security. The city shall release performance security only upon acceptance of all improvements by the city. 
2.  Material and labor security. The city shall reduce security given to secure payment to the contractor, subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment, six months after the completion and acceptance of improvements by the city, to an amount equal to the amount of all claims filed and of which notice has been given to the city. The city shall release the balance of the security upon the settlement of all claims and obligations for which the security was given. 
3.  Warranty security. The city shall release the warranty security upon satisfactory completion of the warranty period; provided: 
4.  All deficiencies appearing on the warranty deficiency list for the subdivision have been corrected; and 
5.  Not less than twelve months has elapsed since the acceptance of the improvements by the city council. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.16.080 - Construction and inspection. 
A.  The construction methods and materials for all improvements shall conform to the conditions of approval, city design standards, detail drawings and construction specifications and are subject to inspection and approval by the city engineer. 
B.  Construction shall not begin until all required improvement plans are approved by the city engineer. Grading plans must conform to submitted improvement plans and shall provide for drainage. Grading shall not commence until the provisions of the city grading ordinance have been met. 
C.  A final report acceptable to the city engineer shall be prepared for each preliminary soil engineering report and for each preliminary engineering geology report. Each final report shall be submitted at the completion of the grading work, prior to the release of grading bonds, and prior to issuance of building permits. Each final report shall contain complete field data to indicate full compliance with the preliminary report and subsequent recommendations based on new information acquired during construction. The soil engineer shall provide written approval as to the adequacy of the site for the intended use based on soil engineering factors. The engineering geologist shall provide written approval as to the adequacy of the site for the intended use as affected by geologic factors. 
D.  The subdivider shall notify the city engineer one full working day before beginning any work. All work done in constructing the improvements and all materials furnished shall be subject to the inspection of the city engineer. The city engineer and the flood control district shall have access to the work at all times during its construction and shall be furnished with every reasonable facility for ascertaining that the materials used and the workmanship are in accordance with the requirements of this title. If any of the work on improvements is done by the divider before the inspection of the improvements as required by the city engineer, the city engineer may reject that work, and it is deemed to have been done at the risk of the subdivider. 
E.  The subdivider shall prosecute the work to completion without undue delay except for inclement weather or other reasonable cause. If there is a delay in completion of the work beyond the period stated in the subdivision improvement agreement, unless an extension is approved by the city council and the surety company, the city council may take appropriate steps to use the security to complete the work. 
F.  The city engineer shall also inspect private streets and the utility systems improvements for conformance with this code and the zoning ordinance, and the city design standards, detail drawings and construction specifications. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.16.090 - Time of completion. 
A.  Major subdivisions. 
1.  The subdivider shall complete the improvements for a subdivision of five or more lots within twelve months from the recording of the final map, unless an extension is granted by the city council. 
2.  If the subdivider fails to complete the improvements within the specified time, the city may, by resolution of the city council, cause the uncompleted improvements to be completed, and the parties executing the performance security shall be firmly bound for the payment of all costs. 
B.  Minor subdivisions. The completion of improvements for subdivisions of four or fewer parcels is not required until a permit or other grant of approval for the development of a lot within the subdivision is applied for. However, the city may require completion of the improvements within twelve months from the recording of the parcel map when it finds that the completion of the improvements is necessary for public health or safety or for the orderly development of the surrounding area. The planning commission or city council may make this finding at the time of tentative map approval. The specified date, when required, shall be stated in the subdivision improvement agreement. 
C.  Extensions. 
1.  The city council may extend the completion date upon written request by the subdivider and the submittal of adequate evidence to justify the extension. The request shall be made at least thirty days before expiration of the subdivision improvement agreement. No extension shall be granted if any lot within the subdivision has been sold. 
2.  The subdivider shall enter into a subdivision improvement agreement extension with the city. The agreement shall be prepared by the city engineer, approved as to form by the city attorney, executed by the subdivider and surety and transmitted to the city council for its consideration. If approved by the city council, the mayor shall execute the agreement on behalf of the city. 
3.  In passing upon a request for a subdivision improvement agreement extension, the city may require the following: 
a.  Revision of improvement plans to provide for current design and construction standards when required by the city engineer; 
b.  Revised improvement construction estimates to reflect current improvement costs as approved by the city engineer; 
c.  Increase of improvement securities in accordance with revised construction estimates; 
d.  Increase of inspection fees to reflect current construction costs; however, inspection fees are not subject to decrease or refund; and 
e.  The city council as a condition to approving a time extension for the completion of improvements may impose additional requirements relating to the physical improvements, considered necessary to bring the project into compliance with current ordinances, standards and policies. 
4.  The subdivider shall pay the costs incurred by the city in processing the extension request and extension agreement. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.16.100 - Acceptance of improvements. 
A.  When the subdivider has completed all improvements, corrected all deficiencies, and submitted record drawings of the improvements, the city shall consider the subdivision improvements for acceptance. The city council shall act by resolution accepting any previously rejected improvements for maintenance and also accepting the public streets and easements for these improvements. 
B.  When dedications of rights-of-way, dedications of easements or improvements are accepted for public purposes, the city clerk shall file a notice with the county recorder. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 16.18 - REVERSION TO ACREAGE 
Sections: 
 
16.18.010 - General. 
A.  Property which has been subdivided may be reverted to acreage in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter. 
B.  A subdivision may be merged or merged and resubdivided without reverting to acreage in accordance with Chapter 16.20 of this title. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.18.020 - Initiating proceedings. 
Proceedings for reversion to acreage may be initiated by either: 
A.  The city council on its own motion, in which case the council shall direct the department to obtain the necessary information; or 
B.  Petition of all of the owners of record of the real property within the subdivision. The petition shall comply with Section 16.18.030 of this chapter and shall be submitted to the department. 
C.  Fees. Petitions to revert property to acreage shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth by council resolution. If the proceedings are initiated pursuant to paragraph (B) of this section, the person or persons who requested the city council to initiate the proceedings shall pay a fee as set forth by city council resolution. Fees are not refundable. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.18.030 - Form of petition. 
The petition shall contain the following: 
A.  Adequate evidence of title to the property; 
B.  Sufficient data to enable the city council to make the determinations and findings set forth in Section 16.18.040 of this chapter; 
C.  A final or parcel map delineating dedications that will not be vacated and dedications required as a condition to reversion. Such a final or parcel map shall be conspicuously designated with the title, "The Purpose of this Map is a Reversion to Acreage"; and 
D.  Such other relevant information as the city may require. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.18.040 - Council hearing and determination. 
A.  The department shall submit the completed petition together with a report and recommendation to the city council for consideration. 
B.  The city council shall consider the matter at a public hearing, with notice of the hearing as provided in Government Code Section 66451.3. 
C.  The city council may approve a reversion to acreage only if it finds and records by resolution that: 
1.  Dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned by the reversion to acreage are unnecessary for present or prospective public purposes; and 
2.  Either: 
a.  All owners having an interest in the real property within the subdivision have consented to reversion, or 
b.  None of the improvements required to be made have been made within two years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is later, or 
c.  No lots shown on the final or parcel map or portion thereof have been sold within five years from the date such map was filed for record. 
D.  The city council may require as conditions of the reversion: 
1.  That owners dedicate or offer to dedicate streets, public rights-of-way or easements; 
2.  That all or a portion of previously paid subdivision fees, deposits or improvements securities be retained if they are necessary to accomplish any of the purposes or provisions of this title; and 
3.  Such other conditions of reversion as are necessary to accomplish the purposes or provisions of this title or necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare. A tax bond is not required. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.18.050 - Recording. 
A.  If the city council approves the reversion, the city clerk shall transmit the final or parcel map, together with the council resolution, to the county recorder. 
B.  Upon such filing, the reversion is effective and all dedications and offers of dedication not shown on the map are terminated. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 16.20 - PARCEL MERGER 
Sections: 
 
16.20.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter implements the procedures and prescribes the standards authorized by Government Code Sections 66451.10 et. seq. pertaining to the merger and unmerger of parcels of land. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.20.020 - Criteria for merger of contiguous parcels. 
A parcel of land may be merged with a contiguous parcel held by the same owner if all of the following requirements are satisfied: 
A.  The affected parcels are held by the same owner as of the date the notice of intention to determine status is recorded, as provided by Government Code Section 66451.13; 
B.  One of the affected parcels does not conform to standards for minimum parcel size under the applicable zoning; 
C.  One of the affected parcels is (a) undeveloped by a structure, or (b) developed only with an accessory structure, or (c) developed with a single structure (other than an accessory structure) that is partially sited on the contiguous parcel with which it is proposed to be merged (i.e., straddles a lot line); and 
D.  With respect to each affected parcel, one or more of the conditions set forth in Section 16.20.030 below is met. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.20.030 - Conditions of contiguous parcels permitting merger. 
In addition to the requirements of Section 16.20.020 above, in order for affected parcels to be merged, one or more of the following conditions must exist as to an affected parcel: 
A.  Comprises less than five thousand square feet in area at the time the merger is determined; 
B.  Was not created in compliance with applicable laws or ordinances in effect at the time of its creation; 
C.  Does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply; 
D.  Does not meet slope stability standards in that soils investigation indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soil problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects; 
E.  Does not have legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability to satisfy the requirements relating to the design and specifications for minor streets or private roads, as the case may be, and does not have the approval of the local fire district as meeting its standards for access and maneuverability for fire equipment; 
F.  Does not have sufficient dimensions to allow development that conforms to applicable ordinance development standards; 
G.  If developed, would create one or more of the following health or safety hazards: 
1.  Construction is likely to adversely affect the stability of adjoining property, or result in the deposition of debris on a way open to the public, or interfere with an existing drainage course, or is in an area determined to be subject to geological hazard, 
2.  Surface waters occurring on the affected parcel or flowing onto or through it cannot be conveyed without damage to an improvement, building or dwelling, to a natural watercourse having a definable bed and banks, or to an existing adequate storm drainage facility, 
3.  The site available for development does not provide an appropriate buildable site consistent with the site's constraints in relation to one or more of the following: the slope, soil characteristics, seismic factors, existing and future residential development in the area of the site, the general plan and the applicable specific plan and zoning ordinance, 
4.  Development of the site is likely to cause environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure wildlife or their habitat, 
5.  The type of improvements proposed for the site will conflict with easements acquired by the public at large for access through a use of the site; and 
6.  Is inconsistent with the general plan or applicable specific plan, other than minimum lot size or density standards. It is not necessary, however, that the same condition exist with respect to each affected parcel. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.20.040 - Procedure. 
A.  Notice of intention to determine status of affected parcels. The department shall mail a notice of intention to determine the status of the affected parcels by certified mail to the then current owner of record. The notice shall advise the owner that the affected parcels may be merged under the standards specified in this chapter and advise the owner of the opportunity to request a hearing on the determination of status and to present evidence at the hearing that the affected parcels do not meet the criteria for merger. 
B.  Recordation of notice of intention. The department shall file the notice of intention to determine status for record with the recorder of the county on the date that the notice is mailed to the property owner. 
C.  Hearing. If the property owner exhibits to the department a request for a hearing on determination of status within thirty days after recordation of the notice of intention to determine status, the department shall fix the time, date and place for a hearing to be conducted by the planning commission. The department shall notify the property owner by certified mail of the hearing. The planning commission shall conduct a hearing not less than thirty days after the city has received the property owner's request for a hearing. The hearing date may be postponed or continued with the mutual consent of the planning commission and the property owner. 
D.  Determination of status following hearing. At the hearing, the property owner may present evidence that the affected parcels do not meet the standards for merger specified in this chapter. At the conclusion of the hearing, the planning commission shall determine whether the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged, and shall notify the owner of its determination. 
E.  Recordation of notice of merger. The city shall cause a notice of merger specifying the names of the record owners and particularly describing the real property to be recorded within thirty days after conclusion of the hearing. 
F.  Determination of merger where no hearing requested. If, within the thirty-day period after recordation of the notice of intention to determine status, the owner of the affected parcel does not file a request for a hearing, the planning commission may make a determination that the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged. A notice of merger shall be recorded not later than ninety days after the date when the department mailed the notice of intention to determine status. 
G.  Determination not to merge. If the planning commission determines that the affected parcels are not to be merged, the city shall have recorded a release of the notice of intention to determine status and shall mail a clearance letter to the then current owner of record. If a property owner initiates or consents in writing to a lot merger, the department may cause the merger of the affected lots without referring the proposed merger to the planning commission for a public hearing. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.20.050 - Unmerger. 
A property owner may apply to the city for a determination that affected parcels be deemed not to have been merged in accordance with Government Code Section 66451.30. Upon a determination that the parcels meet the standards in Section 66451.30, the city shall issue to the owner and record with the county recorder a notice of the status of the parcels and a declaration that the parcels are unmerged. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.20.060 - Appeal. 
The decision of the planning commission made under this chapter may be appealed to the city council in the manner provided for the appeal of a decision of the planning commission. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.20.070 - Fee. 
The owner shall pay a fee for processing an owner-initiated merger or unmerger as by council resolution. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 16.22 - CORRECTION AND AMENDMENT OF RECORDED MAP 
Sections: 
 
16.22.010 - Requirements. 
After a final or parcel map is filed in the office of the county recorder, it may be amended by a certificate of correction or an amending map: 
A.  To correct an error in any course or distance shown on it; 
B.  To show any course or distance that was omitted from it; 
C.  To correct an error in the description of the real property shown on the map; 
D.  To indicate monuments set after the death, disability, retirement from practice or replacement of the engineer or surveyor charged with responsibilities for setting monuments; 
E.  To show the proper location of any monument that has been changed in location or character, or originally was shown at the wrong location or incorrectly as to its character; 
F.  To correct any other type of map error or omission as approved by the city engineer, which does not affect any property right. An error or omission includes, but is not limited to, lot number, acreage, street name and identification of adjacent record maps. Error does not include a change in course or distance from which an error is not ascertainable from the data shown on the final or parcel map; 
G.  To make modifications when there are changes that make any or all of the conditions of the map no longer appropriate or necessary if: 
1.  The modifications do not impose any additional burden on the present fee owner of the property, 
2.  The modifications do not alter any right, title or interest in the real property reflected on the recorded map, and 
3.  The map as modified conforms to the requirements of this title. 
The modification shall be set for public hearing by the planning commission. The planning commission shall confine the hearing to consideration of, and action on, the proposed modification. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.22.020 - Form and contents. 
The amending map or certificate of correction shall be prepared and signed by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. The form and contents of an amending map or certificate shall conform to the requirements of this title. The amending map or certificate of correction shall set forth in detail the corrections made and show the names of the present fee owners of the property affected by the correction. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.22.030 - Certification by city engineer. 
The amending map or certificate of correction in completed final form shall be submitted to the city engineer. The city engineer shall examine the amending map or certificate of correction and, if the only changes made are those set forth in Section 16.22.010 above, he or she shall certify to this fact on the amending map or certificate of correction. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.22.040 - Filing with county recorder. 
The amending map or certificate of correction certified by the city engineer shall be filed or recorded in the office of the county recorder in which the original map was filed. Upon such filing or recordation, the county recorder shall index the names of the fee owners and the appropriate subdivision designation shown on the amending map or certificate of correction in the general index and map indexes, respectively. Thereupon, the original map shall be deemed to have been conclusively so corrected. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 16.24 - ENFORCEMENT AND JUDICIAL REVIEW 
Sections: 
 
16.24.010 - Prohibition. 
A.  1.  No person shall sell, lease or finance a parcel of real property or begin construction of a building for sale, lease or financing thereon (except for model homes) or allow occupancy thereof, for which a final or parcel map is required by the Subdivision Map Act or this title, until the map complies with the Subdivision Map Act and this title and is recorded with the county recorder. 
2.  This subsection does not prohibit an offer or contract to sell, lease or finance real property or to construct improvements where the sale, lease or financing or the beginning of construction is expressly conditioned upon the approval and filing of a final map or parcel map. 
B.  The conveyance of part of a division of real property for which a final or parcel map is required shall not be made by parcel or block number, letter or other designation until the map is recorded with the county recorder. 
C.  This section does not apply to a parcel of a subdivision offered for sale or lease, contracted for sale or lease, or sold or leased in compliance with or exempt from any law, including this title, regulating the design and improvement of subdivisions in effect at the time the subdivision was established. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.24.020 - Penalty for violation. 
A violation of this title by a person who is the subdivider or an owner of record, at the time of the violation, of property involved in the violation is punishable by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding one year or in the state prison, by a fine not exceeding ten thousand dollars, or by both that fine and imprisonment. Every other violation of this title is a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.24.030 - Remedies. 
A.  Other Legal Action. This title does not bar any legal, equitable or summary remedy to which the city or other public agency, or any person may otherwise be entitled. The city or other public agency or person may file a suit in the superior court to restrain or enjoin an attempted or proposed subdivision or sale, lease or financing in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or this title. 
B.  Denial of Permits and Approvals. The city shall not issue a permit or grant any approval necessary to develop real property which has been divided or which has resulted from a division in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or this title if it finds that development of the property is contrary to the public health or safety. The authority to deny or approve such a permit applies whether the applicant was the owner of record at the time of the violation or whether the applicant is either the current owner of record or a vendee of the current owner with, or without, actual or constructive knowledge of the violation at the time of the acquisition of an interest in the property. 
C.  Permit or Approval Subject to Conditions. If the city issues a permit or grants approval for the development of any real property illegally subdivided, the city may impose those additional conditions which would have been applicable to the division of the property at the time the current owner of record acquired the property. If the property has the same owner of record as at the time of the initial violation, the city may impose conditions applicable to a current division of the property. If a conditional certificate of compliance has been filed for record, only the conditions stipulated in that certificate are applicable. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.24.040 - Certificate of compliance. 
A.  A person owning real property or a vendee of such person under a contract of sale may request the department to determine whether the real property complies with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. A written application for a certificate of compliance shall be accompanied by a current preliminary title report showing the legal owner of the property. 
B.  If the department determines that the real property complies with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title, the city shall file a certificate of compliance for record with the county recorder. The certificate of compliance shall identify the real property and shall state that the division thereof complies with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. 
C.  1.  If the department determines that the real property does not comply with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this title, the department may, as a condition to granting a certificate of compliance, impose conditions in accordance with subsection (D) of this section. Upon the department's making such a determination and establishing such conditions, the city shall file a conditional certificate of compliance for record with the county recorder. The certificate shall serve as notice to the property owner and any successor that the fulfillment and implementation of such conditions shall be required before subsequent issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for development of the property. 
2.  Compliance with such conditions is not required until the city issues a permit or other grant of approval for development of the property. 
D.  A recorded final map, parcel map or official map (prepared in accord with Government Code Section 66499.35(e)) constitutes a certificate of compliance with respect to the parcels of real property described on the map. 
E.  The applicant for a certificate of compliance shall pay the city a fee to cover the reasonable cost of processing the application. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.24.050 - Notice of violation. 
A.  Notice of Intention to Record Notice of Violation. If it is determined that real property has been divided in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or this title, the department shall mail by certified mail to the then current owner a notice of intention to record a notice of violation. The notice shall describe the property in detail, name the owners, describe the violation, why the subject parcel is not lawful under Section 66412.6(a) or (b) of the Subdivision Map Act and state that the owner will be given the opportunity to present evidence. The notice shall specify the date, time and place for a planning commission meeting at which the owner may present evidence to the city why a notice of violation should not be recorded. 
B.  Meeting. The meeting shall be held no sooner than thirty days and no later than sixty days from that date of mailing of the notice of intention to record a notice of violation. 
C.  Clearance if No Violation. If, after the owner has presented evidence, the city determines that there has been no violation, the department shall mail a clearance letter to the then current owner of record. 
D.  Recording Notice of Violation. The city shall record the notice of violation with the county recorder if: 
1.  Within fifteen days of receipt of the notice, the owner fails to file with the department a written objection to recording the notice of violation; or 
2.  After the owner has presented evidence, the city determines that the property has in fact been illegally divided. 
E.  Effect of Recording. The notice of violation, when recorded, is constructive notice of the violation to all successors-in-interest in the property. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.24.060 - Judicial review. 
A.  An action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void or annul a decision of the city under this title must be commenced and served on the city within ninety days after the date of the decision. After ninety days, all persons are barred from any such action. 
B.  The issues raised in an action may be limited to those raised in the public hearing or in written correspondence presented before or at the hearing. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 16.26 - COPELAND CREEK DRAINAGE PLAN 
Sections: 
 
16.26.010 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to require the payment of a fee as a condition of approval of any final subdivision map or as a condition of any permit for the construction and development of any property within the area described in the Copeland Creek drainage plan. Such fees are for the purpose of defraying the actual or estimated costs of constructing planned drainage facilities for the removal of surface and storm waters from the drainage area included within the Copeland Creek drainage plan. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.26.020 - Reference to Copeland Creek drainage plan. 
Reference is hereby made to the Copeland Creek drainage plan which was approved by the city council of the city pursuant to resolution number 67-64 adopted by the city council on August 7, 1967, which plan contains an estimate of the total costs of constructing the drainage facilities required by the plan and a map of the drainage area showing its boundaries and the location of planned drainage facilities. Copies of the Copeland Creek drainage plan shall at all times be on file and available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk, city hall, Rohnert Park, California. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.26.030 - Findings. 
The city council finds and determines as follows: 
A.  That the subdivision and development of property within the Copeland Creek drainage plan area will require construction of the facilities prescribed in said plan; 
B.  That the costs described in the Copeland Creek drainage plan are reasonable estimates of the costs of constructing the facilities described in said plan; 
C.  That the fees described in Section 16.54.040 of this title are fairly and uniformly apportioned on all land within the area of the Copeland Creek drainage plan on a per-acreage basis; 
D.  That the drainage facilities described within the Copeland Creek drainage plan are in addition to existing local drainage facilities serving the area at the time of the adoption of the Copeland Creek drainage plan. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.26.040 - Establishment of fees. 
There is established a fee of six hundred and thirty dollars per acre which shall be paid as a condition of the subdivision or development of any land within the city boundaries and within the Copeland Creek drainage plan as hereinafter provided. An equivalent portion of the fees shall be paid when applied to any fraction of an acre of land. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.26.050 - Fees—When paid—How computed. 
Payment of the fees prescribed in Section 16.26.040 of this chapter shall be made a condition of the approval of any final subdivision map as defined in the California State Map Act. Computation of the fee shall be based upon the total acreage within the exterior boundaries of the land described in the final subdivision map. 
Payment of the fee prescribed in Section 16.26.040 shall also be made a condition of the issuance of any building permit for the development of any land within the area of the Copeland Creek drainage plan against which said fee has not already been paid. For the purpose of this chapter, development of the land is defined as any construction or improvement thereon which requires a building permit under the ordinances of the city and specifically the currently adopted edition of the Uniform Building Code. Computation of the fee shall be based upon the amount of land to be utilized by the development or the planned future expansion thereof. Any dispute as to the amount of land to be utilized in connection with the development shall be resolved by the city building inspector whose decision is subject to review by the city council. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.26.060 - Establishment of Copeland Creek drainage facilities fund. 
There is established a Copeland Creek drainage facilities fund. All fees collected pursuant to the terms and provisions of this chapter shall be deposited in said fund. All moneys in such fund shall be expended solely for the construction or reimbursement for construction of local drainage facilities within the area of the Copeland Creek drainage plan. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.26.070 - In lieu payment. 
The city may accept cash or other consideration in payment of the fees described in Section 16.26.040. Any consideration received, other than cash, shall be credited on the basis of its fair market value. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.26.080 - Advance from general fund. 
The city may advance money from its general fund to pay the costs of constructing drainage facilities within the Copeland Creek drainage plan area and reimburse the general fund for such advancement from the Copeland Creek drainage facilities fund. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.26.090 - Incurring indebtedness. 
The city may incur an indebtedness for the construction of drainage facilities within the area of the Copeland Creek drainage plan provided that the sole security for the repayment of such indebtedness shall be moneys in the Copeland Creek drainage facilities fund. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.26.100 - Fee paid once—Records. 
Only one fee or portion thereof shall be paid as to any one acre of land or portion thereof. Accurate records shall be kept of the fees collected under this chapter. Such records shall set forth the amount of fees paid as to each parcel of land to which said fees apply. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
16.26.110 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. The city council may authorize the city attorney to proceed by injunction to abate any violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 744 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Title 17 - ZONING  
Chapter 17.01 - USER'S GUIDE TO THE ZONING ORDINANCE  
Article I. - What is Zoning? 
Zoning is the process by which the city of Rohnert Park is divided into "districts" identified by particular land use types, such as residential, commercial, and industrial. Section 17.06 of the Zoning Ordinance includes a description of the land use districts and identifies what types of uses would be allowed in each area. Subsequent sections explain how such uses are to be developed and operated. The locations of these districts are shown on an official map of the city, which is referred to as the "Zoning Map." 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
Article II. - What is the Zoning Ordinance? 
The Zoning Ordinance is the document that establishes the various zoning districts, identifies those uses that may be allowed in each district, and provides the regulations and standards that pertain to the development and operation of those uses. In the city of Rohnert Park, the Zoning Ordinance is found in Title 17 of the Rohnert Park Municipal Code. In Rohnert Park there are seventeen zoning districts, categorized as follows (with the densities allowed in each residential district indicated in parentheses): 
A.  Residential. 
R-R: Rural Residential District (up to 2 units per acre) 
R-E: Estate Residential District (up to 2 units per acre) 
R-L: Residential-Low Density District (4-6 units per acre) 
R-M: Residential-Medium Density District (6-12 units per acre) 
R-H: Residential-High Density District (12-30 units per acre) 
B.  Commercial. 
C-O: Professional/Administrative Office District 
C-N: Neighborhood Commercial District 
C-R: Regional Commercial District 
C.  Industrial. 
I-L: Limited Industrial District 
D.  Mixed Use. 
M-U: Mixed Use District 
E.  Public/Institutional. 
P-I: Public/Institutional Zoning District 
F.  Open Space and Recreational. 
OS-ARM: Open Space for Agriculture and Resource Management District 
OS-EC: Open Space for Environmental Conservation District 
G.  Other. 
P-D: Planned Development District 
SP: Specific Plan District 
H.  Overlays. 
MHP: Mobile Home Park Overlay District 
O: Office Overlay District 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
Article III. - How do I use the Zoning Ordinance? 
 
17.01.010 - Finding a land use. 
The "heart" of the Zoning Ordinance is Chapter 17.06—Land Use Regulations. This chapter presents the city's zoning districts in a series of tables, divided by land use type (e.g., residential, commercial, mixed use, industrial.) The tables are set up with the zoning districts displayed along the top of the columns and the land uses down the left side of each table. To find out if a certain land use is permitted in a district, locate the use on the appropriate zoning district table and read across the row to the right. If a letter appears in one or more of the columns, the use is either permitted or requires a separate approval prior to its operation (see below). If a letter does not appear in the row, the use is not permitted in that district. Some of the uses have additional requirements that are indicated by a number and/or a Code citation, and these requirements are listed in the Land Use Footnotes (Chapter 17.07) section that follows the land use tables. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.01.020 - What does the letter in the column mean? 
If a letter appears in the column for a given use, the use is one that may be allowed in that zoning district. A "P" indicates that the use is permitted and no formal review is required. A "C" indicates that the use requires approval of the planning commission; there would be a public notice and a public hearing before the Commission. An "A" indicates an administrative approval by the Planning Director or a Zoning Administrator; there would be a public notice and the decision could be appealed to the planning commission. A "Z" indicates zoning compliance; these are uses (e.g., home occupations) that, if they meet certain criteria outlined in the footnotes, are approved and there is no notice or appeal process. A "T" is for a temporary use that would either be seasonal (e.g., Christmas tree lot) or would last less than two years (e.g., construction trailer); there would be no notification or appeal. An "I" indicates uses that are allowed when incidental to a primary use. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.01.030 - Where do I find information on building setbacks, height limits, and other dimensional requirements? 
The "Development Standards" section of the zoning ordinance (Chapter 17.10) contains this information. A table is provided that lists various development standards along the top of the columns and the zoning districts down the left side of the table. To determine what standards apply to each district, find the district on the left and then read across the columns to the right to read the standards. Footnotes follow the table that further explain the standards. This chapter also contains information on allowable projections into yard setbacks (e.g., balconies and patios) and the placement of accessory structures, such as tool sheds and detached garages. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.01.040 - Where do I find information on how high I can build a fence? 
This information is contained in the "Fence, Wall, and Landscape Standards" section of the zoning ordinance (Chapter 17.14.) This section also contains information on landscaping requirements for various developments. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.01.050 - Where do I find information on noise, odor, or other performance standards pertaining to a land use? 
The "Performance Standards" section of the zoning ordinance (Chapter 17.12) contains this information. These standards are intended to help protect the public health and safety and to minimize a given land use's impacts on surrounding uses and the greater community. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.01.060 - Where do I find information on off-street parking and loading requirements? 
The "Off-Street Parking Standards" and "Off-Street Loading Standards" sections of the zoning ordinance (Chapters 17.16 and 17.17) contain this information. Tables located within this section give the parking requirements for various land uses by category (e.g., residential, public and semi public, commercial/retail/office, industrial), with dimensional and development standards following these tables. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.01.070 - Where do I find information on signage? 
Chapter 17.27 contains the signage regulations for the city of Rohnert Park. These regulations indicate the amount of signage allowable for projects in each zoning district, the proper locations for such signage, how temporary signage may be used, and other requirements pertaining to this topic. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.01.080 - What else is included in the Zoning Ordinance? 
The other sections of the Zoning Ordinance explain the City's Growth Management Program, the Development Agreement Procedure, Mobile Home Park Conversion requirements and procedure, and Administrative and Enforcement Procedures. The latter contains information on the permits that may be required for some operations, such as conditional use permits, site plan and architectural review for new and modified developments, and administrative permits. This section also explains the City's Code Enforcement Procedures. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.01.090 - How can I get additional information on the Zoning Ordinance and its use? 
Planning Staff is available to discuss the Zoning Ordinance and its proper use and interpretation, as well as to review projects to determine their compliance with the Ordinance. Staff can also review the Zoning Map to determine the zoning district designation for a given property. Planning Staff can be visited at the City Offices located at 130 Avram Avenue, Rohnert Park, CA, or can be reached by phone at (707) 588-2236. The Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning Map and related materials are also available on the city's website, 
www.rpcity.org. 
(Ord. No. 812, § 2, 1-27-2009) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 812, § 2, adopted Jan. 27, 2009, deleted § 17.01.090 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, § 17.01.090 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 695 § 3, 2003.  
Chapter 17.02 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
17.02.010 - Title. 
Chapter 17 of the municipal code shall be known and cited as the "zoning ordinance of the city of Rohnert Park" or "zoning ordinance." 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.02.020 - Purpose. 
The zoning ordinance is adopted to protect and promote the public health, safety, peace, comfort, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare. More specifically, the zoning ordinance is adopted in order to achieve the following objectives: 
A.  To implement the goals, objectives, policies and programs of the Rohnert Park general plan, and to manage future development and growth consistent with that plan; 
B.  To ensure that development creates a harmonious, convenient, workable relationship among land uses; 
C.  To promote the stability of existing land uses which conform to the general plan; 
D.  To ensure that public and private lands ultimately are used for the purposes that are most appropriate and most beneficial for the city as a whole; 
E.  To facilitate the location of community facilities and institutions where they can best serve the city's residents; 
F.  To facilitate the development of housing opportunities to meet the needs of all segments of the community and foster an equitable jobs/housing balance; 
G.  To promote commercial and industrial activities in order to provide employment and strengthen the city's tax base; 
H.  To protect and enhance the image of the city as a safe environment in which to raise a family; and 
I.  To safeguard and enhance the appearance of the city to reflect and maintain the aesthetic values important to its residents as they relate to such factors as setbacks, quality design, and enhanced landscaping. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.02.030 - Contents. 
The zoning ordinance shall consist of a zoning map designating certain districts and a set of regulations controlling the uses of land, the density of population, the uses and locations of structures, the appearance of certain uses and structures, the areas and dimensions of sites, the location, size, and illumination of signs, and requiring the provision of on- and off-site improvements. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.02.040 - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation of this title: 
A.  The provisions shall be held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. 
B.  It is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul, or interfere with any existing ordinance of the city, except as is specifically repealed herein; provided, that where this title imposes greater restrictions upon the use of land or structure or the height or bulk of structures, or greater areas or dimensions of sites, than is imposed or required by an existing ordinance, this title shall control. 
C.  These standards are not intended to deprive any party of the private property rights that would normally be enjoyed by that party, rather they are intended to help protect the same rights by equal application to all properties.(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.02.050 - Applicability. 
All properties within the boundaries of the city of Rohnert Park shall be subject to the provisions of this title. 
A.  Private projects. 
1.  No land, building, or structure shall be developed, used, constructed, or altered except in conformance with the provisions of this title. 
2.  No use that requires a permit, license or approval under the provisions of this title shall be made, continued, established or operated until the permit, license or approval is finally granted, and all conditions of the permit, license or approval have been complied with, performed and completed. 
3.  No use that requires a permit, license or approval under the provisions of this title shall be established or operated in violation of, or contrary to, any terms or conditions of the granted permit, license or approval. 
B.  Private projects on public lands. 
Unless otherwise exempted, private projects on federal, state, county, or city land shall be subject to the provisions of this title, including private projects on land owned by any combination of these agencies, or by a private person for the benefit of any such governmental agency. 
C.  Public projects. 
Public projects proposed by the city shall be reviewed by the planning commission if referred to the commission by the city council. Unless otherwise exempted, public projects proposed by other public agencies shall be subject to the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.02.060 - Consistency with the general plan. 
An application for any permit, license or approval submitted pursuant to this title shall not be accepted as complete for processing under this title unless it is consistent with the general plan; however, the concurrent filing of a general plan amendment application with an amendment to a zoning district or the provisions of this title shall be allowed. In any case where there is a conflict in regulation between this title and the general plan, the general plan shall prevail. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.02.070 - Zoning districts. 
A.  Establishment of zoning districts. 
The city of Rohnert Park shall be divided into land use zoning districts consistent with the General Plan. The following districts are established: 
(1)  Residential Districts. 
R-R: Rural Residential District 
R-E: Estate Residential District 
R-L: Residential-Low Density District 
R-M: Residential-Medium Density District 
R-H: Residential-High Density District 
(2)  Commercial Districts. 
C-O: Professional/Administrative Office District 
C-N: Neighborhood Commercial District 
C-R: Regional Commercial District 
(3)  Industrial Districts. 
I-L: Limited Industrial District 
(4)  Mixed Use Districts. 
M-U: Mixed Use District 
(5)  Public/Institutional. 
PI: Public/Institutional District 
(6)  Open Space and Recreational Districts. 
OS-ARM: Open Space for Agricultural and Resource Management District 
OS-EC: Open Space for Environmental Conservation District 
(7)  Special Districts. 
PD: Planned Unit Development District 
SP: Specific Plan District 
B.  Adoption of zoning map. 
The boundaries of the zoning districts established pursuant to this section of this title are delineated upon that certain map entitled "Zoning Map of the city of Rohnert Park" or "zoning map". The zoning map, together with all legends, notions, references, boundaries, and other information thereon, is hereby incorporated into this title by reference. 
A copy of the current zoning map shall be kept on file with the city clerk and planning director and shall be made available to the public. Changes in the boundaries on any district shall be made by ordinance pursuant to Section 17.25.070 of this title, and shall be reflected on the zoning map. 
C.  Zoning District boundaries. 
The following rules shall apply for determining the boundaries of any district on the zoning map: 
1.  Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following street or alley lines or other identifiable property or boundary lines, such lines shall be construed to be the district boundary. Where boundaries are indicated as within a street or alley, the center lines thereof shall be construed to be the district boundary. 
2.  District boundaries shall follow along property lines or center lines of rights-of-way, wherever feasible. If a district boundary line divides or splits a lot or parcel of land of less than 12,000 square feet of area, the entire lot or parcel shall be deemed to fall within the zoning district in which the preponderance of such lot or parcel lies. Where said preponderance cannot be determined, such lot or parcel shall be deemed to fall entirely within the more restrictive zoning district. In the case of parcels in excess of 12,000 square feet, and in all cases where the methods of determination of this section are inappropriate, the boundaries shall be determined by scaling the location of such boundaries as shown on the zoning map and the regulations applicable within each district shall apply to each portion of the site situated in a separate district. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.02.080 - Severability. 
If any provision of this title and the application thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such a decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this title. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.02.090 - Clarification of ambiguities. 
If ambiguity arises concerning any aspect of this title, the planning and community development director shall interpret same. Should the planning and community development director's ruling be disputed, the matter shall be referred, upon written request, to the planning commission for clarification. Written requests received by the planning and community development director shall be placed on the next available planning commission agenda as a non-public hearing item. A fee to request an interpretation by the planning commission may be set by the city council. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.02.100 - Marijuana-related uses prohibited. 
Marijuana cultivation facilities, marijuana processing, marijuana delivery, and marijuana dispensaries as defined in Chapter 8.30 are expressly prohibited in all districts. 
( Ord. No. 896 , § 4(Exh. A), 2-9-2016)  
Chapter 17.04 - DEFINITIONS 
 
17.04.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure precision and consistency in interpretation of this title. The meaning and construction of words and phrases defined in this chapter applies throughout this title, except where the context of such words or phrases clearly indicates a different meaning or construction. Refer to Title 24, California Building Standards Code, Parts II, III, IV, and V, and any ordinance of the city of Rohnert Park's Municipal Code, Title 15, for more complete definitions. If any of these definitions are in conflict with the provisions of Title 24 of the State of California Building Code, then the provisions of Title 24 shall govern. (Ord. 695 § 3, 2003) 
(Ord. No. 854, § 2(Exh. A), 7-9-2013)  
17.04.020 - Rules for construction of language. 
The following rules of construction shall apply: 
A.  The specific shall control the general. 
B.  The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive and discretionary. 
C.  In the case of difference of meaning or implication between the text of any provision and any caption or illustration, the text shall control. 
D.  Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words in the present and the future tense are interchangeable, and words in the singular and plural are interchangeable. 
E.  Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, the following conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows: 
1.  "And" indicates that all connected items or provisions shall apply. 
2.  "Or" indicates that all connected items or provisions may apply singly or in any combination. 
3.  "Either...or" indicates that the connected items or provisions shall apply singly but not in combination. 
F.  The word "used" shall include arranged, designed, constructed, altered, converted, rented, leased, occupied, or intended to be utilized. 
G.  All references to departments, commissions, boards or other public agencies pertain to those of the city of Rohnert Park, unless otherwise indicated. 
H.  All references to public officials pertain to those of the city of Rohnert Park and include designated deputies of such officials, unless otherwise indicated. 
I.  All references to days pertain to calendar days unless otherwise indicated. If a deadline falls on a weekend or holiday, it shall be extended to the next working day. 
J.  Chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of any section hereof. (Ord. 695 § 3, 2003) 
(Ord. No. 854, § 2(Exh. A), 7-9-2013)  
17.04.030 - Definitions of words and terms. 
Where terms, phrases and words are not defined below, they shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context which they are used. Random House Webster's College Dictionary, copyright 2000 by Random House Inc. shall be considered as providing ordinarily accepted meanings. 
"Abutting (Adjacent) lots or parcels" means two or more lots or parcels of land having a common border or being separated from such a common border by a right-of-way, alley or easement. Parcels having no common boundary other than a corner shall not be considered abutting. 
"Access driveway" means a driveway that provides access into and through a parking area from a street access point, provides access to the parking aisles, or provides interior circulation among parking areas. 
"Accessory building or use" means a building or use which is clearly incidental or subordinate to and serves the principal building or use located on the same lot. Portable storage sheds less than six feet in height and twelve square feet in floor area and prefabricated open play structures are excluded. 
"Accessory dwelling unit (ADU)" means an attached or a detached residential dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons. It shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family dwelling is situated. An ADU shall be in compliance with Section 17.07.020 of this title. An ADU also includes the following: 
1.  An efficiency unit, as defined in Section 17958.1 of the Health and Safety Code. 
2.  A manufactured home, as defined in Section 18007 of the Health and Safety Code. 
"Acre, gross" means the total land area within the legal lines of a property (that is, including all existing streets and other rights-of-way, but excluding areas subject to physical or environmental constraints, as well as areas dedicated for creekside/greenway or habitat protection except as may be provided for the Rohnert Park general plan. All new public or private rights-of-way created as part of a given development are not excluded in determining the gross acreage of that development. 
"Addition" means an extension or increase in floor area or height of a building or structure. 
"Administrative office": See "Professional office." 
"Administrative review" means permit/project review, approval or disapproval by the planning and community development director or his/her designee. 
"Adult business": See Chapter 8.37. 
"Alley" means a public or private permanently reserved thoroughfare less than sixteen feet but not less than ten feet in width, other than side street, which has been dedicated or deeded to the public for public use as a secondary means of access to abutting properties. 
"Alteration" means any change, addition or modification in construction or occupancy of an existing structure or use. 
"Alteration, structural": See "Structural alteration." 
"Amendment" means a change in the wording, context or substance of the zoning ordinance, or a change in the district boundaries on the zoning map. 
"Amusement center" means any commercial activity, whether conducted intermittently or full-time, which is primarily used for physical recreation or entertainment. The phrase "amusement center" includes any bowling alley, dance hall, arcade, shooting gallery, miniature golf, golf driving ranges, cyber cafes, and any similar commercial activity. 
"Animal, domestic": See "Domestic animals." 
"Animal hospital" means a place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment; may include the ancillary use of the premises as a kennel or a place where animals or pets are boarded for remuneration. 
"Arcade" means an area with coin-operated games. See also "Amusement center." 
"Attached structure" means any structure that has an interior wall or roof in common with another structure. 
"Automobile" means any self-propelled, motorized vehicle used, intended to be used, or (originally) designed to be used for the transportation of people upon a street or highway, but not including any vehicle designed for travel on stationary rails or tracks. As used in this chapter, "automobile" includes motorcycles and light trucks with a capacity rating not exceeding one ton, and any (travel) trailer (designed to) which can be towed by any of the above-described vehicles. 
"Automobile body repair" means a business operated in a building or part thereof where repairs, alterations or replacements are made to automobile and truck bodies and related components. Typically, these activities include welding, frame straightening or painting, as well as minimal trim work (e.g., installation or replacement of mirrors, upholstery, decorative trim or striping). 
"Automobile parts sales" means a business operated in a building where parts for automobiles from sources off-site are sold. 
"Automobile repair" means a business operated in a building or part thereof where automobiles are repaired or reconditioned. Such repair shall be limited to mechanical and electronic sys-tems only. Painting (which requires a spray booth), repair or alterations to automobile body parts or frame shall not be allowed. Minimal trim work (e.g., installation or replacement of mirrors, upholstery, decorative trim or striping) is allowed. Vehicles being repaired may be retained for more than twenty-four hours but not longer than thirty days. 
"Automobile sales" means a business engaged in the sale of used or new automobiles. Automobile repair may be permitted on the premises as an ancillary activity. 
"Automobile service station" means any business or premises engaged in the sale of gasoline and other fuels and/or light maintenance activities such as engine tune-up, lubrication and minor repairs. Service stations shall not include premises where heavy automobile maintenance activities such as engine overhauls, automobile painting, body fender work or storage for more than a twenty-four-hour period are conducted. 
"Automobile storage" means the storage of a motor vehicle for a period in excess of twenty-four hours without repairs or maintenance being required. 
"Automobile wrecking/salvage" means the removal of part(s) from an automobile and/or retention of said automobile from which part(s) have been removed for the purpose of reuse, sale or disposal; and/or the dumping of dismantled or wrecked automobiles or their parts. This business is normally conducted in the non-building space of the premises and there are present at least two or more automobiles or parts that have been retained for a period longer than twenty-four hours. 
"Awning" means a roof-like cover that is attached to and projects from the wall of building for the purpose of shielding from the elements. 
"Balcony" means a platform that projects from the wall of a building, typically above the first level, and is surrounded by a rail, balustrade or parapet. 
"Banks/savings and loan/credit unions" means financial institutions, including federally-chartered banks, savings associations, industrial loan companies, and credit unions that provide retail banking services to individuals and businesses. "Banks/savings and loan/credit unions" includes only those institutions engaged in the on-site circulation of money, and whose deposits are insured by the state or federal government and/or a state or federal sponsored entity, including credit unions. "Banks/savings and loan/credit unions" specifically excludes pawn shops, check cashing stores, payday loan establishments, and car title loan establishments. 
"Bar" means any business wherein alcoholic beverages are sold at retail for consumption on the premises and minors are excluded therefrom by law. It shall not mean a business wherein such beverages are sold in conjunction with the sale of food for consumption on the premises and the sale of said beverages comprises less than twenty-five percent of the gross receipts. 
"Base density" means the number of dwelling units permitted before any density bonus credit is applied. 
"Basement" means any floor level below the first story in a building and at least four feet below grade, as defined in the building code, for at least fifty percent of the total perimeter. 
"Bath house/spa" means a business which engages in providing sauna baths, water baths, showers, steam rooms or steam baths, or any other body cleansing and toning arrangement wherein an attendant accompanies the customer into the room or facility. 
"Bed and breakfast inn" means a transient lodging establishment with no more than five rooms, unless more approved in accordance with Section 17.07.020, Bed and breakfast inn, for rent primarily engaged in providing overnight or otherwise temporary lodging for the general public and may provide meals to the extent otherwise permitted by law. 
"Boarding house" means a structure where lodging and meals for seven or more boarders is provided for compensation. Definition includes fraternities, sororities, and rooming houses, etc. 
"Building" means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls. 
"Building Code" means California Building Standards Code, Parts II, III, IV and V, and any ordinance of the city of Rohnert Park's Municipal Code, Title 15, governing the type and method of construction of buildings, signs, and sign structures and including adopted model codes and any amendments to the California Building Standards Code. 
"Building coverage": See "Lot coverage." 
"Building envelope" means the area of a lot or parcel of real property within which main structures must be confined, except fencing, driveways, and accessory buildings. 
  
"Building frontage" means the linear dimension, parallel to the ground, of that side of a building facing on a public street. 
"Building height" means the vertical distance from the finished grade to the highest point of the structure, excluding chimneys and vents. 
  
"Building site" means a legally created parcel or several contiguous parcels of land in single or joint ownership, which provide the area and the open spaces required by this title, exclusive of all vehicular and pedestrian public rights-of-way. 
"Car title loan establishment" means any business that engages in providing short-term loans in which the borrower's car title is used as collateral. The borrower must be the lien holder (i.e., own the car outright). 
"Carport" means a permanent roofed structure completely open on two or more sides to be used for vehicle parking. 
"CC&Rs" means covenants, conditions, and restrictions as recorded as a deed restriction running with the land and binding upon subsequent owners of the property. 
"Cemetery" means land used or intended to be used primarily for the burial of deceased persons or animals and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbariums, crematories, mausoleums and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of the cemetery. 
"Check cashing store" means any business, company, corporation, establishment, organization, private enterprise, shop, or store whose primary service is that of a check casher, as defined by Section 1789.31 of the California Civil Code, as may be amended from time to time. 
"Commercial filming studio" means an enterprise engaged in the production, distribution or exchange of motion picture photography at the same location more than six days per quarter of a calendar year. 
"Commission/planning commission" means the planning commission of the city of Rohnert Park. 
"Common area" means a parcel or parcels of land, together with the improvements thereon, which are shared by several owners in common. 
"Common open space": See "Open space, common." 
"Community center" means an area developed, or to be developed separately or with any of the following public buildings or uses: offices, libraries, playgrounds, parks, assembly halls, police stations, swimming pools and fire stations. 
"Conditional use" means a use that is generally compatible with other uses permitted in a zoning district, but that requires individual review of its location, unusual site development features or operating characteristics, and/or intensity and density of use and structures, and may require the imposition of conditions pertinent thereto to ensure that the use is designed, located, and operated compatibly with uses on adjoining properties and in the surrounding area. The planning commission shall have responsibility for the review of conditional uses. 
"Condominium" means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property, together with a separate interest in space in a commercial or residential building, such as an apartment. A condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of such project. 
"Condo conversion" means the change in a development's status from existing multifamily rental housing units to private ownership of lot or air space. This term applies to commercial and industrial properties as well as where ownership of ground or airspace rights are involved. 
"Congregate care/assisted living facility" means a facility providing full-time care, either permanently or temporarily, for those persons unable to live independently, due to age, physical or developmental disability or medical disability. Congregate care facilities include the following state-authorized or licensed operations: 
 "Congregate care/assisted living facility, small" means facilities providing care for six or fewer children or adults housed in a single-family residential unit; and 
 "Congregate care/assisted living facility, large" means facilities providing care for seven or more children or adults. 
"Contractor yard": See "Equipment rental yard/contractor yard." 
"Convenience store" means a retail establishment with a sales area of five thousand square feet or less which sells primarily food, household, and personal convenience items. 
"Council/city council" means the city council of Rohnert Park. 
"Court" means a space, open and unobstructed to the sky, located at or above grade level on a lot and bounded on three or more sides by walls of a building and/or buildings. 
"Coverage, lot or site": See "Lot coverage." 
"Credit union": See "Banks/savings and loans/credit unions." 
"Cyber cafe" means an establishment that provides four or more computers and/or other electronic devices for access to the internet, e-mail, video games or computer software programs which are networked or which function as a client/server program, and which seeks compensation in any form from users. Also referred to as a PC cafe, internet cafe, or cyber center, but does not include a cyber learning center. 
"Day care center" means any child day care facility other than a family day care home. Includes infant care centers, preschools, and extended day care facilities. 
"Day care facility" means a facility which provides non-medical care to children under eighteen years of age in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual on less than a twenty-four-hour basis. Child day care facilities includes day care centers and day care homes. Refer to definitions for both. 
"Day care home" means a licensed home which is authorized, certified or licensed by the state of California which regularly provides care, protection and supervision of twelve or fewer children in the provider's own home, for periods of less than twenty-four hours per day. The number of children shall include children under the age of ten who reside at the provider's home. 
"Day care home, small" means a licensed facility that provides day care to eight or fewer children. 
"Day care home, large" means a licensed facility that provides day care for nine to fourteen children. 
"Deck" means a platform less than thirty inches above grade, either free standing or attached to a building. 
"Density" means the number of dwelling units per gross acre. See also "Dwelling unit." 
"Density bonus" means a provision to allow additional units above the maximum allowable within a district as an incentive to provide dwelling units for low and very low income households. 
"Depth": See "Lot depth." 
"Domestic animals" means small animals of the type generally accepted as pets that are customarily kept for personal use or enjoyment within the home or yard, such as dogs, cats, rabbits, canaries or parrots. 
"Dwelling, multiple-family" means a structure containing two or more dwelling units. 
"Dwelling, single-family, attached (duplex, townhouse, zero lot line developments)" means one of two or more dwelling units situated on separate lots and having a common or party wall separating the dwelling units. Refer to the Rohnert Park general plan for further definition of a duplex allowed in the residential-medium density district. 
"Dwelling, single-family, detached" means a detached building containing a single dwelling unit and surrounded by open space on the same lot. 
"Dwelling unit" means any building or portion thereof which contains living facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, as required by the California Building Standards Code, Rohnert Park amendments thereto, and model codes adopted under municipal code Title 15, for not more than one family. For the purposes of calculating density, duplex studio units whose total square footage does not exceed eight hundred fifty square feet shall be considered a single multifamily, one-bedroom unit. 
"Easement" means a grant of one or more property rights by the property owner for the use by the public, a corporation or another person or entity. 
"Educational institution" means an institution giving general academic instruction equivalent to the standards prescribed by the state board of education. 
"Elevation" means: 
(A)  A vertical distance above or below a fixed reference level; or 
(B)  A flat scale drawing of the front, rear, or side of a building or structure. 
"Emergency shelter" means a residential facility that provides short-term, temporary accommodations to individuals and families. The goal of an emergency shelter is to address acute needs of individuals and families by providing basic residential facilities and may include programs which help residents find available social services. 
"Equipment rental yard/contractor yard" means a use providing for maintenance, servicing, or storage of motor vehicles, equipment, or supplies; or for the dispatching of service vehicles; or distribution of supplies or construction materials required in connection with a business activity, public utility service, transportation service, or similar activity. The term "contractor yard" shall include a construction materials yard, vehicular service center, or similar use. 
"Erect" means to build, construct, attach, place, suspend or affix to or upon any surface. Such term shall also include the painting of wall signs. 
"Family" means an individual or two or more persons, not including servants, living as a single housekeeping unit. For limitations upon the number of residents per square foot of floor space see Rohnert Park Municipal Code Section 15.12.010. 
"Family care home" means a state-authorized, certified or licensed family care home, foster home, or group home serving six or fewer mentally disordered or otherwise handicapped persons or dependent and neglected children providing care on a twenty-four-hour-a-day basis. Includes elderly group homes and adult group homes as defined by the state of California. 
"Fire code" means California Building Standards Code, Part IX and local amendments as contained in the city of Rohnert Park's Municipal Code, Title 15, Chapter 15.28. 
"Floor area, gross" means the area included within the surrounding exterior walls of a building or portion thereof, exclusive of HVAC, elevator shafts, courts and loading docks. The floor area of a building, or portion thereof, not provided with surrounding exterior walls shall be the useable area under the horizontal projection of the roof or floor above. 
"Floor area ratio (FAR)" means the gross floor area of all buildings on a lot divided by the building site area. 
  
"Frontage" means the side of a lot abutting a street (the front property line), except the side of a corner lot. For purposes of determining frontage on a corner lot, the narrowest street property line shall be considered the front of the lot. See also "Building frontage." 
"Garage" means a building, or a portion of a building, enclosed on two or more sides and used for the parking of vehicles. 
"General plan" means the city of Rohnert Park general plan as adopted by the city council, who may amend the plan from time to time, hereafter referred to as the general plan. 
"Grade, existing" means the surface of the ground or pavement at a stated location as it exists before disturbance in preparation for a project regulated by this chapter. 
"Grade, finished" means the lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving, or sidewalk within the area between the building and the property line. When the property line is more than five feet from the building, the finished grade shall be the lowest point between the building and a line five feet from the building. 
  
"Gross acreage" means the total area within the lot lines of a lot or parcel of land before public streets, easements or other areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use are deducted from such lot or parcel, and does not include adjacent lands already dedicated for such purposes. 
  
"Group home": See "Family care home." 
"Group, residential" means shared living quarters without separate kitchen or bathroom. 
"Height of building": See "Building height." 
"Home occupation" means an occupation conducted entirely within the dwelling unit, garage, or accessory building by the occupants of the primary dwelling, which occupation is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes, which use must not change the residential character thereof and which meets the conditions of this code. 
"Homeless shelter" means housing provided as a temporary/emergency shelter for individuals and families to reside while they prepare to move into more stable housing. Emergency housing, along with assessment and case management, is typically provided for twenty-eight days to one hundred eighty days per client. 
"Hospital" means an institution providing physical or mental health services, in-patient or overnight accommodations, and medical or surgical care of the sick or injured including full-time medical supervision which is approved by the American Hospital Association and licensed by the state. 
"Hotel" means any building containing six or more guest rooms, primarily accessible from interior hallways, intended or designed to be used, or which are used, rented or hired out to be occupied or which are occupied for transient sleeping purposes by guests. No in-room food preparation unless applied for and approved with project or separately. (Also see "Motel.") 
"Incidental": See "Accessory building or use." 
"Intersection, controlled" means an intersection controlled by the use of traffic signals or signs, such as stop or yield signs. 
"Intersection, uncontrolled" means an intersection not controlled by traffic signals or signs. 
"Junk yard" means an outdoor space used exclusively for the storage or sale of secondhand and used machinery and scrap iron, including automobiles, tools, implements or parts or portions thereof, and any and all secondhand used furniture or other personal property, or part or portions thereof. 
"Kennel (commercial)" shall be as defined in Rohnert Park Municipal Code Section 6.02.070.F. 
"Kiosk" means an ancillary, freestanding structure designed for retail sales or public/informational notices. 
"Kitchen" means a room or area within a room used for cooking and/or preparation of foods. 
"Landscaping" means an area devoted to or developed and maintained predominantly with native or exotic plant materials, including lawn, ground cover, trees, shrubs, and other plant materials; and also including accessory decorative outdoor landscape elements such as pools, fountains, paved or decorated surfaces (excluding driveways, parking, loading, or storage areas), and sculptural elements. 
"Live/work" means an occupancy by an individual or a family maintaining a common household consisting of one or more rooms or floors in a building originally designed for industrial or commercial occupancy or in a new building specifically designed for live/work and which includes the following: 
A.  Cooking and sanitary facilities in accordance with applicable building standards adopted by the city of Rohnert Park; and 
B.  Adequate working space reserved for and used by one or more persons residing therein. 
"Loading space" means an off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building or contiguous group of buildings, for the temporary parking of vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise or materials. 
"Lot" means a parcel of land occupied, or intended to be occupied, by a building, group of buildings or uses, and accessory buildings, together with such open space, yard and setbacks as are required. The parcel must have the minimum area required for a lot in the zone in which such lot is located and having its principal frontage on public street or public right-of-way. The classification of lots are as follows: 
A.  "Corner lot" means a lot abutting on and at the intersection of two or more streets. 
B.  "Flag lot" means a lot having access or an easement to a public or private street by a narrow, private right-of-way. 
C.  "Interior lot" means a lot abutting only one street. 
D.  "Reversed frontage lot or key lot" means a lot with a side line that abuts the rear line of any one or more adjoining lots. 
E.  "Through lot or double-frontage lot" means an interior lot having frontage on more than one street. Each frontage from which access is permitted shall be deemed a front lot line. 
  
"Lot area" means the total horizontal area included within the lot lines of a lot. 
"Lot coverage" means the percent of the lot area which may be covered by all buildings and structures, excluding allowed projecting eaves, balconies and similar features and by a deck(s) more than thirty inches in height. 
"Lot depth" means the linear distance between the front and rear property lines of a site measured along a line midway between the side property lines. 
"Lot or property line" means a line dividing one lot from another lot, street or alley. 
A.  "Front." See "Frontage." 
B.  "Rear" means a lot line, not intersecting a front line, which is most distant from and most closely parallel to the front lot line. In the case of an irregularly shaped lot or a lot bounded by only three lot lines, a line within the lot having a length of ten feet or more, parallel to and most distant from the front lot line shall be interpreted as the rear lot line for the purpose of determining required yards, setbacks, and other provisions of this title. 
  
C.  "Interior" means any lot line not abutting a street. 
D.  "Side" means any lot line that is not a front lot line or a rear lot line. 
"Lot width" means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines. 
  
"Manufactured home" means a complete single-family home deliverable in one or more transportable sections, certified under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, and that is attached to a permanent foundation. A manufactured home is also commonly referred to as a "mobile home" or "modular home." A manufactured home is not the same as a recreational vehicle, commercial coach, or factory-built home, which may look similar from the exterior. 
"Massage establishment": See Chapter 8.36. 
"Medical marijuana dispensary" means any facility where medical marijuana is made available to and/or distributed to one or more of the following: a "primary caregiver," a "qualified patient," or a "person with an identification card." Each of these terms is defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7 and shall be interpreted in strict accordance with Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.5 and 11362.7 et seq. A medical marijuana dispensary shall not include the following uses, so long as the location of such uses is otherwise regulated by the city's municipal code or other applicable law and such uses strictly comply with the city's municipal code or other applicable law, including but not limited to, Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.5 and 11362.7 et seq.: a clinic licensed pursuant to Chapter 1 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code; a healthcare facility licensed pursuant to Chapter 2 of Divisions 2 of the Health and Safety Code; a residential care facility for persons with chronic life-threatening illness licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.01 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code; a residential care facility for the elderly licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.2 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code; a residential hospice, or a home health agency licensed pursuant to Chapter 8 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code. 
"Microbrewery" means any brewery that produces fewer than half a million gallons of beer per year. 
"Motel" means a building or group of buildings containing six or more guest rooms which are rented or hired out to be occupied or which are occupied for transient sleeping purposes, typically where a majority of such rooms open directly to the outside, and parking is located adjacent to the room. No in-room food preparation is allowed unless applied for and approved as part of project approval or separately. 
"Multifamily residential": See "Dwelling, multifamily." 
"Natural state" means all land and water that remains undeveloped and undisturbed. The grading, excavating or filling of land, and/or the construction of roadways, driveways, parking areas, and structure shall be prohibited in areas so designated. Incidental minor grading for such purposes as equestrian, bicycling, or pedestrian trails, picnic areas, flood control, and planting and landscaping which is in addition to and enhances the natural environment may be permitted. 
"Natural waterway" means any natural stream of water flowing in a definite course or channel and possessing a bed and banks. It is not necessary that the flow of water be continuous throughout the year. Natural waterways do not include artificially created channels for storm waters, such as street gutters and drain and drainage facilities installed in connection with the development of property. 
"Nonconforming lot" means a lot which was lawfully subdivided or established, but which does not conform with prescribed regulations for the district in which the lot is located by reason of adoption or amendment of this title or by reason of annexation of territory to the city. The lot shall be shown on a duly approved and recorded tract or parcel map or has been issued or is eligible for a certificate of compliance or conditional certificate of compliance. 
"Nonconforming structure" means any structure legally constructed or established which fails to conform to the regulations of this ordinance, within the district in which it is located by reason of the adoption of this ordinance or any amendment hereto or by reason of annexation of territory to the city. Structures not legally established, which fail to conform to the provisions of this ordinance, shall be deemed to be illegal structures. 
"Nonconforming use" means a use of a structure or land which is lawfully established and maintained prior to the adoption of this ordinance but which does not conform with the use regulations of the district in which it is located. Uses not legally established, which fail to conform to the provisions of this ordinance, shall be deemed to be illegal uses. 
"Occupancy" means the purpose for which a building, or part thereof, is used or intended to be used. 
"Off-campus student housing" means a living arrangement for student tenants within an off-campus dwelling unit or portion thereof, except if all the student tenants are family of the owner of the dwelling or the dwelling is leased and used only by a family as the family's primary residence. Off-campus student housing shall not include dormitories owned and operated by a university, college or trade school. 
"Office": See "Professional office." 
"Open space" means the area of a project (exclusive of the required setback from a public street) which is to be used exclusively for leisure, recreational, and/or aesthetic or visual relief purposes. Open space areas may include those reserved for active and passive recreational uses and park facilities. 
"Open space, common" means an open area within a residential or commercial development reserved for the exclusive use of the residents or employees of the development and guests. 
"Open space, private" means a usable open space adjoining and directly accessible to a dwelling unit, reserved for the exclusive use of residents of the dwelling unit and their guests. 
"Parking lot" means an off-street parking area, not within a building, where motor vehicles may be stored for the purposes of temporary, daily or overnight parking. 
"Parking space" means an unobstructed, permanently reserved and clearly delineated area or space other than a street or alley maintained for the parking of one motor vehicle. 
"Patio, covered" means a covered area without walls, screens, or windows on two or more sides or when walls, screens, or windows are incorporated meeting the requirements of the Uniform Building Code, Appendix Chapter 31, Division III, Section 3116. 
"Pawn shop" means an establishment in which any business is engaged in, carried on, or conducted that involves the receipt of personal property in pledge as security for a loan pursuant to California Financial Code Section 21000 et seq., as may be amended from time to time. "Pawn shop" does not include banks, savings and loan institutions, credit unions, or other banking organizations regulated by state or federal law. 
"Payday loan establishment" means any establishment whose business includes the making of deferred deposit transactions, commonly referred to as "payday loans." "Payday loan establishment" includes any business operating as a "licensee" under California Financial Code Section 23001(d). 
"Personal services" means services of a personal convenience nature, as opposed to products, sold to individual consumers and include the provision of information, individual instruction, beauty and barber shops, laundry and cleaning services, and similar services. 
"Pre-existing" means in existence prior to the effective date of this ordinance or applicable amendments thereto. 
"Principal or primary use" means the predominant use of any lot, building or structure. 
"Processing facility" means a building or enclosed space used for the collection and processing of recyclable materials. Processing means the preparation of material for efficient shipment, or to an end-users specification, by such means as baling, briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting, shredding, cleaning, and remanufacturing. Processing facilities include the following: 
A.  "Light processing facility": Occupies an area of under forty-five thousand square feet of gross collection, processing and storage area and has up to an average of two outbound truck shipments per day. Light processing facilities are limited to baling, briquetting, crushing, compacting, grinding, shredding and sorting of source-separated recyclable materials and repairing of reusable materials sufficient to qualify as a certified processing facility. A light processing facility shall not shred, compact, or bale ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers. 
B.  "Heavy processing facility" means any processing facility other than a light processing facility. 
"Professional office" means an office or studio of professional or service occupations or agencies which benefit from and contribute to an environment generally characterized by low traffic and pedestrian volumes, lack of distracting, irritating or sustained noise, and low density building developments, including occupations or agencies such as accountants, administrative offices, appraisers, architects, engineers, lawyers, secretarial agencies, and real estate. 
"Public hearing" means a noticed meeting where the public is provided an opportunity to comment and file testimony on a matter under consideration prior to official action being taken. 
"Recovery facility" means any facility, place or building which provides twenty-four-hour residential non-medical services to adults who are recovering from problems related to alcohol, drug, or alcohol and drug misuse or abuse, and who need alcohol, drug, or alcohol and drug recovery treatment or detoxification services. "Adults" may include, but need not be limited to, parents over eighteen years of age and their children, and emancipated minors, which may include, but need not be limited to, parents under eighteen years of age and their children who are recovering from alcohol, drug or drug and alcohol misuse and are currently capable of meeting their life support needs independently, but who temporarily need guidance, counseling, or other alcohol or drug recovery services. Recovery facilities that offer drug or alcohol abuse counseling must require counselors to be licensed by the state. 
A.  "Recovery facilities, small" means facilities providing care for six or fewer adults (as defined above) and housed in a single-family residential unit; and 
B.  "Recovery facilities, large" means facilities providing care for seven or more adults. 
"Recreation facility, commercial" means recreation facilities operated as a business and open to the general public for a fee. 
"Recreation facility, private" means clubs or recreation facilities for which a membership charge may be made and which are open only to bona fide members and their guests. A private recreational facility may not be open or available to members of the general public. 
"Recreation facility, public" means publicly owned or operated recreation facilities. 
"Recreational vehicle" means any vehicle or trailer designed or modified for use as a camp car, camper, motor home, house car, trailer, trailer coach, boat, boat trailer, snowmobile, snowmobile trailer, camping trailer or for any similar purpose. 
"Recyclable material" means reusable material including but not limited to metals, glass, plastic and paper, which are intended for reuse, remanufacture or reconstitution for the purpose of using the altered form. "Recyclable material" does not include refuse or hazardous material as defined in Section 15.04.820.020. Recyclable material may include used motor oil collected and transported in accordance with Sections 25250.11 and 25143.2(b)(4) of the California Health and Safety Code. 
"Recycling facility" means a center for the collection and/or processing of recyclable materials. A certified recycling facility or certified processor means a recycling facility certified by the California Department of Conservation as meeting the requirements of the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986. A recycling facility does not include storage containers or processing activity located on the premises of a residential, commercial, or manufacturing use and used solely for the recycling of materials generated by that residential property, business or manufacturer. Recycling facilities may include the following: 
A.  "Recycling collection facility" means a collection facility for the acceptance by donation, redemption, or purchase of recyclable material from the public. Such a facility does not use power-driven processing equipment except as provided for in particular zoning districts. Collection facilities may include the following: 
1.  "Small recycling collection facility": Occupies an area of not more than five hundred square feet and may include a mobile unit; bulk reverse vending machines or a grouping of reverse vending machines occupying more than fifty square feet, kiosk type units which may include permanent structures; unattended containers placed for the donation of recyclable materials. 
2.  "Large recycling collection facility": Occupies an area of more than five hundred square feet, or is on a separate property not appurtenant to a host use, and which may include permanent structures. 
B.  "Reverse vending machine" means an automated mechanical device which accepts at least one or more types of empty beverage containers including, but not limited to, aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles, and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value not less than the container's redemption value as determined by the state. A reverse vending machine may sort and process containers mechanically provided that the entire process is enclosed within the machine. 
"Religious assembly uses" means the operation of nonsecular facilities, such as churches, temples, synagogues, and related playgrounds, centers and halls for social, educational, religious and recreational activities. 
"Research and development" means uses engaged in the research, analysis, design, development and/or testing of a product. 
"Rooming house": See "Boarding house." 
"Rounding of quantities" means the consideration of distances, unit density, density bonus calculations, or other aspects of development or the physical environment expressed in numerical quantities which are fractions of whole numbers; the numbers are to be rounded to the nearest highest whole number when the fraction is 0.5 or more, and to the next lowest whole number when the fraction is less than 0.5, except as otherwise provided in this title. 
"Savings and loan": See "Banks/savings and loans/credit unions." 
"School" means an institution for the teaching of children or adults including primary and secondary schools, colleges, professional schools, business schools, trade schools, art schools, and similar facilities. 
"Second dwelling or residential unit" - See "Accessory dwelling unit". 
"Senior housing" means new or rehabilitated dwelling units which are exclusively used by persons of fifty-five years of age or older and provide common recreational or social facilities. 
"Setback" means a required, specified distance between a building or structure and a lot line or lines, measured perpendicularly from the lot line or lines in a horizontal plan extending across the complete length of such lot line or lines. 
"Short-term rental" means a dwelling unit, part of a dwelling unit, or an accessory dwelling unit, that is a type of transient lodging establishment engaged in providing overnight or otherwise temporary lodging for a period of less than thirty days. Does not include "bed and breakfast inns", "boarding house", "hotel", or "motel", each of which are separately defined. 
"Sign" means a device, display, figure, message, placard or structure, including its component parts, situated indoors or outdoors, which is constructed, designed, intended or used to advertise or otherwise attract or direct attention, provide information, to a business, event or location, institution, person, product or service, or promotes the interests of any person, by any means including, but not limited to, color, design, figures, illumination, letters, projected images or words, and is visible from any public street, road, highway, right-of-way, or parking area. Signage terminology used in this code includes the following: 
1.  "Abandoned" means any sign that advertises a business, lessor, owner, product, service or activity that is no longer located on premises where the sign is displayed. 
2.  "Address" means a sign identifying the position of a land use in relationship to a public or private street. 
3.  "Alteration" means any change of copy, sign face, color, size, shape, illumination, position, location, construction, or supporting structure of any sign. 
4.  Area. See "Sign area." 
5.  "Attention attracting device" means animated or moving signs, including signs held by mechanical mannequin or other devices, balloons, banners, beacons, blinking or traveling lights, flashing messages, inflatable signs (and figures), pennants, search lights, spinners and streamers, but excluding approved temporary banners, time/temperature devices, and electronic message boards. 
6.  "Awning" means a sign attached to a roof-like projection from the wall of a building that serves to shield a doorway or window from the weather and is often constructed of weather resistant fabric. 
7.  Banner. See "Flags, banners or pennants." 
8.  "Campaign" means a temporary sign that is designed to support the passage or defeat of any measure on a ballot or to influence voters with respect to the nomination, election, defeat, or removal of a candidate from public office at any national, state, or local election. 
9.  "City entry" means a public sign located at specific entry points to the city of Rohnert Park. 
10.  "Commemorative" means a sign which commemorates the historical status and/or date of erection. 
11.  "Commercial" means any sign with a commercial message. 
12.  "Commercial message" means any wording, logo or other representations that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises or calls attention to a business, product, service or other commercial activity. 
13.  "Construction" means a sign that identifies the architects, engineers, owners, lenders, contractors, future tenants and others associated with a construction project, but which contains no other advertising matter. 
14.  "Copy" means words, letters, numbers, figures, designs or other symbolic representations incorporated into a sign. 
15.  "Directional" means a sign that has been designed and erected for the sole purpose of directing vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic within a project, e.g., restroom, security office, entrance/exit. 
16.  "Directory" means a sign that lists tenants of a multiple tenant building or center. 
17.  "Double-faced" means a sign which has back to back sign copy where the angle between the two faces does not exceed thirty degrees. 
18.  "Edge of roof" means on a pitched roof, the lowest portion of the fascia board covering the roof rafters, or, if no fascia board exists, the lowest point of the roof rafters. On a flat roof, the top of the parapet wall or three feet above the roof deck, whichever is less. 
19.  "Electronic message center" means a sign with a fixed or changing display composed of a series of lights, but not including time/temperature displays. 
20.  "External illumination" means the lighting of an object from a light source located at a distance from the object. 
21.  "Flags, banners or pennants" means cloth, plastic, paper or similar material used for advertising purposes attached to framing, line, pole, structure, staff or vehicle. 
22.  "Flashing" means a sign that includes an intermittent or sequential flashing light source. 
23.  "Freestanding monument" means a sign that is supported by a base structure that rests on the ground and is not supported or attached to a building. 
24.  "Freeway oriented" means a freestanding sign located on a nonresidential property and directly adjacent to Highway 101. 
25.  "Hand-held" means a sign that is held by or otherwise mounted on a person. For the purposes of this title, "hand-held sign" does not include a noncommercial sign. 
26.  Height, sign. See "Sign height." 
27.  "Illegal sign" means: 
a.  Any sign originally erected or installed without first complying with all structural, locational, design, building, and electrical regulations in effect at the time of its construction or installation; 
b.  Any commercial sign that is not maintained, or is not used to identify or advertise an ongoing business, occupancy, product, good or service available on the site of the sign for more than ninety days; 
c.  Any unsafe sign; 
d.  Any legal nonconforming sign that has not been removed following the expiration of any applicable amortization period provided in this code; and 
e.  Any sign that is in violation of the provisions of Chapter 17.27 (Signs). 
28.  "Inflatable device" means an object that is filled with a gas, including CO2. 
29.  "Internal illumination" means the lighting of an object from within the interior so that light rays go through the face of the sign. This does not include a sign with a light source that is attached to the face of the sign and is perceived as a design element of the sign. 
30.  "Live/work" means a sign that identifies the location of a live/work unit within a mixed-use or similar type development. 
31.  "Maintenance, normal" means the painting and cleaning of signs and/or the replacement of like parts of a nonstructural nature, e.g., lights, panels, trim pieces and other similar items. 
32.  Marquee. See "Theatre, marquee." 
33.  "Mural" means a two-dimensional piece of art which is applied to the flat surface or wall of a building. 
34.  "Neon" means a light source that is generated by inserting electrical energy into a chemically inert gas. 
35.  "Noncommercial message" means any wording, logo or other representation that does not directly or indirectly, name, advertise or calls attention to a commercial or industrial business, product, good, service or other commercial or industrial activity. 
36.  "Noncommercial sign" means a sign that does not name, advertise or call attention to a commercial or industrial business, commodity, product, good, service or other commercial or industrial activity for a commercial or industrial purpose. 
37.  "Nonconforming" means an advertising structure or sign which was lawfully erected and maintained in conformance with the requirements in effect at the time, and which has subsequently come under new amended requirements and no longer complies with the requirements. 
38.  "Obscene" means a sign that includes materials that appeal predominantly to a prurient interest in sexual conduct, depict or describe sexual conduct in a patently offensive way, and lack serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value. 
39.  "Off-site billboard" means a sign identifying a use, facility, service or product that is not located, sold or manufactured on the same premises as the sign. 
40.  "On-site sign" means any sign which directs attention to an occupancy, business, commodity, good, product, service or other activity conducted, sold or offered upon the site where the sign is maintained. For the purposes of this title, all signs with noncommercial messages are deemed to be "on-site," regardless of location. 
41.  Pennants. See "Flags, banners or pennants." 
42.  "Permanent" means a sign constructed of durable materials and intended to exist for the duration of time that the use or occupant is located on the premises. 
43.  "Primary street frontage" means the primary street frontage is the most prominent public right-of-way as related to a lot of record. 
44.  "Private information" means signs that are required or permitted by law to be posted, or signs displayed on private property that are intended to preserve and protect public health, safety and general welfare. Examples include, but are not limited to: beware of dog signs, no soliciting signs, and no trespassing signs. 
45.  "Portable" means an "A" frame sign or other sign attached to a devise used to allow the sign to be rolled or moved around. 
46.  "Projecting" or "suspended" means a sign, other than a wall sign, that is suspended from or supported by a structure attached to a building and projecting outward from the building. 
47.  "Public information" means a sign that has been displayed by a federal, state or local agency for the purpose of protecting public health, safety and general welfare. 
48.  "Real estate" means a sign indicating that a property or any portion thereof is available for inspection, sale, lease, rent or directing people to a property, and does not include temporary subdivision signs. 
49.  "Roof" means a sign mounted on the roof of a building or supported entirely by the building and which projects above the highest point of a building with a flat roof, the eave line of a building with a gambrel, gable or hip roof or the deck line of a building with a mansard roof. 
50.  "Sign area" means the surface of a sign. 
51.  "Sign face" means that portion of a sign intended to be viewed from one direction at a time. 
52.  "Sign height" means the vertical distance from the lowest point of the base of the sign to the highest point of the structure, where the lowest point of the base of the sign structure does not include fill, planters or other materials that artificially increase the sign height. 
53.  "Sign program" means a process for reviewing and approving nonresidential or mixed use signage for larger sites and buildings, and for properties with multiple tenants for the purpose of ensuring aesthetic compatibility and equitable signage area. 
54.  "Sign structure" means the supporting framework or bracing of a sign and incidental to the sign display. 
55.  "Subdivision" means a sign that identifies a subdivision project with units for sale. 
56.  "Temporary" means a sign intended to be displayed for a limited period of time and capable of being viewed at a building frontage, including but not limited to: construction and subdivision signs, campaign signs, real estate signs, and special event signs. 
57.  "Theatre marquee" means a sign that is attached to or otherwise made part of a permanent roof-like structure and projects beyond the building wall in the form of a large canopy to provide protection from the weather. 
58.  "Three-dimensional" means a sign that has a relief image on its surface that exceeds six inches. 
59.  "Time/temperature" means the area of any time and/or temperature device incorporated into a sign shall not be included in the calculation of total sign area. 
60.  "Unsafe sign" means a sign posing an immediate peril or reasonably foreseeable threat of injury or damage to persons or property on account of the condition of the sign structure or its mounting mechanism. 
61.  "Vehicle" means a sign that is used or intended for use as a portable sign and is towed or affixed to a vehicle and used to display commercial or noncommercial messages primarily for advertising purposes unrelated to the principal use of the vehicle. 
62.  "Wall" means a sign that is attached or painted on the exterior wall of a structure with the display surface of the sign approximately parallel to the building wall. 
63.  "Window" means a sign posted, painted, placed, or affixed on the interior or exterior of a window exposed to public view, and includes an interior sign that faces a window exposed to public view and is located within two feet of the window. This definition does not include window displays of merchandise offered for sale, so long as such displays are located more than two feet from the window on the interior. 
"Single-family residential": See "Dwelling, single-family, attached or detached." 
"Single-room occupancy (SRO) living unit facility" means a residential development containing secure rooms, of a smaller size than normally found in multiple dwellings, which are rented to a one- or two-person household. SRO living units are provided for a weekly or monthly period of time, in exchange for an agreed payment or a fixed amount of money or other compensation. 
"Single-room occupancy (SRO) residential hotel" means a commercial facility with individual secure rooms which are rented to a one- or two-person household. SRO residential hotels are provided on a daily, weekly, or monthly basis, in exchange for an agreed payment of a fixed amount of money or other compensation. 
"Site": See "Lot." 
"Site area": See "Lot area." 
"Slope" means the vertical distance divided by the horizontal distance. 
"Spa": See "Bath house/spa." 
"Specific plan" means a plan consisting of text, maps, and other documents and exhibits regulating development within a defined area of the city, consistent with the Rohnert Park general plan and the provisions of Chapter 17.06, Article VIII of this title and Government Code Section 65450 et seq. 
"Stable, commercial" means housing for horses owned and used by someone other than the occupant or owner of the residence and including related shows, lessons, clinics, and similar activities. 
"Stable, private" means housing for horses owned by the occupant or owner of the residence. Raising, feeding, maintaining and breeding of not more than one horse per twenty thousand square feet of site area. 
"Story" means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If there is no floor above it, then the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it shall be considered a story. 
"Street" means any thoroughfare, alley, way, boulevard, or road, either public or private, which is used or is to be used for access to abutting land. 
"Structural alteration" means any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders. 
"Structure" means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground. 
"Structure, accessory": See "Accessory building or use." 
"Structure, attached": See "Attached structure." 
"Student tenant" means an individual who is enrolled or has made application to and been accepted at a university, college, or trade school and who is residing in a dwelling unit governed by this ordinance. 
"Supportive housing" means a residential use that provides housing with no limit on length of stay to adults with low incomes having one or more disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other chronic health conditions, or individuals eligible for services provided under the Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act (Division 4.5 (commencing with Section 4500) of the Welfare and Institutions Code) and may, among other populations, include families with children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the foster care system, individuals exiting from institutional settings, veterans, or homeless people. Supportive housing is linked to on-site or off-site services that assist the tenants with the retention of the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing their ability to live and, when possible, to work in the community. Supportive housing shall be considered a residential use and only subject to those restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone. 
"Telecom center" means facilities made to house equipment instead of people. 
"Temporary use/event/building" means a use, event, or building which will be in existence either seasonally or for a period of two years or less. 
"Tobacco store" shall be as defined in Chapter 8.32. 
"Townhouse": See "Dwelling, single-family, attached." 
"Trailer" means a vehicle without motor power, designed so that it can be drawn by a motor vehicle, to be used for human habitation or for the transporting of personal property. 
"Transitional housing" means temporary housing provided for a longer term (generally up to twenty-four months) with varying degrees of support services (e.g., life skills training, financial management, job hunting skills, as well as case management and counseling) to enable homeless persons to successfully transition to and maintain permanent housing. Transitional housing shall be considered a residential use and only subject to those restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone. 
"Tree" means any living, woody plant having a single trunk diameter of four inches or more, or a combination of multiple trunks with a total diameter of eight inches or more. The diameter shall be measured at a point 4.5 vertical feet above the undisturbed, natural grade. The diameter is the circumference divided by 3.14. The following six definitions shall apply when implementing Chapter 17.15 (Tree Preservation and Protection): 
1.  "Alter" means to take an action that could foreseeably diminish the health or vigor of a tree, including, but not limited to, excessive or improper pruning of a tree, grade changes around or near a tree, excessive irrigation of a tree, and trenching within the root zone of a tree. "Alter" does not include periodic trimming, shaping, thinning, or pruning of a tree to preserve or protect its health, growth, or appearance in accordance with accepted arboricultural standards and practices. 
2.  "Dripline" means a line drawn on the ground around a tree directly under its outermost branches which locates where rainwater tends to drip from the tree. When depicted on a map, the dripline will appear as an irregular shaped circle that follows the contour of the tree's branches as seen from overhead. 
3.  "Protected" means and includes any tree which is not exempt pursuant to Section 17.15.030.B (Exemptions), any tree which was required to be planted as environmental mitigation, or any tree identified by council resolution as having protected tree status. 
4.  "Relocate" means to move a tree from the place where it is growing and replant it in another location in accordance with accepted arboricultural standards and practices and with the intent and a reasonable expectation that the tree will survive and grow in the new location. 
5.  "Remove" means the cutting down of a tree or the relocation of a tree in a manner that is not in accordance with accepted arboricultural standards and practices. 
6.  Value. The value of a tree shall be determined using the latest edition of the "Guide for Plant Appraisal," published by the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers. The appraisals shall be completed on the most recent "Form for Northern California," published by the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA). 
"Truck terminal" means an area or building where cargo is stored and where trucks load and unload cargo on a regular basis. 
"Use" means the purpose for which land or premises, or a building thereon, is designed, arranged, intended, occupied or maintained. 
"Use, accessory": See "Accessory building or use." 
"Utilities, major" means generating plants, electrical substations, switching buildings, refuse collection processing, recycling or disposal facilities, water or waste treatment plants, and similar facilities of public agencies, public utilities, or private companies. 
"Utilities, minor" means utility facilities that are necessary to support legally established uses and involve only minor structures such as switching boxes, electrical distribution lines and underground water and sewer lines. 
"Warehousing" means the use of building or buildings for the storage of goods of any type, when such building or buildings contain more than five hundred square feet of storage space and where no or minimal retail is conducted. 
"Watercourses": See "Natural watercourses." 
"Yard" means open, unoccupied space, other than a court, and unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except where specifically provided by this code, in the lot on which a building is situated. The classifications of yards are: 
1.  "Front yard" means an area extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the front lot line and the nearest line or point of the main building. Front yards shall be measured by a line at right angles to the front lot line, or by the radial line in the case of a curved front lot line. For corner lots, the front yard shall be established as the area extending across the narrowest width of the lot. 
2.  "Interior yard" means a rear yard or side yard open, surrounded full or in part by structure, effectively separated from vehicular circulation and parking. 
3.  "Rear yard" means a yard extending across the full width of the lot between the rear lot line and the nearest line or point of the main building. 
4.  "Side yard" means a yard between the side or street side line of the lot and the nearest line of the building and extending from the front line of the lot to the rear yard. 
  
"Zero lot line" means the location of a structure on a lot in such a manner that one or more of the structure's sides rest directly on a lot line. 
  
"Zoning map" means a map or maps that are a part of the zoning ordinance and delineate the boundaries of zone districts. 
(Ord. 781 § 4, 2007; Ord. 769 § 3 (part), 2007; Ord. 765 § 2 (part), 2006; Ord. 739 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 695 § 3, 2003) 
(Ord. No. 844, § 2(Exh. A), 3-13-2012; Ord. No. 854, § 2(Exh. A), 7-9-2013; Ord. No. 876, § 3(Exh. A), 4-8-2014; Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. A), 5-26-2015; Ord. No. 896 , § 4(Exh. A), 2-9-2016; Ord. No. 906 , §§ 4, 5, 4-11-2017; Ord. No. 908 , § 4, 8-8-2017 )  
Chapter 17.06 - LAND USE REGULATIONS  
Article I. - Residential Zoning Districts 
 
17.06.010 - Purpose. 
The residential districts are intended to achieve the following purposes: 
A.  Reserve residential areas for a broad range of dwelling types and densities, which meet the diverse economic and social needs of the residents consistent with sound standards of public health and safety. 
B.  Ensure the provision of light, air, privacy, and open space. 
C.  Protect residential neighborhoods from excessive noise, illumination, unsightliness, odors, dust, dirt, smoke, vibration, heat, glare, and other objectionable influences. 
D.  Minimize congestion and avoid the overloading of public services and utilities. (Ord. 695 § 3, 2003) 
(Ord. No. 854, § 2(Exh. A), 7-9-2013; Ord. No. 897 , (Exh. B), 4-12-2016)  
17.06.020 - Districts. 
A.  R-R: Rural Residential. This district is intended for very low-density residential development on large lots of typically forty thousand sq. ft. or more that convey a "rural" or agricultural character. These districts are located at the perimeter of the city and provide a transition from the more urban development to the open space/agricultural areas outside of the city. This district is consistent with the "Estate Residential" general plan designation. 
B.  R-E: Estate Residential. This district is intended for very low-density residential development on large estate size lots of typically seventeen thousand sq. ft. or more. This district also is located at the perimeter of the city to provide a transition from the more urban development to the open space/agricultural areas outside the city. This district is consistent with the "Estate Residential" general plan designation. 
C.  R-L: Residential-Low Density. This district is comprised of four sub-districts: R-L-5,000, R-L-6,000, R-L-8,000, and R-L-10,000 (Note: numbers represent minimum lot size). These sub-districts are intended to promote the development of single-family detached dwellings in a suburban setting with a variety of minimum lot sizes. This district is consistent with the "Low Density" general plan designation. The floor area ratio for this district is 0.40. 
D.  R-M: Residential-Medium Density. This district is intended for attached and detached single-family housing and duplexes as part of a planned residential development with a minimum lot size of three thousand seven hundred sq. ft. Multi-family housing is not permitted. Side-by-side duplexes not separated by a property line or without individual heating systems are permitted. This district is consistent with the "Medium Density" general plan designation. The floor area ratio for this district is 0.55. 
E.  R-H: Residential-High Density. This district is comprised of two sub-districts: R-H-2,000 and R-H-1,800 (Note: numbers represent minimum lot area per unit). These subdistricts are intended to permit a wide range of housing types, ranging from single-family attached to multi-family, and are intended for specific areas where higher densities may be appropriate. This district is consistent with the "High Density" general plan designation. The floor area ratio for this district is 1.15. (Ord. 695 § 3, 2003) 
F.  DTR-H: Downtown Residential-High Density. This district is located within the Central Rohnert Park PDA planning area as identified in the general plan and is intended to allow for residential development proximate to the downtown area. This district is consistent with the "High Density" general plan designation. Unless otherwise specified, all special provisions, development standards and other requirements and limitations shall be the same as the R-H district. 
(Ord. No. 854, § 2(Exh. A), 7-9-2013; Ord. No. 897 , (Exh. B), 4-12-2016)  
17.06.030 - Permitted uses. 
The following is a list of land uses and the residential districts within which they are permitted as follows: 
P  = Permitted. 
C  = Conditionally-permitted by planning commission. 
A  = Administrative permit. 
Z  = Certificate of zoning compliance. 
T  = Temporary conditional permit. 
I  = Uses allowed as incidental to a primary use. 
Land uses that are not specifically listed are not permitted unless determined, by the planning and community development director, to be substantially similar to a listed use. If the listed land use is followed by a number or a section reference in parenthesis, that number or reference directs the reader to the corresponding land use footnote or special provision which follow this chapter. 
Land Use Category	R-R/R-E
Districts 	R-L
District 	R-M
District 	R-H
District 	DTR-H
District 
Accessory Dwelling Unit (X) 	Z 	Z 	Z 	Z 	
Affordable Housing Density Bonus (H) 	A 	A 	A 	A 	
Agricultural Uses 					
 •  Pasturing and Grazing (small scale) 	P 				
 •  Other 	C 				
Bed and Breakfast Inn (D) 	C 			C 	
Community Center 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Communication Facilities (F) 	C/A 	C/A 	C/A 	C/A 	
Day Care Center 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Day Care Home, Family (G) 					
 •  Small (8 or fewer children) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
 •  Large (9 or more children) 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Equestrian Uses 					
 •  Stables, Private 	P 				
 •  Stables, Commercial 	C 				
Family Care Home/Community Care 					
 •  Small (6 or less persons) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
 •  Large (7 or more persons) 				C 	
Farmworker Housing 	P 			P 	
Homeless Shelters (M) 					
 •  Small (6 or less persons) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
 •  Large (7 or more persons) 				P 	
Kennel (Commercial and Noncommercial) (O) 	C 				
Manufactured Housing (Q) 	Z 	Z 	Z 	Z 	
Mobile Home Park or Subdivision 
(see Section 17.06.120) 			C 	C 	
Multi-Family Housing 					
 •  Duplexes-single story 			P 	P 	
 •  Other 				P 	
Private/Public Utility Facility (F) 					
 •  Minor 	Z/C 	Z/C 	Z/C 	Z/C 	
 •  Major 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Private Schools 					
 •  Elementary and Secondary 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
 •  High School 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
 •  Vocational/Trade Schools 	C 			C 	
Public Facility-Non-city owned or proposed 
(see also Public Utility) 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Public Facility-City owned or proposed 
(subject to Planning Commission review on referral from City Council) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Rooming or Boarding House 					
 •  Single Room Occupancy Living Unit Facility (Z) 	A 			A 	
 •  Fraternity/Sorority 				C 	
Recovery Facility 					
 •  Small (6 or less persons) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
 •  Large (7 or more persons) 				C 	
Religious Assembly 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Residential Care Facility 
(Congregate Care/Assisted Living) 					
 •  Small (6 or less persons) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
 •  Large (7 or more persons) 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Short-term Rental (single room) (KK) 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 
Single Family Dwellings 	P 	P 	P 	C 	
 •  Accessory Uses/Structures 					
 •  Antenna, Vertical/Satellite Dish (F) 	P/C 	P/C 	P/C 	P/C 	
 
(Ord. 739 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 695 § 3, 2003; Ord. No. 844, § 2(Exh. A), 3-13-2012; Ord. No. 854, § 2(Exh. A), 7-9-2013; Ord. No. 897 , (Exh. B), 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 906 , § 6, 4-11-2017; Ord. No. 908 , § 6, 8-8-2017)  
Article II. - Commercial Zoning Districts 
 
17.06.040 - Purpose. 
The commercial districts are intended to provide appropriate areas for office uses and retail and service establishments that serve the needs of the city and area communities, as well as for mixed residential/commercial development where appropriate. The districts are designed to provide for the effective integration of commercial areas with adjacent uses, so that impacts related to traffic, noise, illumination and other potential concerns are minimized. The commercial districts are also intended to foster the development of employment-generating uses that will benefit existing and future residents of the city and the surrounding region. (Ord. 790 § 4, 2007: Ord. 695 § 3, 2003) 
(Ord. No. 854, § 2(Exh. A), 7-9-2013)  
17.06.050 - Districts. 
A.  C-O: Professional/Administrative Office District. This district allows for the development of administrative, financial, business, professional, medical and public offices. Retail uses within this district are generally limited to those that provide support services to the office uses. This district is consistent with the "Office" general plan designation. The floor area for this district is 1.0. 
B.  C-N: Neighborhood Commercial District. This district is intended to accommodate businesses that provide goods and services to nearby residential neighborhoods, generally within an area of a one-mile radius or less. Typical uses found in this district include limited commercial offices, and retail stores and service establishments that are compatible with, and dependent upon, nearby residential developments. This district is consistent with the "Neighborhood Commercial" general plan designation. The floor area ratio for this district is 0.4. 
C.  C-R: Regional Commercial District. This district allows operations that provide goods and services that serve the community and outlying areas within an eight to twenty mile radius. It is primarily reserved for larger shopping centers and can accommodate "big box" retailers. This district is consistent with the "Regional Commercial" general plan designation. The floor area ratio for this district is 0.4, and 1.5 for hotel and motel projects. (Ord. 695 § 3, 2003) 
(Ord. No. 854, § 2(Exh. A), 7-9-2013)  
17.06.060 - Permitted uses. 
The following is a list of land uses and the commercial districts within which they are permitted as follows: 
P  = Permitted. 
C  = Conditionally-permitted by planning commission. 
A  = Administrative permit. 
Z  = Certificate of zoning compliance. 
T  = Temporary conditional permit. 
I  = Uses allowed as incidental to a primary use 
Uses involving chemicals may also be subject to requirements regarding hazardous materials (footnote 11), in which case more restrictive requirements shall apply. Land uses that are not specifically listed are not permitted unless determined, by the planning and community development director, to be substantially similar to a listed use. If the listed land use is followed by a number or a section reference in parenthesis, that number or reference directs the reader to the corresponding land use footnote or special provision which follow this chapter. 
Land Use Category 	C-O 
District 	C-N 
District 	C-R 
District 
Appliance Repair Service 
 *  Minor (e.g., computers, televisions) 		P 	P 
Amusement Center (e.g., miniature golf, golf driving range, bowling alley, cyber cafe) (B) 
 *  Small (e.g., indoors; commercial shopping center) 		A 	A 
 *  Large (e.g., indoors or outdoors; stand alone facility) 			C 
Animal Hospital/Veterinary Clinic 	C 	C 	C 
Antique Store 		P 	P 
Arcade Games/Cybercafes (B) 	P/C 	P/A 	P/A 
Automobile Service Station (C) 		C 	C 
Bakery (Retail Sales) 	P(I) 	P 	P 
Bank/Savings and Loan/Credit Union (see Drive-Through Windows) (I) 	P 	P 	P 
Bar/Nightclub (R) 			C 
Barber/Beauty Shop/Tanning Salon 	P(I) 	P 	P 
Bath House/Spa 	C 		C 
Bed and Breakfast Inn (D) 		C 	
Billiards Parlor (R) 			C 
Broadcasting Studio 	C 		C 
Car Title Loan Business 			C 
Car Wash 		C 	C 
Check Cashing Store 			P 
Clubs and Lodges 	C 	C 	C 
Commercial Filming Studio 	P 		C 
Communication Facility (F) 	C/A 	C/A 	C/A 
Convention Center 	C 		C 
Cultural Institution (e.g., museums) 	C 	C 	C 
Day Care Center (Nonresidential) 	C 	C 	C 
Drive-Through Window (any use) (I) 			C 
Drive-Through Window (pharmacy) (I) 	C 	C 	C 
Dry Cleaning Outlet 	P 	P 	P 
Firearm Dealers and Firearm Ammunition Dealers (J) 			C 
Florist 	P(I) 	P 	P 
Food Store 
 *  Convenience Store 	P 	P 	P 
 *  Supermarket 		C 	P 
Funeral Parlor/Mortuary 			C 
Furniture Store 
 *  Small/Custom Order 		P 	P 
 *  Large 			P 
Hardware Store 		P 	P 
Health Club 	A 	A 	A 
Home Improvement Store 			P 
Homeless Shelter (M) 
 *  Small (6 or less persons) 	P 	P 	P 
 *  Large (7 or more persons) 	P 	P 	P 
Hospital 	C 		C 
Hotel/Motel (No in-room food preparation unless applied for and approved as part of project approval or separately.) 			P 
Interior Decorator 		P 	P 
Kennel (Commercial) (O) 			C 
Laboratory 
 *  In conjunction with a medical, dental or optical use 	P(I) 	P(I) 	P(I) 
 *  As a primary use 	P 		
Laundromat 		P 	
Liquor Store (Off-Sale) (R) 		C 	C 
Live Entertainment 		C 	C 
Live/Work (P) 		C 	C 
Massage Therapy (see Chapter 8.36) 	P 	P 	P 
Medical Clinic 	P 	P 	P 
Microbrewery with restaurant 	C 		C 
Nursery (Horticulture) 			P 
Office 
 *  Professional and Administrative 	P 	P 	P 
 *  Medical and Dental 	P 	P 	P 
Paint Store 		A 	P 
Parking Lot (Commercial) 	A 	C 	A 
Pawn Shop 			C 
Payday Loan Establishment 			P 
Pharmacy (see Drive-Through Window) (I) (Does not include a Medical Marijuana Dispensary, which is a prohibited use within the City) 	P(I) 	P 	P 
Photography Studio 		P 	P 
Printing and Blueprinting 
 *  Small Copy Center 	P 	P 	P 
 *  Print Shop 	P 		P 
Private/Public Utility Facility (F) 
 *  Minor 	Z/C 	Z/C 	Z/C 
 *  Major 	C 	C 	C 
Public Assembly 	A 	A 	A 
Public Facility—Non-city owned or proposed (see also Public Utility) 	C 	C 	C 
Public Facility—City owned or proposed (subject to Planning Commission review on referral from City Council) 	P 	P 	P 
Recovery Facility 
 *  Small (6 or less persons) 	A 	A 	A 
 *  Large (7 or more persons) 	C 		C 
Recycling Facility (V) 
 *  Reverse Vending Machines 		P 	P 
 *  Small Collection Facility 	A 	A 	A 
Religious Assembly 	C 	C 	C 
Research and Development (Office Type Uses) 	P 		
Residential Care Facility 
 *  Congregate Care/Assisted Living 	C 	C 	C 
 *  Convalescent Hospital 	C 	C 	C 
 *  Senior Housing (Independent Living) 	C 	C 	C 
Residential uses as a part of a mixed use project when located in the same building as a nonresidential use 	C 	C 	C 
Restaurant 
 *  General 	P 	P 	P 
 *  Fast Food (see also Drive-Through Window) (I) 	C 	C 	C 
 *  Outdoor and Sidewalk Cafe (S) 	A 	A 	A 
 *  Take Out/Delivery 	P 	P 	P 
 *  With Bar and Live Entertainment (R) 	C 		C 
Retail, General and Specialty 	P(I) 	P 	P 
 *  Department or Big Box Retail 			P 
Retail Warehouse Store (e.g., big box) 			P 
School 
 *  Elementary or Secondary 		C 	C 
 *  High School 	C 		C 
 *  Trade School 	C 		C 
 *  College 	C 		
Sign Shop 
 *  Small (e.g., typically located in a small office/retail space) 	P 	P 	P 
 *  Large 	P 		C 
Single Room Occupancy Living Unit Facility (Z) 			A 
Single Room Occupancy Residential Hotel (Z) 			A 
Studio (e.g., Dance, Martial Arts) 	P 	P 	P 
Tailor 	P(I) 	P 	P 
Tattoo/Piercing Studio 		C 	C 
Telecom Center 	A 		
Temporary Use/Event (EE, see also DD) 
 •  Arts and Crafts Show 	T 	T 	T 
 •  Circus/Carnival 	T 	T 	T 
 •  Flea Market/Swap Meet 	A 	A 	A 
 •  Live Entertainment 	A 	A 	A 
 •  Outdoor Exhibit 	T 	T 	T 
 •  Recreation Event 	A 	A 	A 
 •  Religious Assembly 	A 	A 	A 
 •  Retail Sales 	T 	T 	T 
 •  Seasonal Lot/Activity (e.g., Christmas trees, pumpkins) 	T 	T 	T 
 •  Trade Fair 	T 	T 	T 
Theater 			C 
Thrift Shop 	P 	P 	P 
Tobacco store (retail or wholesale) and private smoker's lounge when attached to a tobacco store (regulated by Municipal Code Chapters 8.32 and 8.33) 			C 
Transit Facility 	C 		C 
Upholstery Shop 		A 	A 
Vehicular Dealerships/Rentals (incl. boats, RVs and Farm and Construction Equipment (FF) 			C 
Vehicular Repair (including boats) (GG) 			C 
 
(Ord. 790 § 5, 2007; Ord. 781 § 5, 2007; Ord. 751 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 739 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 695 § 3, 2003) 
(Ord. No. 813, § 4B, 4-28-2009; Ord. No. 844, § 2(Exh. A), 3-13-2012; Ord. No. 854, § 2(Exh. A), 7-9-2013; Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. A), 5-26-2015; Ord. No. 896 , § 4(Exh. A), 2-9-2016)  
17.06.070 - Miscellaneous provisions. 
A.  In any commercial district, all operations shall be conducted entirely within a completely enclosed structure, except for off-street parking and loading areas, exhibits of goods sold or manufactured on the premises, automobile service stations, outdoor dining areas, nurseries and garden shops, temporary uses/events, utility substations, and equipment installations. 
B.  In the C-N district all products produced on the site of any of the permitted uses shall be sold primarily as retail on the site where produced. 
C.  In the C-N district any retail and/or entertainment commercial uses that are within five hundred feet of any residential district, measured from the property lines, whose hours of operation are before 6:00 a.m. and/or after 10:00 p.m. must obtain a conditional use permit. (Ord. 695 § 3, 2003) 
(Ord. No. 854, § 2(Exh. A), 7-9-2013)  
Article III. - Industrial Zoning Districts 
 
17.06.080 - Purpose. 
The industrial district is intended to provide appropriate areas for businesses that manufacture, process, assemble, repair, or otherwise create and maintain goods, merchandise and equipment. The district is designed to provide for the effective integration of industrial areas with adjacent uses, so that impacts related to traffic, noise, illumination, smoke, hazardous materials and other potential concerns are minimized. The industrial district is also intended to foster the development of an industrial base that will benefit existing and future residents of the city and the surrounding region. (Ord. 695 § 3, 2003) 
(Ord. No. 854, § 2(Exh. A), 7-9-2013)  
17.06.090 - Districts. 
I-L: Limited Industrial District. This district allows for campus-like environments for corporate headquarters, research and development facilities, offices, light manufacturing and assembly, industrial processing, general service, warehousing, storage and distribution, and service commercial type use. Retail activities are generally limited to those that support the industrial type uses. This district is consistent with the "Industrial" general plan designation. The floor area ration for this district is 0.5, or 1.0 for projects that meet specific criteria specified in the city's design guidelines. (Ord. 695 § 3, 2003) 
(Ord. No. 854, § 2(Exh. A), 7-9-2013)  
17.06.100 - Permitted uses. 
The following is a list of land uses and the limited industrial district within which they are permitted as follows: 
P  = Permitted. 
C  = Conditionally-permitted by planning commission. 
A  = Administrative permit. 
Z  = Certificate of zoning compliance. 
T  = Temporary conditional permit. 
I  = Uses allowed as incidental to a primary use. 
Uses involving chemicals may also be subject to requirements regarding hazardous materials (footnote 11), in which case more restrictive requirement shall apply. Land uses that are not specifically listed are not permitted unless determined, by the planning and community development director, to be substantially similar to a listed use. If the listed land use is followed by a number or a section reference in parenthesis, that number or reference directs the reader to the corresponding land use footnote or special provision which follow this chapter. 
Land Use Category 	I-L District 
Adult Business (subject to the provisions and limitations of Chapters 8.37, 8.38, and 8.39) (A) 	C 
Agricultural Processing (includes viticulture) 	C 
Agricultural Services 	A 
Aircraft Related Industry 	A 
Animal Hospital/Veterinary Clinic 	A 
Ambulance Service 	A 
Appliance Repair Service 	P 
Auto Parts Sales and Installation 	P 
Automobile Service Station (C) 	C 
Beverage Bottling Plant 	P 
Boat Building 	P 
Brewery/Distillery/Winery (R) 	A 
Broadcasting Studio 	A 
Car Wash 	P 
Clubs and Lodges 	C 
Commercial Filming Studio 	P 
Communication Facility (F) 	C/A 
Contractors' Storage Yard 	C 
Convention Center 	C 
Cooperage 	P 
Cultural Institution (e.g. museums) 	C 
Dairy Products Processing 	P 
Day Care Center (Nonresidential) 	C(I) 
Dry Cleaning Plant 	A 
Exterminator 	P 
Food Processor 	C 
Fuel Storage 	C 
Funeral Parlor/Mortuary 	C 
Health Club 	P(I) 
Household Hazardous Waste Facility 	C 
Household Services/Contractors (e.g. plumbing, painting, electrical, interior decorating) 	P 
Kennel (Commercial) (O) 	C 
Laundries/Linen Supply Service 	P 
Light Manufacturing and/or Assembly (Laboratory requirements to Biosafety Levels 1 and 2) 	P 
Lumber Yard 	P 
Massage Therapy (see Chapter 8.36) 	P(I) 
Medical Laboratory 	A 
Microbrewery 
 •  with restaurant 	C 
 •  without restaurant 	P 
Nursery (Horticulture) 	P 
Office 	A 
Parking Lot (Commercial) 	C 
Parcel Delivery Service 	P 
Personal Services 
 •  As a Principal Use 	A 
 •  As an Incidental Use 	I 
Photographic Plant 	P 
Printing and Blueprinting 	P 
Private/Public Utility Facility (F) 
 •  Minor 	Z/C 
 •  Major 	C 
Public Assembly 	C 
Public Facility—Non-City owned or proposed (see also Public Utility) 	C 
Public Facility—City owned or proposed (subject to Planning Commission review on referral from City Council) 	P 
Publishing 	P 
Recycling Facility (V) 
 •  Reverse Vending Machines 	P 
 •  Small Collection Facility 	A 
 •  Large Collection Facility 	C 
 •  Light Processing Facility 	C 
Religious Assembly 	C 
Research and Development (Laboratory requirements to Biosafety Levels 1 and 2 only) 	P 
Restaurant (I) 
 •  As an Incidental Use 	A 
Retail Use 
 •  As an Incidental Use 	A 
Retail Warehouse 	C 
School 
 •  Trade School 	A 
 •  High School 	C 
Security Guard Residence 	I 
Sign Shop 	P 
Stone Works 	P 
Studio (e.g. Dance, Martial Arts) 	A 
Taxidermist 	A 
Telecom Center 	A 
Temporary Use/Event (EE, see also DD) 
 •  Arts and Crafts Show 	T 
 •  Circus/Carnival 	T 
 •  Flea Market/Swap Meet 	A 
 •  Live Entertainment 	A 
 •  Outdoor Exhibit 	A 
 •  Recreational Event 	A 
 •  Religious Assembly 	A 
 •  Retail Sales 	A 
 •  Seasonal Lot/Activity (e.g. Christmas trees, pumpkins) 	T 
 •  Trade Fair 	T 
Towing Service/Impound Yard 	A 
Trucking Terminal (including moving and storage) 	A 
Upholstery Shop 	P 
Vehicular Dealerships/Rentals (incl. boats, farm and construction equip.) (FF) 	A 
Vehicle Repair/Body Shops (GG) 	P 
Warehousing/Wholesaling 	P 
 
(Ord. 751 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 739 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 695 § 3, 2003) 
(Ord. No. 854, § 2(Exh. A), 7-9-2013; Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. A), 5-26-2015; Ord. No. 905 , § 4(Exh. A), 3-28-2017)  
Article IV. - Mixed-Use Zoning Districts 
 
17.06.110 - Purpose. 
The Mixed Use District and the Downtown Mixed Use District encourage the siting of compatible businesses, stores, institutions, service organizations, and residences in close proximity to one another so as to create self-sufficient neighborhoods within the city. The district promotes such neighborhood development in order to minimize reliance on the automobile, resulting in a reduction in vehicle miles traveled and traffic congestion. These districts are intended to create pedestrian-oriented environments that provide access to residents' basic everyday requirements, foster an active street life, enhance the vitality of local businesses, and provide employment opportunities close to home for residents of the city. The preferred pattern of development will be ground floor commercial uses, with residential and/or office uses located on the upper floor(s). Special urban design amenities (pedestrian facilities, landscaping, public spaces, etc.) would be included in the district to create recognizable, pedestrian friendly activity centers. On-site parking would be provided for residential uses and parking for businesses would generally be on-street and in parking garages or off-site parking lots. Convenient vehicular and pedestrian/bicycle access from surrounding neighborhoods and transit service would also be components of this district. (Ord. 695 § 3, 2003) 
(Ord. No. 854, § 2(Exh. A), 7-9-2013; Ord. No. 897, (Exh. B), 4-12-2016)  
17.06.120 - District descriptions. 
A.  M-U: Mixed Use District. This district allows for the development of integrated centers that combine a supportive mix of land uses, either within the same building or in clusters of buildings. This district is consistent with the "Mixed Use" general plan designation. The floor area ratio for this district is 1.5 for non-residential projects, and 2.0 for mixed residential/residential projects. (Ord. 695 § 3, 2003) 
B.  DTM-U: Downtown Mixed Use District. This district allows for the development of integrated centers that combine a supportive mix of land uses, either within the same building or in clusters of buildings. This district is consistent with the "Downtown Mixed Use" general plan designation. The floor area ratio for this district is 1.5 for non-residential projects, and 2.0 for mixed residential/residential projects. Non-residential development is required within this designation and residential development is only permitted as part of a mixed use project. 
(Ord. No. 854, § 2(Exh. A), 7-9-2013; Ord. No. 897, (Exh. B), 4-12-2016)  
17.06.130 - Permitted uses. 
The following is a list of land uses and the Mixed Use District within which they are permitted as follows: 
P  = Permitted. 
C  = Conditionally-permitted by planning commission. 
A  = Administrative permit. 
Z  = Certificate of zoning compliance. 
T  = Temporary conditional permit. 
I  = Uses allowed as incidental to a primary use. 
Uses involving chemicals may also be subject to requirements regarding hazardous materials (footnote 11), in which case more restrictive requirements shall apply. Land uses that are not specifically listed are not permitted unless determined, by the planning and community development director, to be substantially similar to a listed use. If the listed land use is followed by a number or a section reference in parenthesis, that number or reference directs the reader to the corresponding land use footnote or special provision which follow this chapter. 
Land Use Category	M-U District 	DTM-U District 
Amusement Center (e.g., video games, other indoor amusements) 	C 	C 
Animal Hospital/Veterinary Clinic 	A 	A 
Antique Store 	P 	P 
Bakery (Retail Sales) 	P 	P 
Bank/Savings and Loan/Credit Union (drive-through windows not permitted) 	P 	P 
Bar/Nightclub (R) 	P 	P 
Barber/Beauty Shop 	P 	P 
Bath House/Spa 	C 	C 
Bed and Breakfast Inns (D) 	A 	A 
Billiards Parlor (R) 	C 	C 
Clubs and Lodges 	C 	C 
Communication Facility (F) 	C/A 	C 
Cultural Institutions (e.g., museums) 	A 	A 
Day Care Center (Non-Residential) 	C 	C 
Dry Cleaning Outlet 	P 	P 
Florist 	P 	P 
Food Store 		
 • Under 15,000 square feet 	P 	P 
 • Between 15,000 sq. ft. and 40,000 sq. ft. 	C 	C 
Hardware Store 	P 	P 
Health Club 	P 	P 
Hotel (No food preparation unless applied for and approved as part of project approval or separately.) 	C 	C 
Interior Decorator 	P 	P 
Laboratory 		
 • In conjunction with a medical, dental or optical use only 	P(I) 	P(1) 
Laundromat 	P 	N 
Liquor Store (Off-Sale) (R) 	C 	C 
Live Entertainment (R) 	C 	C 
Massage Therapy (see Chapter 9.80) 	P 	P 
Medical Clinic 	A 	A 
Microbrewery (with restaurant) 	C 	A 
Office 		
 • Professional and Administrative 	P 	P 
 • Medical and Dental 	P 	P 
Parking Lot (Commercial) 	C, P(I) 	C, P(I) 
Pharmacy (drive-through windows not permitted) (Does not include a Medical Marijuana Dispensary, which is a prohibited use within the City.) 	P 	P 
Photography Studio 	P 	P 
Printing 		
 • Small Copy Center 	P 	P 
Public Assembly 	C 	C 
Public Facility (e.g., police and fire stations, community centers, government offices) 	C 	C 
Religious Assembly 	A 	A 
 • Homeless shelter (6 or less persons) 	P 	P 
Residential Facility 		
 • Congregate Care/Assisted Living 	A 	N 
 • Convalescent Hospital 	A 	N 
 • Single Room Occupancy Living Unit Facility (Z) 	P 	N 
 • Single Room Occupancy Residential Hotel (Z) 	P 	N 
 • Senior Housing (Independent Living) 	P 	C (JJ) 
Residential Use 		
 • Live/Work (P) 	P 	P 
 • Multi-Family 	P 	C (JJ) 
 • Townhouse 	P 	C (JJ) 
Restaurant 		
 • General 	P 	P 
 • Outdoor and Sidewalk Café (S) 	A 	A 
 • Take Out/Delivery (drive-through windows not permitted) 	P 	P 
 • With Bar and Live Entertainment (R) 	C 	C 
Retail, General and Specialty 	P 	P 
School 		
 • Elementary or Secondary 	C 	N 
 • High School 	C 	N 
 • Trade School 	C 	N 
 • College 	C 	N 
Studio (e.g., Dance, Martial Arts) 	A 	A 
Tailor 	P 	P 
Tattoo/Piercing Studio 	C 	C 
Temporary Use/Event (EE) 		
 • Arts and Crafts Show 	T 	T 
 • Circus/Carnival 	T 	T 
 • Flea Market/Swap Meet 	T 	T 
 • Live Entertainment 	T 	T 
 • Outdoor Exhibit 	T 	T 
 • Recreational Event 	T 	T 
 • Religious Assembly 	C 	C 
 • Retail Sales 	T 	T 
 • Seasonal Lot/Activity (e.g., Christmas trees, pumpkins) 	T 	T 
 • Trade Fair 	T 	T 
Theater (under 500 seats) 	C 	C 
Transit Facility (e.g., bus or train station) 	C 	C 
Visitor Center 	P 	P 
 
(Ord. 781 § 6, 2007; Ord. 695 § 3, 2003) 
(Ord. No. 844, § 2(Exh. A), 3-13-2012; Ord. No. 854, § 2(Exh. A), 7-9-2013; Ord. No. 897, (Exh. B), 4-12-2016)  
Article V. - Public/Institutional Zoning Districts 
 
17.06.140 - Purpose. 
The public/institutional district is intended to provide sites for public uses, such as government centers and educational facilities. This district also allows for public and private facilities that are necessary to the functioning of the city, such as water and wastewater treatment plants, well sites, and other infrastructure. (Ord. 695 § 3, 2003) 
(Ord. No. 854, § 2(Exh. A), 7-9-2013)  
17.06.150 - District. 
PI: Public/Institutional District. 
This district allows for schools, government offices, transit sites, religious facilities, and other land uses that have a unique public character, as well as Sonoma State University. Public infrastructure facilities are also permitted in this district. This district is consistent with the "Public/Institutional" general plan designation. (Ord. 695 § 3, 2003) 
(Ord. No. 854, § 2(Exh. A), 7-9-2013)  
17.06.160 - Permitted uses. 
The following is a list of land uses and the Public/Institutional district within which they are permitted as follows: 
P  = Permitted. 
C  = Conditionally-permitted by planning commission. 
A  = Administrative permit. 
Z  = Certificate of zoning compliance. 
T  = Temporary conditional permit. 
I  = Uses allowed as incidental to a primary use. 
Land uses that are not specifically listed are not permitted unless determined, by the planning and community development director, to be substantially similar to a listed use. If the listed land use is followed by a number or a section reference in parenthesis, that number or reference directs the reader to the corresponding land use footnote or special provision which follow this chapter. 
Land Use Category 	P-I District 
Arboretum 	C 
Clubs and Lodges 	C 
Cemetery, Crematory, Columbarium 	C 
Communication Facility (F) 	C/A 
Cultural Institution (e.g., museums, libraries) 	P 
Day Care Center (Non-Residential) 	A 
Golf Course 	C 
Homeless Shelter (M) 	C 
Hospital 	C 
Medical Clinic 	P 
Parking Lot (Commercial) 	C 
Parks 	C 
Private/Public Utility Facility (F) 	
 •  Minor 	A 
 •  Major 	A 
Public Assembly 	C 
Public Facility-Non-city owned or proposed (see also Public Utility) 	P 
Public Facility-City owned or proposed (subject to Planning Commission review on referral from City Council) 	C 
Recreational Facility (e.g., public swimming pool, sports center) 	P 
Religious Assembly 	A 
Residential Use on a site of Religious Assembly (see also Homeless Shelter) 	C(I) 
School 	
 •  Elementary and Secondary 	P 
 •  High School 	P 
 •  Vocational/Trade Schools 	P 
 •  Colleges 	P 
Temporary Use/Event (EE, see also DD) 	
 •  Arts and Crafts Show 	T 
 •  Circus/Carnival 	T 
 •  Flea Market/Swap Meet 	T 
 •  Live Entertainment 	T 
 •  Outdoor Exhibit 	T 
 •  Recreational Event 	T 
 •  Religious Assembly 	T 
 •  Seasonal Lot (e.g., Christmas trees, pumpkins) 	T 
 •  Trade Fair 	T 
Theater 	C 
Transit Facility (e.g., bus or train station) 	A 
Visitor Center 	P 
 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003) 
(Ord. No. 854, § 2(Exh. A), 7-9-2013)  
Article VI. - Open Space and Recreational Zoning Districts 
 
17.06.170 - Purpose. 
The open space districts are intended to ensure that land is maintained beyond the city's developed areas as open space. This open space helps to define the edge of the city and its transition into the adjacent rural areas. The districts are designed to preserve areas that reflect the county's agricultural heritage and to preserve scenic view corridors that may be enjoyed from within the city, as well as to protect areas that have unique and/or sensitive environmental features, such as wetlands, vernal pools, and creek channels. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.06.180 - District. 
A.  OS-ARM: Open Space for Agriculture and Resource Management. This district includes orchards and croplands, grasslands, cemeteries, and rural residential areas. It is intended to allow for greenbelts and urban buffers, consisting of open space, park land, and agricultural areas outside urban areas, as opposed to urban parks, which are located within developed areas and provide outdoor recreational opportunities. This district is consistent with the "Open Space—Agriculture and Resource Management" general plan designation. 
B.  OS-EC: Open Space for Environmental Conservation. This district includes sites with environmental and/or safety constraints, such as riparian corridors, sensitive habitats, and wetlands. This district is consistent with the "Open Space—Environmental Conservation" general plan designation. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.06.190 - Permitted uses. 
The following is a list of land uses and the open space and recreational districts within which they are permitted as follows: 
P  = Permitted. 
C  = Conditionally-permitted by planning commission. 
A  = Administrative permit. 
Z  = Certificate of zoning compliance. 
T  = Temporary conditional permit. 
I  = Uses allowed as incidental to a primary use. 
Land uses that are not specifically listed are not permitted unless determined, by the planning and community development director, to be substantially similar to a listed use. If the listed land use is followed by a number or a section reference in parenthesis, that number or reference directs the reader to the corresponding land use footnote or special provision which follow this chapter. 
Land Use Category 	OS-ARM District 	OS-EC District 
Agricultural Production (includes viticulture) 	C 	
Agricultural Services 	C 	
Arboretum 	C 	
Bed and Breakfast (D) 	C 	
Bike/Pedestrian Path 	P 	P 
Clubs and Lodges (in existing building only) 	C 	
Cemetery, Crematory, Columbarium 	C 	
Dairy Farm 	C 	
Dairy Products Processing 	P 	
Farm Machinery Sales/Rental/Repair (in existing building only) 	C 	
Farmworker Housing 	P(I), C 	
Grazing and Pastureland 	P 	P 
Kennel (Commercial) (O) 	C 	
Nursery (Horticulture) 	P 	
Produce/Flower Stand 	P 	
Public Assembly (in existing building only) 	C 	
Public Facility—Non-city owned or proposed (see also Public Utility) 	C 	
Public Facility-City owned or proposed (subject to Planning Commission review on referral from City Council) 	P 	
Recreational Facility 	C 	C 
Religious Assembly 	C 	
School 	C 	
 • Elementary and Secondary 	C 	
 • High School 	C 	
 • Vocational/Trade Schools 	C 	
 • College 	C 	
Single-Family Residence 	P 	
Temporary Use/Event (EE, see also DD) 		
 • Arts and Crafts Show 	T 	
 • Live Entertainment 	C 	
 • Outdoor Exhibit 	T 	
 • Recreational Event 	C 	
 • Religious Assembly 	C 	
 • Retail Sales 	T 	
 • Seasonal Lot (e.g., Christmas trees, pumpkins) 	T 	
Tree Farm 	P 	
Vineyards 	C 	
 
(Ord. 739 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
Article VII. - Planned Development Zoning District 
 
17.06.200 - Purpose. 
The Planned Development Zoning District is intended to accommodate a wide range of residential, commercial and industrial land uses, which are mutually-supportive and compatible with existing and proposed development on surrounding properties. P-D zoning districts shall encourage the use of flexible development standards designed to appropriately integrate a project into its natural and/or man-made setting and shall typically be intended for projects that provide for a mix of land uses to serve identified community needs. Furthermore, the P-D zoning process may be used to implement the various specific plans adopted by the city. Once established, the P-D zoning district becomes, in effect the zoning for the area within its respective boundaries. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003; Ord. No. 897 , (Exh. B), 4-12-2016)  
17.06.210 - General provisions. 
A.  P-D zoning districts with commercial and/or industrial components may be established on a parcel or parcels of land having a contiguous area of at least three acres or, if in a M-U District, at least one and one-half acres. P-D zoning districts for residential developments may be established on a parcel or parcels of land having a contiguous area of at least one acre. Within a specific plan area, a P-D zoning district may be designated for properties totaling less than three acres in size, provided the district is consistent with the specific plan. 
B.  Each P-D zoning district shall include specific development standards designed for that particular district, including minimum lot sizes, setbacks and open space requirements, architectural and landscaping guidelines, and maximum building heights and lot coverage. In establishing these standards, the requirements for existing zoning and P-D zoning districts may be reviewed and modifications to these standards may be made as appropriate. Varying residential densities may be established for specific areas within each district. Once approved, as part of a final development plan (see Section 17.06.250), all standards, densities, and other requirements shall remain tied to that plan and to the property designated by that district, unless formally amended by city council action (see Section 17.06.280.) If no specific standards are proposed for any or all portions of a P-D district, the applicable general standards of the zoning ordinance shall apply. 
C.  A P-D zoning district may include a combination of residential, industrial, and commercial uses within either the same or adjacent buildings within the district, so long as such mixed uses are consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan. Industrial, commercial and residential components within the same P-D districts shall share a similar or compatible architectural theme and maximize pedestrian access between the two. 
D.  In situations where a subdivision of land (e.g., a tentative map) is undertaken in conjunction with the establishment or implementation of a P-D zoning district, such subdivisions shall be processed concurrently. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003; Ord. No. 897 , (Exh. B), 4-12-2016)  
17.06.220 - Uses permitted. 
Any and all uses otherwise permitted in the city of Rohnert Park may be included in a P-D zoning district, provided such uses are permitted or conditionally-permitted by the zoning ordinance and are shown on the approved final development plan for that district. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.06.230 - Relationship to existing general and specific plans. 
All standards, requirements, densities, land use designations and other contents of an approved final development plan shall be consistent with the city's general plan and any applicable specific plan. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003; Ord. No. 897 , (Exh. B), 4-12-2016)  
17.06.240 - Application. 
Application for a P-D zoning district shall be made by a person, or the authorized agent of a person, having a legal or equitable interest in the affected property. In addition to the required application submittal forms available from the planning department and specified supporting materials including the fee pre scribed by the city council, the following shall also be required for all requests to establish a P-D zoning district and shall be submitted at the preliminary development plan and final development plan stages, as outlined in Section 17.06.250: 
A.  A listing of the development standards proposed for the P-D zoning district (e.g., setbacks, lot sizes, building heights); 
B.  A listing of the uses that will be permitted and/or conditionally-permitted in the P-D zoning district; 
C.  A phasing plan indicating the approximate date when construction of the first development phase of the P-D zoning district is scheduled to begin and tentative completion dates for the remaining phases. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003; Ord. No. 897 , (Exh. B), 4-12-2016)  
17.06.250 - Procedure. 
A.  Preliminary Development Plan. In establishing a P-D district, a preliminary development plan shall be prepared for the proposed P-D zoning district. 
1.  Parks and Recreation Commission Recommendation. The preliminary development plan shall be submitted to the parks and recreation commission for a recommendation with regards to any proposed parkland dedication. The recommendation of the parks and recreation commission to the planning commission shall be based upon the criteria listed in Section 16.14.020(K)(1)(a) of this code. 
2.  Planning Commission Approval. The planning commission will hold a public hearing to consider the preliminary development plan, the recommendation of the parks and recreation commission with regard to any dedicated parkland, and whether the land uses proposed and their interrelationships are generally acceptable and consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan. The commission shall indicate conceptual approval or disapproval of the preliminary development plan. Such conceptual approval shall not bind the planning commission to approval of the final development plan, which shall be subject to environmental analysis and public hearings. 
B.  Final Development Plan. Once a preliminary development plan has been approved by the planning commission, a final development plan to rezone the property to P-D district may be submitted to the city. If subdivision within the district is necessary, then a tentative map may also be applied for at this time. 
1.  Parks and Recreation Commission Review. If any changes to dedicated parkland have been proposed since preliminary development plan approval, staff will schedule a public hearing before the parks and recreation commission after receipt of a complete application. The recommendation of the parks and recreation commission to the planning commission shall be based upon the criteria listed in Section 16.14.020(K)(1)(a) of this code. 
2.  Planning Commission Approval. Following appropriate environmental review of the plan, the planning commission shall consider the application for a final development plan at a public hearing. After the hearing, the planning commission shall forward any new recommendation of the parks and recreation commission with regard to any dedicated parkland. The planning commission will also make a recommendation to the city council based on a review of the environmental impacts of the plan, the appropriateness and interrelationships of the proposed uses, any effects on traffic circulation due to development of the plan, the quality of the suggested site plan design, consistency with the general plan and any applicable specific plan, and other details of the proposed district. A favorable recommendation must include the findings listed in this title for a final development plan (see Section 17.06.260). 
3.  City Council Approval. At the city council's public hearing, it may approve or deny the final development plan or return the matter to the planning commission for further evaluation. If the application for a final development plan is approved, the property shall be rezoned as a P-D zoning district and so indicated on the zoning map for the city. 
C.  A use permit shall be required prior to the construction of any phase of an approved P-D zoning district. A use permit for any or all phases of the development may be processed concurrently with the final development plan. It is the intent of the use permit to further clarify the details of the development phase being considered and to ensure that each component complies with the established provisions of the district. The use permit is intended to refine the final development plan and implement the conditions of approval attached to the final development plan. Use permit approval shall be required prior to final map recordation for all projects within a P-D zoning district. 
The planning commission may grant a use permit, provided that the proposed development phase is in substantial conformance with any approved final development plan for that property and the conditions thereof. In approving a use permit for a phase of the P-D zoning district the planning commission may add conditions of approval, which are consistent with the intent and provisions of an approved P-D zoning district and help to implement that district. For P-D zoning districts containing commercial and/or industrial components, a Master Use Permit may be approved which will generally or specifically describe those tenants that may utilize those components. 
(Ord. 787 § 4, 2007; Ord. 695 § 3, 2003; Ord. No. 897 , (Exh. B), 4-12-2016)  
17.06.260 - Findings. 
The planning commission shall recommend approval of a final development plan to the city council, provided the planning commission finds the following: 
A.  Each individual component of the development can exist as an independent unit capable of creating an environment of sustained desirability and stability, and the uses proposed will not be detrimental to present and potential surrounding uses but instead will have a beneficial effect which could not be achieved under another zoning district; 
B.  The streets and thoroughfares proposed meet the standards of the city and adequate infrastructure can be supplied to all phases of the development; 
C.  Any commercial component complements other uses in the development; 
D.  Any residential component will be in harmony with the character of the surrounding neighborhood and community and will result in densities within the P-D district that are no higher than that permitted by the general plan; 
E.  Any industrial component conforms to applicable desirable standards and will constitute an efficient, well-organized development with adequate provisions for railroad and/or truck access and necessary storage and will not adversely affect adjacent or surrounding development; 
F.  Any deviation from the standard zoning requirements is warranted by the design and additional amenities incorporated in the final development plan, which offer certain unusual redeeming features to compensate for any deviations that may be permitted; 
G.  The P-D zoning district is consistent with the general plan of the city and any applicable specific plan. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003; Ord. No. 897 , (Exh. B), 4-12-2016)  
17.06.270 - Lapse of approval extension and renewal. 
A.  A final development plan shall expire two years after date of approval or at an alternate time specified as a condition of approval, unless there has been any activity in that P-D zoning district (e.g., a use permit has been approved or a building permit issued for any development phase of the P-D zoning district) or an extension has been granted. Preliminary development plans shall expire one year after date of approval unless application for final development plan approval is submitted. If a final development plan expires and is not extended, the property shall revert to its prior zoning. 
B.  A final development plan approval may be extended by the planning commission for a two-year period at a noticed planning commission public hearing, if the findings required remain valid and application is made at least thirty days prior to expiration. The planning commission may modify the final development plan and/or add conditions of approval at this time based on this review. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003; Ord. No. 897 , (Exh. B), 4-12-2016)  
17.06.280 - Changed plans and new applications. 
A.  A request for modifications to the conditions of approval for an approved final development plan shall be treated as a new application, unless the planning and community development director finds that the changes proposed do not involve substantial alterations or additions to the plan, and are consistent with the original approval and the general plan and any applicable specific plan. 
B.  If an application for a final development plan is denied, no new application for the same, or substantially the same, final development plan shall be filed within one year of the date of last denial, unless the denial was made without prejudice. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003; Ord. No. 897 , (Exh. B), 4-12-2016)  
Article VIII. - Specific Plan Zoning District 
 
17.06.290 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this section is to: 
A.  Facilitate the general plan provisions for the preparation, adoption and implementation of specific plans in certain areas of the community pursuant to Government Code Section 65450 et seq. 
B.  Provide the city with the ability to require specific plans when the city council finds it necessary and appropriate. 
C.  Ensure that large developing areas of the city are master planned and compatible with the existing community; and, that each phase of a multi-year development is compatible with and integrated into each of the past and future phases of the development. 
D.  Ensure that the extensive information needed by the city to process applications is submitted at appropriate times during the preparation of a specific plan and that early public input is obtained prior to adoption of a specific plan. 
E.  Provide the city with flexibility to regulate the design phases that are inherent in large master planned developments and to allow variations from the zoning ordinance standards and provisions as may be appropriate for a master planned area. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.06.300 - Application. 
The regulations set forth in this section apply to all SP - Specific Plan Districts. The Specific Plan District shall apply to all areas designated in the general plan for a specific plan and any other area of the city where the city council may determine that because of a project's size, mixed uses, adverse environmental impacts, or other factors, a specific plan should be considered. Consistent with the general plan, these regulations may be modified by the planning and community development director for the Wilfred-Dowdell specific plan area, for which one draft specific plan has been prepared. The purpose of the modifications would be to facilitate final resolution of a specific plan for this area. 
An initiation by the city council or planning commission or a request to rezone a parcel or parcels to a SP District shall be processed as a rezoning application pursuant to Chapter 17.25, Article VII and may be initiated in the same manner as a specific plan or as part of a specific plan application. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.06.310 - Permitted uses. 
Certain uses may be specifically permitted or permitted by use permit or may be disallowed from a specific plan area in accordance with provisions specified in the specific plan and consistent with the general plan. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.06.320 - Initiation of specific plans and amendments to specific plans. 
A.  Preparation and adoption of a new specific plan or amendment of an existing specific plan may be initiated by either of the following actions: 
1.  Resolution of the city council; or 
2.  An application from a property owner(s) with control of a majority of the acreage within the existing or proposed SP District or his/her agent. The city shall only process one preliminary application and one specific plan application at a time for a specific plan district. 
3.  An application from property owners who control less than a majority of the acreage within the existing or proposed SP district if the city council, by resolution, determines that it is in the best interest of the city to allow the minority property owners to proceed with the specific plan process and if the property owned by the minority property owner(s) is contiguous to the city's incorporated boundaries. 
B.  If the property for which a specific plan or specific plan amendment is proposed is located in unincorporated territory, the SP district designation will serve as prezoning for the property pursuant to Government Code Section 65859. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.06.330 - Procedure for applying for a specific plan or an amendment to a specific plan—Generally. 
Applications for a specific plan shall include two separate stages. The first stage is submittal of the preliminary application and the second stage is submittal of the draft specific plan. Applications for development within a SP District shall include a development area plan, pursuant to Section 17.06.400. The preliminary application stage shall not be required for an amendment to a specific plan unless it is determined by the planning director that the amendment constitutes a new specific plan (e.g., fifty percent or more of the text or land use map are proposed to be amended). 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.06.340 - Preliminary application—Purpose and submittal. 
A.  The first stage of a specific plan application shall be submittal of a preliminary application. Due to the size of the SP District areas and their potential impact on the community, the preliminary application will provide the opportunity for staff, the public, the planning commission and the city council to review the preliminary proposal prior to the preparation of a full draft specific plan. 
B.  The preliminary application shall include the following: 
1.  Completed planning application form and required fee and attachments. 
2.  A general description of the proposed development, including a legal description of the property in the district. 
3.  Definitions of the land use designations (including density ranges and, in the case of residential designation, sample product types). 
4.  Schematic maps, illustrative material and narrative sufficient to describe the general relationships between on-site and surrounding land uses, circulation system, and the intended design character and scale of principal features including, but not limited to, public buildings, schools, parks, and open space. 
5.  A preliminary time schedule for development, including quantitative data, such as population, housing units, land use acreage, preliminary ranges of water consumption and wastewater generation, and other data sufficient to illustrate phasing of development and potential impact on public service requirements. 
6.  General description of possible financing mechanisms for on- and off-site infrastructure improvements. 
7.  A preliminary map showing the natural resources, as well as the opportunities and constraints of the district (e.g., wetlands, creeks, view corridors), including wetlands, habitat areas, and creeksides by a qualified biologist and a preliminary program for conservation/mitigation to the extent feasible. The map shall indicate the potential for candidate, sensitive, or special status species identified in the general plan (e.g., the California tiger salamander), other local or regional plans, policies, or regulations, or by the California Department of Fish and Game or U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and possible mitigation. Included with the map shall be a preliminary biological assessment, by a qualified biologist, indicating whether any biological surveys are required for potential candidate, sensitive, or special status species identified in the general plan (e.g., the California tiger salamander), other local or regional plans, policies, or regulations, or by the California Department of Fish and Game or U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 
8.  Schematic maps of two conceptual land use and/or land use and circulation alternatives considered in the development of the preliminary plan. 
C.  The number of copies of the application and attachments to be submitted shall be determined by the planning and community development director. 
D.  If the property within an existing or proposed specific plan district is owned by more than oneowner and not all owners join in the application, the planning and community development director may modify the requirements for a preliminary application to require, on a site-specific basis, less detailed information regarding property owned by persons not joining in the application. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.06.350 - Preliminary application—Review procedure. 
A.  Within thirty days of submittal, the community development director shall respond in writing to the applicant regarding the completeness of the preliminary application. Following initial application review, the community development director may require other documentation and information he or she deems necessary for the parks and recreation commission and planning commission to make a recommendation to the city council regarding conformance with the general plan. 
B.  Parks and Recreation Commission Report. The application shall be submitted to the parks and recreation commission for a report with regards to any proposed parkland dedication. The report of the parks and recreation commission to the planning commission shall include the criteria listed in Section 16.14.020(K)(1)(a) of this code. 
C.  Planning Commission and City Council Public Hearings. The planning commission and city council will each hold a public hearing to receive public input on the preliminary plan. Additional public meetings and workshops may be required if necessary to determine general plan conformance as determined by the community development director. 
D.  Following completion of the public meetings, but not more than ninety days following the determination that the preliminary application is complete, the community development director will provide the applicant(s) and all property owners within the SP district with a copy of the staff report and any adopted resolutions. 
E.  Preliminary application review shall not constitute any representation on the part of the city that a specific plan will be prepared or approved for the property or that any other application pending or otherwise will be approved. 
F.  Final Development Plan. Once a preliminary development plan has been approved by the planning commission, a final development plan to rezone the property to SP district may be submitted to the city. If subdivision within the district is necessary, then a tentative map may also be applied for at this time. Once the application has been deemed complete by staff, a public hearing before the planning commission shall be scheduled following appropriate environmental review of the plan. The planning commission shall make any new recommendations to the city council based on a review of the environmental impacts of the plan, the appropriateness and interrelationship of the proposed uses, any effects on traffic circulation due to development of the plan, the quality of the suggested site plan design, consistency with the general plan and any applicable specific plan, and other details of the proposed district. A favorable recommendation must include the findings listed in this title for a final development plan (see Section 17.06.260). At its public hearing, the city council may approve or deny the final development plan or return the matter to the planning commission for further evaluation. If approved, the property shall be rezoned as a SP zoning district and so indicated on the zoning map for the city. 
(Ord. 787 § 5, 2007: Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.06.360 - Application—Request for development agreement. 
A specific plan application may include a request that the city enter into a development agreement with the property owner(s) or applicant for development within the specific plan area. To the extent practicable, the development agreement application shall be processed concurrently with the specific plan application. Provisions of this chapter may be varied if expressly authorized through approval of a development agreement. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.06.370 - Application—Submittal. 
A.  Applications for a specific plan or specific plan amendment shall contain the following: 
1.  Completed planning application form and required fee and attachments. 
2.  Two copies of a preliminary title report dated within the last six months. 
3.  A master copy of a draft specific plan or proposed revisions to an adopted specific plan in the case of an amendment, both in print and electronic format, if available. Additional copies of the draft documents shall be submitted for public review purposes, as determined by the planning and community development director. 
4.  A comparison of the standards and provisions of the specific plan to the standards and provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
B.  The draft specific plan shall include the following, subject to the satisfaction of the planning and community development director: 
1.  Text and tables providing: 
a.  A general description of the proposed development, including a legal description of the property in the district. 
b.  A statement of the relationship of the specific plan to the general plan. 
c.  A boundary survey map of the area within the specific plan and a calculation of the gross land area within the district. 
d.  Definitions of the land use designations (including density ranges and, in the case of residential designation, sample product types) shown on the specific plan graphics (as required by subsection 2 of this section). 
e.  A land use program in table format setting forth, by area and in total, the minimum and maximum total dwelling units, the minimum and maximum nonresidential square footage, and the minimum acreage for open space, public uses, and any other uses for the district at buildout. 
f.  A description of each land use sub-area in terms of uses and compatibility, and the zoning district regulations that shall apply to that sub-area to the extend not otherwise specified in the specific plan. 
g.  A public facilities financing plan that explains how streets, water, wastewater, solid waste, and parks, all meeting city standards, will be provided to the project including quantitative data, such as population, housing units, land use acreage, engineering calculations for projected water consumption and wastewater generation, and other data sufficient to illustrate phasing of development and potential impact on public service requirements. The plan must demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the city manager, that completion of all necessary infrastructure and public facility improvements concurrently with completion of the specific plan is economically, physically, and legally feasible. The city manager shall base the determination of completeness by reviewing the following components: 
(1)  Identification of public improvements required to complete each phase of the project as well as the entire project in accordance with the general plan and city standards. 
(2)  Detailed cost analysis of required public improvements. 
(3)  Method of financing required public improvements. 
(4)  Implementation and phasing schedule correlated with project buildout. 
(5)  Plan for receiving approval of all regulatory agencies including proposed timeline for submittal and approvals. 
(6)  Evidence of ability to complete improvements in a satisfactory and timely manner. 
(Note: Pursuant to general plan policies GM-10, GM-11, and GM-12, a public facilities plan that provides for the project's fair share of the financing for the necessary public facilities, but does not provide for the completion of the public facilities prior to completion of the development due to lack of contribution by other responsible parties, will be deemed complete but will not be sufficient to receive approval as part of a specific plan unless either one or both of the following exceptions apply: 
(i)  A statement of public policy considerations is adopted by the city council to allow certain required public facilities to be deferred for a specific time period. The statement of public policy considerations shall include findings that specific and offsetting community goals and objectives are achieved by the project that balance not meeting the goal of providing necessary public facilities concurrently with development. A time period shall be specified in which the improvements must be completed. Such findings shall be supported by substantial evidence in the record of the public hearing. 
(ii)  For projects subject to a development agreement, the city council may grant an exception for streets/highways/intersections only, if it can be demonstrated that although adequate street/highway/intersections are unable to be provided for the development at the time occupancy is projected, such facilities will be provided within two years of the time occupancy is projected. The determination that such facilities will be provided within two years of the time occupancy is projected shall be based upon the approved public facilities financing plans submitted by other projects that contribute to the need for the street/highway/intersection improvement.). 
h.  Description of proposed water supply (Note: information will be used toward determining the adequacy of water supply consistent with general plan policies PF-11 and PF-14, relating to water supply.). 
i.  If based on the preliminary biological assessment and mapping submitted as part of the preliminary application, surveys are required, a complete site-specific biological assessment of wetlands, habitat areas, and creeksides by a qualified biologist and a proposed program for conservation/mitigation to the extent feasible. The biological assessment shall include a survey, conducted in accordance with established California Department of Fish and Game guidelines, for potential candidate, sensitive, or special status species identified in the general plan (e.g., the California tiger salamander), other local or regional plans, policies, or regulations, or by the California Department of Fish and Game or U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, both in breeding habitat and adjacent upland estivation habitat, with appropriate mitigation, including avoidance and minimization measures. 
If a survey has not been completed at the time of application submittal, it shall be completed prior to completion of a draft environmental impact report. A specific plan application shall not be considered complete until any required surveys are complete, except as may be modified pursuant to subsection 17.06.370(C). 
If surveys are determined not to be required, documentation for this determination prepared by a city-approved biologist shall be submitted. 
j.  Proposed program for conservation of the natural resources along creeks and standards for the conservation, development and utilization of natural resources where applicable. 
k.  A preliminary traffic study prepared by a qualified traffic/transportation planner or engineer and reasonable mitigation measures to mitigate traffic impacts resulting from the development. 
l.  An affordable housing program showing how the proposed development will comply with the city's inclusionary housing requirement, if applicable. 
m.  Other plans and programs, as may be necessary, to address general plan and city requirements regarding traffic, natural resource conservation and management, parks and open space (including a description of the acreage, layout, and configuration of proposed parkland dedication), hydrology, drainage and storm water runoff. 
2.  Graphics showing generally: 
a.  Land use designations for each distinct use in the SP district (each such designated area is hereinafter referred to as a "land use area") and in adjacent areas outside the district. 
b.  Public circulation system (including street standards and cross sections, pedestrian paths and bikeways, and linkages to adjacent properties, where appropriate). 
c.  Public buildings, schools, open space, and park. 
d.  A Preliminary Public Infrastructure Plan including the proposed location and capacity of major infrastructure components, including wells, sewerage, water, drainage, solid waste disposal, energy and other essential facilities proposed to be located within the area covered by the draft specific plan. 
e.  A map showing the natural resources as well as the opportunities and constraints of the district (e.g., wetlands, creeks, view corridors). 
f.  Diagram of how the development within the area covered by the specific plan is to be phased. 
3.  Standards and criteria by which development will be phased. 
4.  Standards for the conservation, development, and utilization of natural resources. 
5.  A topographic map and, if applicable, a general grading concept plan for the property, shown at contour intervals not to exceed two feet for natural slopes over two percent or less. For natural slopes of two percent or more, contour intervals shall not exceed five feet. 
6.  Development standards, including, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  Permitted uses; 
b.  Conditionally permitted uses; 
c.  Site coverage; 
d.  Floor-area ratios; 
e.  Setbacks; 
f.  Building heights; 
g.  Accessory structures; 
h.  Private and public outdoor areas, including open space and parks; 
i.  Parking; and 
j.  Fencing. 
7.  Design guidelines, including, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  Site guidelines. 
(i)  Streetscape, 
(ii)  Parking, 
(iii)  Pedestrian connections, 
(iv)  Landscape and street tree palette, and 
(v)  Lighting; 
b.  Building guidelines. 
(i)  Porches and entries, 
(ii)  Scale, 
(iii)  Architectural character, 
(iv)  Materials/colors, 
(v)  Landscaping, and 
(vi)  Signage. 
8.  A program of implementation measures, including regulations, programs, public works projects, and financing mechanisms necessary to carry out the specific plan. In cases where the application for a specific plan is not joined by all property owners in the district, the implementation program may address any additional information or procedures required for development of those properties, and may establish mechanisms for the allocation of specific plan fees and public facility and infrastructure costs among property owners within the district. 
9.  Any other information required by state law or the general plan to be included in a specific plan. 
10.  Any other subjects that, in the judgment of the planning commission or city council, are relevant to the application and are necessary and desirable for implementation of the general plan. 
C.  If the property within a proposed specific plan district is owned by more than one owner and not all owners join in the application, the planning and community development director may modify the requirements for a draft specific plan to require, on a site-specific basis, less detailed information regarding property owned by persons not joining in the application. 
(Ord. 787 § 6, 2007; Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.06.380 - Specific plan approval procedure. 
A.  Parks and Recreation Commission Report. Upon receipt of a complete application, the parks and recreation commission shall consider the application at a public hearing and report on the proposed acreage, layout, and configuration of parkland dedication and report to the planning commission on the project's compliance with the city's general plan requirements and any other city policies for parkland dedication. 
B.  Planning Commission Review. Following completion of environmental documentation as required by the California Environmental Quality Act, a public hearing shall be scheduled before the planning commission. 
1.  Notice. At least ten days prior to the planning commission hearing, the community development director shall cause to be mailed a notice to the applicant and to all owners within the existing or proposed SP district and within three hundred feet of the boundaries of the district as shown on the latest equalized property tax assessment roll, publish a notice in a newspaper of general circulation, and post a notice in at least three public places in the city. 
2.  Recommendation. The planning commission shall forward the report of the parks and recreation commission to the city council and indicate by resolution, with recommended findings (see Section 17.06.390), whether the specific plan or specific plan amendment is recommended to the city council for approval, approval in modified form, or disapproval. Following the planning commission's recommendation, the community development director shall forward said recommendation to the city clerk for scheduling before the city council. 
C.  City Council Review. The city council shall conduct a public hearing on the specific plan or the specific plan amendment. 
1.  Notice. At least ten days prior to the city council hearing, the community development director shall cause to be mailed a notice to the applicant and all owners of property within three hundred feet of the boundaries of the proposed district as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll, publish a notice in a newspaper of general circulation, and post a notice in at least three public places in the city. 
2.  Approval. Approval of the specific plan or specific plan amendment shall be by resolution. The city council may approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove any proposed specific plan or specific plan amendment. If the city council approves the specific plan with modifications, the applicant shall be responsible for the reprinting of the approved specific plan with all city council approved changes and amendments. A master copy, both in print and electronic form, and a certain number of copies, as determined by the community development director, shall be provided to the city within thirty days of the city council's approval of the specific plan. 
(Ord. 787 § 7, 2007: Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.06.390 - Findings required for approval. 
A.  The city council may approve a specific plan or an amendment to a specific plan only if it can make all of the following findings of fact: 
1.  The specific plan or specific plan amendment is consistent with the city's general plan; 
2.  The specific plan or specific plan amendment will not adversely affect the public health and safety or result in incompatible land uses; 
3.  The specific plan or specific plan amendment provides the framework to phase and pace growth within the specific plan area so as to ensure completion of all necessary public facilities concurrently with completion of the specific plan; or, alternately, a statement of public policy consideration can be adopted and/or an exception granted in accordance with general plan policies GM-10, GM-11, and GM-12. 
4.  The specific plan or specific plan amendment identifies adequate financing mechanisms for the infrastructure and public facilities required to support the development. 
5.  In the case of a specific plan amendment, the following additional finding shall be made: The proposed specific plan amendment will not create internal inconsistencies within the specific plan and is consistent with the purpose and intent of the specific plan it is amending. 
6.  In the case of a specific plan located within unincorporated territory, the following additional finding shall be made: The proposed specific plan is consistent with the planning and prezoning designation provided for the specific plan area, pursuant to Government Code Sections 65300 and 65859, or alternatively functions as prezoning for the unincorporated territory. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.06.400 - Development area plans—Submittal and approval procedure. 
A.  The specific plan shall include procedures and other requirements for development area plans for development within specified land use areas of the specific plan district. The development area plan may be submitted in phases or all at once. The development area plan application(s) may be submitted at any time subsequent to submittal of the specific plan application, except that the entire project area or the first phase of a multi-year development may be submitted concurrently with the specific plan application. Other applicable project applications (e.g., subdivision map, lot line adjustment, conditional use permit) may be submitted concurrently with development area plan application(s). 
B.  A development area plan shall consist of at least one land use area and a minimum of twenty percent of the total acreage of the project or ten acres, whichever is less, unless otherwise provided for in the specific plan or the development area includes property designated for a public use or is proposed for use as affordable housing, in which case no minimum acreage shall apply. 
C.  Consideration of development area plans shall include notification by the planning and community development director to surrounding property owners and neighbors in the same fashion as the specific plan hearings. 
D.  The planning commission shall consider a development area plan application concurrent with or after its consideration of the specific plan application or after council action on the specific plan, and shall make a written recommendation on the development area plan to the city council. 
E.  In order to approve a development area plan application, the city council shall find the proposed development conforms to the specific plan; and 
1.  Public infrastructure and services can be provided concurrently with the development; or 
2.  A statement of public policy consideration and/or an exception can be granted pursuant to Subsection 17.06.370B.l.g. of this chapter. 
F.  The area of a single land use area in a development area plan may vary by up to fifteen percent from the area shown on the specific plan graphics, provided that the overall minimum and maximum residential units, the overall minimum and maximum non-residential square footage and the overall minimum public use open space acreage designated on the specific plan graphics are maintained. 
G.  In the case of a residential land use area, the development area plan may allow for residential uses that are more or less dense than the density designated on the specific plan graphics, provided that the overall residential density ranges designated for that land use area are maintained. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.06.410 - Development area plan—Contents. 
The development area plan application shall include the following information, subject to the satisfaction of the planning and community development director: 
1.  A summary, including a table of specific plan standards and proposed plan standards, showing how the development area plan conforms to the specific plan, including but not limited to the following matters: the total dwelling units in the development area plan by type (such as detached single family, multifamily and the like), the square footage of nonresidential uses and a parking calculation of required and provided spaces by use and stall size. 
2.  Development area plan graphics showing: 
a.  Areas of proposed land use, including open space; 
b.  All streets, pedestrian ways and bike ways; 
c.  A preliminary infrastructure plan; 
d.  A proposed plot plan for each building site in the plan (or, in the case of single family residences, a typical plot plan) showing the existing and/or proposed buildings (indicating maximum and minimum distances between buildings, between building and property or building site boundaries, percentage of building coverage and percentage of landscaping, if applicable), paving and areas to be landscaped; 
e.  A parking and/or loading plan drawn to scale; 
f.  Preliminary elevations of all proposed structures drawn to scale. The purpose of such drawings is to indicate the building heights, materials, fenestration, colors, and the general appearance of the existing and/or proposed structures so that the entire development will not detract from and will preserve the integrity of the surrounding developments; 
g.  Preliminary floor plans of the proposed structures; 
h.  Preliminary landscaping plan; and 
i.  Fencing, trash disposal and recycling storage areas. 
3.  A tentative subdivision map or vesting tentative map for the development area plan, if appropriate. 
4.  A map showing the existing natural resources of the district. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.06.420 - Development schedule. 
Construction in each development area must begin within two years of final development area plan approval by the city council or the approval will expire and must be re-applied for. For good cause shown by the developer, the planning commission may, at a public hearing, grant extensions of time for up to two years for each extension. An application for an extension must be filed within two years of the date of council approval of the development area plan. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.06.430 - Architectural and design review not required. 
Notwithstanding Chapter 17.25, Article III Site Plan and Architectural Review, no site plan and architectural review shall be required for any approvals or permits granted for development within a SP District to the extent that they substantially conform to the development area plan. The review of the development area plans by the planning commission and city council shall constitute an equivalent of the review envisioned by Chapter 17.25, Article III. 
After the initial approval and construction of the development area plan, remodels and additions to the buildings and sites in the specific plan area shall be handled through the usual site plan and architectural review requirements of Chapter 17.25, Article III. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.06.440 - Modifications to development area plan. 
The planning and community development director shall have the authority to grant minor modifications to a development area plan not to exceed ten percent of the number proposed for modification, limited to lot area, lot width, building height, setbacks, parking number or dimensions, building coverage, landscaping and fencing dimensions, and facade changes. Major modifications to a development area plan shall be made in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 17.06.400, Development Area Plans—submittal and approval procedures. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.06.450 - Fees. 
A.  The city council may by resolution, adopt reasonable fees and a reasonable fee schedule for costs incurred by the city in the processing of preliminary applications, specific plan applications, and development area applications. 
B.  Specific plan reimbursement fees shall be imposed as a condition of development approval to reimburse the applicant(s) or, if city initiated, the city for costs in incurred in the preparation, adoption, and implementation of a specific plan including the preliminary application and costs incurred pursuant to CEQA. Reimbursable costs incurred by the applicant(s) shall be based on a prior city-approved budget and documented expenditures. The reimbursement fees shall be calculated and collected for all development in accordance with the applicable fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city council at the time a specific plan is approved, and as may be amended from time to time, based on documented and city approved costs incurred in the preparation, adoption and implementation of a specific plan including the preliminary application. 
C.  Reimbursement fees shall be collected at the time a subdivision or parcel map or building permit is applied for, whichever comes first, unless otherwise stated in the adopting resolution. In the case of development requiring multiple development approvals, the specific plan fee requirement shall be applicable only once, to any particular property. 
D.  Appeal of any reimbursement fee imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be made in accordance with the appeal procedures established in this title for to the city council. 
E.  Reimbursement fees are intended to reimburse the applicant or the city for costs associated with the preparation, adoption and administration of each specific plan. All reimbursement fees collected shall be placed in a separate fund designated for the preparation, adoption, and administration of each specific plan. 
F.  At least once every year prior to, or at the time of, city council adoption of the annual budget, staff shall prepare a report to the city council on the subject of reimbursement fees which report shall include the following for each specific plan area: 
1.  Itemization of costs incurred by the applicant or the city in the preparation, adoption and administration of the specific plan, including costs incurred pursuant to CEQA. 
2.  Itemization of specific plan fees collected in the preceding budget year and cumulatively; and 
3.  Additions to (by annexation or otherwise) and deletions of land from the specific plan area. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
Article IX. - Mobile Home Park Overlay District 
 
17.06.460 - Purposes. 
The purposes of the MHP Mobile Home Park Overlay District are to: 
A.  Recognize the importance of existing mobile home parks as a valuable city resource providing affordable housing and stable communities, protected from speculative pressures to convert to other land use types. 
B.  Provide appropriate areas for residential mobile home park development that are consistent with the general plan and with standards of the public health and safety as established by state or city code. 
C.  Ensure adequate light, air, privacy and open space for each dwelling, and protect residents from the harmful effects of excessive noise, population density, traffic congestion and other environmental effects. 
D.  Achieve design compatibility with surrounding neighborhoods and promote and encourage orderly residential development with appropriate physical amenities. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.06.470 - Overlay districts. 
A mobile home park overlay district may be combined with any residential district, which allows compatible densities, by a change of district to include the overlay in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.25, Article VII. A mobile home park overlay district shall be designated by the letters "MHP" following the residential district designation. For definitions of words and phrases refer to Chapter 17.23, Mobile Home Park Conversions. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.06.480 - Allowable uses. 
A.  Permitted Uses. 
The following uses may be allowed in the MHP Overlay District through a site and architectural review approval: 
1.  Mobile home park. 
2.  Accessory structures and recreational facilities related to mobile home parks. 
3.  Living units for resident managers. 
B.  Conditionally-Permitted Uses. 
The following uses may be allowed in the MHP Overlay District through approval of a conditional use permit: 
1.  Mobile home subdivision. 
2.  The permitted and conditionally permitted uses allowed in the underlying base zoning district. 
C.  Mobile home Park Conversion. 
All requests to convert a mobile home park or subdivision to another land use requires a rezoning to eliminate the overlay district and compliance with the city's conversion of mobile home parks. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.06.490 - Development standards. 
A.  Project Area. 
A site proposed for a mobile home park or subdivision shall be a minimum of ten acres. 
B.  Density and Site Area. 
1.  The minimum and maximum overall density of a mobile home park or subdivision shall conform to the site's general plan land use designation and the underlying base zone district. 
2.  Individual mobile home sites or lots shall have a minimum area of three thousand six hundred eighty square feet. 
C.  Site Width. 
Individual mobile home sites or lots shall have a minimum width of forty-six feet. 
D.  Perimeter Buffer Area. 
A landscaped area with a minimum width of twenty feet shall be maintained along the exterior boundaries of a mobile home park or subdivision site as a buffer between the mobile home units and the adjoining property, except when located adjacent to any public roadway, where a landscaped buffer area with a minimum width of thirty feet shall be maintained. 
E.  Minimum Yards. 
1.  Side and rear yards. A five-foot minimum setback from the outer edge of any structure or mobile home to the mobile home side or rear space or lot line shall be maintained. 
2.  Front yard. A fifteen-foot minimum setback from the outer edge of any structure or mobile home to the mobile home front space or lot line shall be maintained. 
3.  Cornices, eaves, canopies, fireplaces and other similar architectural features, but not including any flat wall or window surface, may extend up to two feet into any yard. No other encroachments shall be permitted. 
F.  Maximum Height. 
The maximum height in the MHP Overlay District shall be twenty-five feet and structures, other than recreational facilities, shall be limited to one story. 
G.  Common Areas. 
Common areas shall be provided within a mobile home park or subdivision for recreation and other activities. The size and type of facilities required will be based on project size and location. 
H.  Circulation and Parking. 
All streets, access drives, parking bays and connections to public roads shall be in accordance with plans reviewed and approved by the city engineer. 
1.  Access. 
a.  All mobile home spaces shall be served from internal private streets within the mobile home park or subdivision, and there shall be no direct access from a mobile home space to a public street or alley. 
b.  Private streets shall have a clear and unobstructed access to a public thoroughfare. 
2.  Street widths. 
a.  The minimum width for any interior street within a mobile home park shall be no less than twenty-five feet, curb to curb, with exceptions below. 
b.  No interior street shall be less than thirty-two feet in width, curb to curb, if parking is allowed on one side and not less than forty feet in width if parking is allowed on both sides. 
3.  Pedestrian Circulation Sidewalks and pedestrian pathways shall be incorporated into the park design to allow normal circulation patterns to take place between adjacent parcels and common areas. 
4.  Parking. Parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.16, Off-Street Parking Standards. 
I.  Boat and Trailer Storage. 
1.  All pleasure boats, trailers, campers and motor coaches shall be stored in an approved area set aside for such storage. 
2.  Said areas shall be screened from view and shall provide a minimum of one boat or trailer space for every five mobile home sites. 
3.  Such storage shall not be allowed on any street or individual mobile home space. 
J.  Landscaping. 
1.  A detailed landscaping plan shall be submitted for consideration with each application for a mobile home park or subdivision, in accordance with Chapter 17.14.080, Required Landscape Plans. All open areas except driveways, parking areas, walkways, utility areas, decks, patios and porches shall be landscaped and maintained. 
2.  Substantial trees shall be planted throughout the mobile home park or subdivision, and one street tree, of a variety approved by the planning commission, shall be provided on each lot. Specimen trees of not less than five-gallon container size or one inch in trunk diameter shall be planted. 
K.  Utilities. 
1.  All utilities in a mobile home park or subdivision shall be installed underground. 
L.  Fences. 
1.  The approving authority may require that the park or subdivision property be enclosed at the rear and sides by a six-foot fence and/or thick screen planting for control of view, light, sound and adequate security. 
2.  Fences up to six feet in height may be permitted in the front setback area provided an average setback of ten feet from the street property line is observed and the area between the fence and property line is well landscaped and maintained. The height of fencing and landscaping located at intersections of streets, driveways and pedestrian walkways may be limited to provide clear lines-of site. 
M.  Other Standards. 
Additional development standards may be prescribed as conditions of approval when such requirements are determined to be necessary to ensure the protection of the character of neighboring properties, the compatibility of land uses, and the health and safety of mobile home development occupants and other city residents. 
N.  Continued Maintenance. 
All recreation facilities, common open spaces, common area landscaping, perimeter walls and streets/driveways established under permits approved prior to adoption of this chapter shall be maintained and repaired by management on an ongoing basis to ensure that said facilities serve the purpose intended under the original or subsequent permit approvals. 
O.  Signs. 
1.  Mobile home park or subdivision signs shall be limited to one twenty-four square foot sign per major entrance, not to exceed a height of six feet. 
2.  Each mobile home park or subdivision shall maintain a directory sign showing the location and house number of each unit. 
3.  Signs shall be subject to the permit procedures and standards set forth in Chapter 17.27, Signs, except as noted herein. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.06.500 - Plans to be approved. 
No building permit for a new structure or a major alteration or enlargement of an existing structure, shall be issued until the site plan and the landscape plan for the entire proposed mobile home park has been reviewed and approved by the planning commission and city council pursuant to Chapter 17.25, Article VII of this title. 
The site plan shall be drawn to scale, showing the proposed layout of structures, lots, mobile home pads, and other improvements including, where appropriate, accessory buildings, boat and trailer storage areas, utilities, driveways, pedestrian walks, off-street parking for residents, managers and visitors, landscaped areas, fences, walls, and signs. The site plan shall indicate the locations of entrances and exits and the direction of traffic flow into and out of off-street parking, the location of each parking space, and areas for turning and maneuvering vehicles. 
The landscape plan shall be drawn to scale, showing the locations of existing trees proposed to be retained on the site or sites, the location and design of landscaped areas and, of plant material to be planted therein, and other landscape features. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.06.510 - Legal nonconforming mobile home parks. 
Mobile home parks existing at the time of adoption of this chapter shall be deemed to be nonconforming relative to the use, development, and design standards established by this chapter, and may be continued, except as otherwise provided in Chapter 17.25, Article VIII of this title. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
Article X. - Office Overlay District 
 
17.06.520 - Purpose. 
The Office Overlay District is intended to recognize the existing pattern of development within areas designated for industrial use that include a large number of established office uses and buildings designed to support such uses, such as the Commerce Boulevard and Redwood Drive corridors. The district would ensure that there are locations for new office users within such areas and would allow for their timely approval as principally-permitted uses, while continuing to provide space for uses that are more industrial in nature. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.06.530 - Overlay districts. 
An Office Overlay District may be combined with an Industrial Zoning District by a change of district to include the overlay in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.25.070 of this title. An Office Overlay District shall be designated by the letter "O" following the industrial district designation. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.06.540 - Permitted uses. 
In addition to the uses allowed in the underlying zoning district, the "O" Office Overlay District shall allow professional/administrative office district uses as permitted or conditionally permitted as outlined for the C-O District in Section 17.06.060. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.06.550 - Development standards. 
Projects within the "O" Office Overlay District shall conform to the development standards of the underlying zoning district, as provided for in Chapter 17.10 of this title. Off-street parking and other requirements particular to an office use shall be as provided for as specified in this title. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
Article XI. - Commercial Overlay District 
 
17.06.620 - Purpose. 
The Commercial Overlay District is intended to permit additional commercial development with existing industrial areas which are proximate to Highway 101, such as the Commerce Boulevard. The district would ensure that there are locations for new commercial users within such areas and would allow for their timely approval as principally-permitted uses, while continuing to allow for uses that are more industrial in nature. 
(Ord. No. 897 , (Exh. B), 4-12-2016)  
17.06.630 - Overlay districts. 
A Commercial Overlay District may be combined with an Industrial Zoning District by a change of district to include the overlay in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.25.070 of this title. A Commercial Overlay District shall be designated by the letter "C" following the industrial district designation. 
(Ord. No. 897 , (Exh. B), 4-12-2016)  
17.06.640 - Permitted uses. 
In addition to the uses allowed in the underlying zoning district, the following is a list of permitted land uses within the commercial overlay designation. Permitted as follows: 
P  = Permitted. 
C  = Conditionally-permitted by planning commission. 
A  = Administrative permit. 
Z  = Certificate of zoning compliance. 
T  = Temporary conditional permit. 
I  = Uses allowed as incidental to a primary use. 
Uses involving chemicals may also be subject to requirements regarding hazardous materials (footnote 11), in which case more restrictive requirements shall apply. Land uses that are not specifically listed are not permitted unless determined, by the planning and community development director, to be substantially similar to a listed use. If the listed land use is followed by a number or a section reference in parenthesis, that number or reference directs the reader to the corresponding land use footnote or special provision which follow this chapter. 
Land Use Category 	Additional Uses Permit in "C" Overlay 
Amusement Center - Small (e.g., indoors; commercial shopping center) 	A 
Antique Store 	P 
Arcade Games/Cybercafes (B) 	P/A 
Bakery (Retail Sales) 	P 
Bank/Savings and Loan/Credit Union (see Drive-Through Windows) (I) 	P 
Bar/Nightclub (R) 	C 
Barber/Beauty Shop/Tanning Salon 	P 
Bath House/Spa 	C 
Billiards Parlor (R) 	C 
Check Cashing Store 	P 
Day Care Center (Nonresidential) 	C 
Drive-Through Window (any use) (I) 	C 
Dry Cleaning Outlet 	P 
Florist 	P 
Food Store - Convenience Store 	P 
Food Store - Supermarket 	P 
Furniture Store - Small/Custom Order 	P 
Furniture Store - Large 	P 
Hardware Store 	P 
Health Club 	A 
Home Improvement Store 	P 
Hotel/Motel (No in-room food preparation unless applied for and approved as part of project approval or separately.) 	P 
Interior Decorator 	P 
Liquor Store (Off-Sale) (R) 	C 
Live Entertainment 	C 
Live/Work (P) 	C 
Massage Therapy (see Chapter 8.36) 	P 
Medical Clinic 	P 
Microbrewery with restaurant 	C 
Paint Store 	P 
Pharmacy (see Drive-Through Window) (I) (Does not include a Medical Marijuana Dispensary, which is a prohibited use within the City) 	P 
Photography Studio 	P 
Restaurant 	C 
Restaurant - General 	C 
Restaurant - Fast Food (see also Drive-Through Window) (I) 	C 
Restaurant - Outdoor and Sidewalk Cafe (S) 	P 
Restaurant - Take Out/Delivery 	P 
Restaurant - With Bar and Live Entertainment (R) 	C 
Retail, General and Specialty 	A 
Retail, Department or Big Box l 	P 
Tailor 	A 
Tattoo/Piercing Studio 	A 
 
(Ord. No. 897 , (Exh. B), 4-12-2016)  
Article XII. - Station Center Planned Development District Zoning District 
 
17.06.700 - General provisions. 
A.  Authority. The adoption of the Station Center Planned Development District is authorized under the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Rohnert Park (Rohnert Park Municipal Code Title 17, the "Zoning Ordinance"). Specifically, Chapter 17.06, Article VII. 
B.  Purpose. The district is intended to create a well-designed, pedestrian-oriented commercially focused downtown environment. 
C.  Procedure. Prior to any development within the Planned Development the procedures within Article VII, sections 17.06.200 through 17.06.280, shall be followed to establish the required Final Development Plan and Development Area Plan(s). 
D.  Applicability. All property within the boundaries of the Station Center Planned Development as designated on the City of Rohnert Park, zoning map, shall be subject to the provisions contained within this Article and any subsequent Final Development Plan and Development Area Plan approvals. 
(Ord. No. 897 , (Exh. B), 4-12-2016)  
17.06.710 - Consistency with Central Rohnert Park Priority Development Area Plan. 
A.  All development within the Station Center PD shall be consistent with the Central Rohnert Park, Priority Development Area (PDA) Plan. Any subsequent approvals including the final development plan and development area plan(s) shall be consistent with the PDA, specifically all entitlements and related development shall be: 
1.  Supportive of the Downtown District Amenity Zone (Section 4.3.6 of PDA). 
2.  Consistent with Section 4.4 (Land Use and Development Potential and Requirements) of PDA, specifically the requirement to provide a minimum of 150,000 square feet of active commercial retail or service uses within the Station Center PD area. 
3.  Consistent with Table 4.1 (PDA Zoning Designations and Development Standards) of PDA. 
4.  Consistent with Figure 4.6 (Station Center Subarea Land Use Designations) and the "Required Station Center Land Use Designation" included below. Modifications to street layout, block layout and size, acreage of each land use are permitted subject to the review and approval of a final development plan. No reductions to the acreage totals of commercial mixed-use as depicted below are permitted. 
5.  Implementation of relevant street designs in Chapter 5 (Circulation and Connectivity) in the PDA, specifically State Farm Drive (Figure 5.7). 
6.  Implementation of the community design guidelines (Chapter 6) in the PDA, with particular attention to: 
a.  Urban streetscape condition (Table 6.1 and Figure 6.3 in the PDA). 
b.  Street furnishings and lighting. 
c.  Building setbacks and building orientation (Section 6.2.3 (Building Setbacks), Section 6.2.4 (Building Orientation), Figure 6.4 (Building Setback Diagram) and Figure 6.5 (Streetwall Diagram) in the PDA plan). 
d.  Mixed-use guidelines for the downtown district (Section 6.3.2 in PDA plan). 
7.  Minimum parking ratio may be reduced according to Table 5.2: Parking Standards in the PDA Plan. 
8.  Other requirements from the PDA plan or from PDA plan implementation that may apply. 
Required Station Center Land Use Designations [Note—This graphic will be edited to eliminate overcrossing as directed by the city council on March 22, 2016) 
  
(Ord. No. 897 , (Exh. B), 4-12-2016)  
Article XIII. - Downtown District Amenity Zone (DDAZ) 
 
A. - Purpose. 
The DDAZ is intended to guide downtown-style within a portion of Central Rohnert Park. Development in the DDAZ should be well-designed and supportive of an active, pedestrian-oriented, commercially focused downtown streetscape environment.  
B. - Applicability. 
All development within the designation DDAZ boundary as indicated on the City of Rohnert Park, zoning map.  
C. - Consistency with PDA plan. 
All development within the DDAZ shall comply with relevant provisions within the Central Rohnert Park, Priority Development Area Plan (PDA), specifically: 
1.  Downtown District Amenity Zone (Section 4.3.6 of PDA). 
2.  Section 4.4 (Land Use and Development Potential and Requirements) of PDA, specifically the requirement to provide a minimum of 150,000 square feet of active commercial retail or service uses within the Station Center PD area. 
3.  Table 4.1 (PDA Zoning Designations and Development Standards) of PDA. 
4.  Figure 4.6 (Station Center Subarea Land Use Designations). Modifications to street layout, block layout and size, acreage of each land use are permitted subject to the review and approval of a final development plan. 
5.  The relevant street designs in Chapter 5 (Circulation and Connectivity) in the PDA, specifically State Farm Drive (Figure 5.7). 
6.  Community design guidelines (Chapter 6) in the PDA, with particular attention to: 
a.  Urban streetscape condition (Table 6.1 and Figure 6.3 in the PDA). 
b.  Street furnishings and lighting. 
c.  Building setbacks and building orientation (Section 6.2.3 (Building Setbacks), Section 6.2.4 (Building Orientation), Figure 6.4 (Building Setback Diagram) and Figure 6.5 (Streetwall Diagram) in the PDA plan). 
d.  Mixed-use guidelines for the downtown district (Section 6.3.2 in PDA plan). 
7.  Minimum parking ratios within the DDAZ may be reduced according to Table 5.2: Parking Standards in the PDA Plan. 
8.  Other requirements from the PDA plan or from PDA plan implementation that may apply.  
D. - Limitations on residential development. 
All residential development and mixed-use development within the DDAZ shall comply with the relevant provisions of Chapter 17.07 (Land Use Footnotes/Special Provisions), Footnote JJ (Residential Development in Downtown District Amenity Zone (DDAZ). 
(Ord. No. 897 , (Exh. B), 4-12-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 897 , (Exh. B), adopted April 12, 2016, set out provisions intended for use as Chapter 17.06, Article XIII, § C Limitations on Residential Development. For purposes of clarity and to preserve the style of this Code, at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § D.  
Article XV. - Form-Based Codes for Special Areas 
 
17.06.800 - General provisions. 
A.  Intent and Purpose. The intent of this section is to continue implementation of the guiding objectives set forth in the Rohnert Park General Plan relating to compact urban form, increased connectivity between neighborhoods, designation of mixed-use and pedestrian-oriented centers, development of a variety of housing types within all neighborhoods, and development of a network of trails, parks and land use patterns that maximizes accessibility to parks and commercial centers. 
B.  Definitions. For the purposes of any land use regulations adopted pursuant to this article, the following definitions apply: 
"Development Code" means a set of land use regulations adopted in conformance with the general plan that provide the standards for development. All actions and undertakings necessary for project planning, land acquisition, demolition, or construction of a project must conform with the regulations of the development code before approval. A development code is also known as a zoning code. 
"Form-based Code" means a code that uses physical form (rather than separation of land uses) as the organizing principle. A form-based code is an alternative to conventional zoning. Form-based codes address the relationship between building facades and the public realm, the form and mass of buildings in relation to one another, and the scale and types of streets and blocks. The regulations and standards in form-based codes, presented in both diagrams and words, correspond to a regulating plan that designates the appropriate form and scale (and therefore, character) of development rather than solely distinctions in land-use types. 
"Regulating plan" means a zoning map or plan that delineate the boundaries of individual zones, transect zones, civic zones, special districts, and special requirements, if any, of areas subject to regulation by a form-based code. 
"Transect zone (or T zone)" means one of several areas on a zoning map or regulating plan regulated by the form-based code. Transect zones are administratively similar to the land use zones in conventional codes, except that in addition to building use, density, height, and setback requirements, other elements are integrated, including without limitation private lot, building and public frontage. 
C.  Establishment of Form-Based Codes. In order to further the goals and policies of the general plan, the city council may adopt and amend form-based codes for planned development or specific plan areas identified in the general plan, or for other geographically discrete areas within the Rohnert Park Planning Area (sphere of influence) as may be specified by the city council. Such codes may provide for, among other subjects, the establishment of building design, site design, and other design-related standards that, once adopted, shall apply to proposed development or in any areas of the city subject to the codes. The codes may utilize regulations such as transect-based, form-based coding, with regulating plans or similar mechanisms prescribing appropriate land uses. Regulations may also contain project and site design principles relating to appropriate building types, housing mix, integration of land uses, pedestrian orientation, streetscape, and public spaces in the subject area. 
D.  Adoption or Amendment. The adoption or amendment of a form-based code, or the boundaries of any zones established by a form-based code or regulating plan, shall be carried out in accordance with the procedures outlined in Chapter 17.25, Article VII (commencing with Section 17.25.070) of this title. 
E.  Applicability. After a form-based code is adopted for a particular planned development or specific plan area identified in the general plan, or for any other geographically discrete area of the Rohnert Park Planning Area as may be specified by the city council, the building design and site design standards and any and all other land use and development requirements, standards, regulations, or other provisions set forth in such code shall apply to all development within the geographic boundaries established by and for the code notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary. Whenever the requirements, standards, regulations, or other provisions of a form-based code conflict with the requirements, standards, regulations or other provisions set forth in the Municipal Code, the requirements, standards, regulations, or other provisions in the form-based code shall govern. 
F.  Operation and Enforcement of Form-Based Codes. Any failure to comply with a requirement, standard, regulation, or any other provision set forth in an adopted form-based code shall constitute a violation of the Municipal Code. All such violations shall be subject to the enforcement provisions of any applicable local or state law, including without limitation Chapter 17.25 Article XIII (commencing with 17.25.130). 
(Ord. No. 823, § 2, 9-14-2010)  
Article XV.A. - Sonoma Mountain Village Planned Development Zoning District 
 
17.06.810 - General provisions. 
A.  Authority. The adoption of the Sonoma Mountain Village Planned Development Zoning District (SMV P-D) is authorized under the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Rohnert Park (Rohnert Park Municipal Code Title 17, the "Zoning Ordinance"). Specifically, the SMV P-D is adopted pursuant to the regulations set forth in Chapter 17.06, Article VII and Chapter 17.06 Article XV, to provide the "specific development standards designed for that particular district, including minimum lot sizes, setbacks and open space requirements, architectural and landscaping guidelines, and maximum building heights and lot coverage." 
The SMV P-D is based on the authority vested in the City of Rohnert Park by the State of California, including but not limited to: the California Constitution (Article XI, Section 7, et seq.); the Planning and Zoning Law (California Government Code Sections 65000, et seq.); and the California Environmental Quality Act (California Public Resources Code Section 21000, et seq.; California Code of Regulations Title 14, Section 15000, et seq.). 
B.  Purpose. The development code serving the SMV P-D is intended to create a well-designed, pedestrian-oriented, economically viable neighborhood, and to achieve the related goals below. 
The development code describes the required urban and architectural design patterns, while also regulating the uses of the buildings and lots within the SMV Planned Development area. The development code specifies the permitted residential densities and intensity of the development that may be achieved under the Planned Development. It also describes and regulates the design of the public space network that provides the framework and infrastructure for the Sonoma Mountain Village property, focusing on a circulation network that balances the use of all travel modes, including automobiles, pedestrians, bicycles and public transit. 
The development code in the SMV P-D is designed to be used both as a guide for builders, to allow them to understand from the outset the parameters that the community has set for development, and also as a regulating framework for the City as it plans its investment in capital projects and evaluates the design of proposed building projects. This will improve the quality of design proposals that the City receives, the speed and quality of the design review process, and the value of the City's cumulative reinvestment in the public realm. 
(Ord. No. 824, § 2(Exh. A), 9-14-2010)  
17.06.820 - Administration. 
A.  Applicability. 
1.  Applicable Area. All property within the boundaries of the SMV Planned Development shall be subject to the provisions of this Chapter 17.06, Article XV.A. SMV Planned Development boundaries comply with Section 17.02.070.C.2. of the Zoning Ordinance. 
2.  Applicability of Zoning Ordinance and Municipal Code. In conformance with Zoning Ordinance Section 17.06.210.B, the applicable general standards of the zoning ordinance shall apply to all portions of this Article for which no specific standards are proposed. Moreover, unless expressly addressed in this article, provisions of the Municipal Code shall apply within SMV P-D boundaries. 
3.  Applicability of Development Code. The SMV P-D applies to all land uses, subdivisions, and development within the SMV Planned Development Area, as follows: 
a.  New land uses or structures and/or changes to land uses or structures. It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this development code for any person to establish, construct, reconstruct, enlarge, alter, or replace any use of land or structure, except in compliance with the Transect Zones and Development Standards in Sections 17.06.850 and 17.06.860, respectively. No Building Permit or Grading Permit shall be issued by the City unless the proposed construction complies with all applicable provisions of this development code. 
b.  Minimum and exclusive standards. The requirements of this development code are minimum standards for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare and may be made more restrictive through City review and entitlement processes, including Administrative Permits, Use Permits or subdivision review in accordance with Title 17 of the Municipal Code. 
c.  Conflicting Requirements. 
1.  Uniform Building Code. If a conflict occurs between a provision of the Uniform Building Code, as may be amended by the City, and a requirement of this development code, the building code shall control. 
2.  California Fire Code. If a conflict occurs between a provision of the California Fire Code, as may be amended by the City, and a requirement of this development code, the California Fire Code shall control. 
d.  Other requirements may apply. Nothing in this development code eliminates the need for obtaining any other permits required by the City, or any permit, approval or entitlement required by any other local, State or Federal agency. 
B.  Responsibility for Administration. The SMV P-D regulations shall be administered by the Development Services Director, referred as the "Director," and the other decision-making authorities as identified in the Municipal Code. All findings, approvals, determinations, or other exercises of discretionary judgment, including without limitation any delegation of authority by the Director or other decision making authorities, shall be carried out in a manner consistent with the purposes of the SMV P-D, the Zoning Ordinance, the City's General Plan, and the orderly development of the City. 
C.  Interpretation. In addition to the provisions governing interpretation of zoning districts provided at Section 17.02.040 of the Zoning Ordinance, the standards, requirements, densities, land use designations and other contents of this Article XV.A shall be interpreted in conformance with: 
a.  The City of Rohnert Park General Plan (pursuant to Zoning Ordinance Section 17.06.230); 
b.  The Zoning Ordinance, including all provisions applicable to Planned Development Zoning Districts (Chapter 17.06, Article VII), Form-Based Codes (Chapter 17.06, Article XV), and all other applicable provisions; and 
c.  The Purpose described at Section 17.06.810 (B), above. 
To the extent any standard, requirement, density, land use designation, or other content of this Article XV.A is ambiguous or may conflict with the Zoning Ordinance, the standard, requirement, density, land use designation, or other content of this Article shall prevail. 
D.  Approval Requirements. Each structure and land use shall be established, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered, moved or replaced in compliance with the following requirements: 
1.  Allowable Use or Function. The land use or function must be allowed by the standards in the zone where the site is located. 
2.  Entitlements and Approvals. Any and all entitlements or other approvals required by this development code shall be obtained before the issuance of any required grading, building, or other construction permit, and before the proposed use is constructed, otherwise established or put into operation. 
3.  Development Standards. The regulation of lot sizes, setbacks, open space requirements, architectural and landscaping standards, maximum building height, lot coverage, and all other development standards are provided in Sections 17.06.850 and 17.06.860, (including all Tables referenced therein). 
4.  Design Review. Prior to processing an application subject to the SMV P-D, an applicant must obtain written approval from the Sonoma Mountain Village Design Review Board (SMV DRB) that the project meets the requirements of the SMV Design Standards. Design Review shall be required for all original construction within the SMV Planned Development area and written approval of such construction by the SMV DRB shall be provided with applications to the City. 
Applications for building permits, grading permits and any other land use entitlements submitted to the City shall be accompanied by a form(s) completed by the SMV DRB providing at a minimum: detailed property and use information, transect zone use and development standard compliance, including Floor Area Ratios (FARs), densities, building disposition, setbacks, lot coverage, heights, parking, frontages, landscaping, fences, lighting, street widths and types. No application submitted to the City will be accepted without a completed SMV DRB approval form. 
5.  Permitted Uses. The regulation of permitted, conditionally-permitted, administratively-permitted, or otherwise limited or prohibited land uses are provided at Section 17.06.840 and are consistent with the land use requirements of SMV's Final Development Plan. Applications for conditional use permits, administrative permits and any other type of land use permit shall be processed in accordance with Chapter 17.25 of the Municipal Code, Administrative and Enforcement Procedures. 
6.  Zoning Compliance. A Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be required for all development within SMV P-D boundaries, as provided at Chapter 17.25, Article VI, of the Municipal Code (commencing with Section 17.25.060). Applications shall be processed in accordance with relevant provisions of the Municipal Code, including without limitation, Sections 17.25.062, 17.25.063, 17.25.102 and 17.25.103. 
7.  Exemption From Site Plan and Architectural Review. Site plan and architectural review are addressed in this Article XV.A, or the SMV Design Standards. The provisions at Chapter 17.25, Article III, of the Municipal Code (commencing with Section 17.25.030) shall not apply to projects that are located entirely within SMV P-D boundaries. 
E.  Design Review. 
1.  Purposes and Application. 
a.  The purpose of the SMV DRB is to: ensure compliance with the SMV Design Standards; produce a harmonious, pleasing and desirable appearance of sites, structures and signs through the review of the site and building design in the SMV Planned Development area including, but not limited to, materials, textures, colors and such other elements of construction which affect the exterior appearance of structures; and encourage originality in site design, building design, and construction in a manner which will enhance the physical appearance and attractiveness of the community. 
b.  Site and architectural design review provisions shall apply to any permitted, conditionally permitted, administratively permitted or use listed within the SMV P-D. 
2.  Design Review Board. The SMV DRB shall consist of a total of three members. Two members shall be selected by the City Manager must include a city staff member and design professional. One member shall be selected by Sonoma Mountain Village or its successor-in-interest. 
3.  Design Review Requirements. 
a.  Building design review is required for the following: 
1.  Any new building; 
2.  Any new use or existing use or building for which exterior remodeling is proposed, including without limitation exterior surface improvement, such as painting, sand blasting, veneer and stucco surface; 
b.  The establishment or remodeling of any on-premise sign or other advertising structures, shall be regulated under Chapter 17.27 of the Municipal Code. 
c.  Architectural design parameters in the SMV Design Standards shall consist of the following: 
1.  Architecture and design principles related to building design, particularly in terms of scale, bulk, mass, color, texture and form; 
2.  Review of proposed development in the context of the surrounding land use and structures. 
d.  Site design standards shall consist of the following: 
1.  SMV development standards for circulation, parking, setbacks and landscape design issues; 
2.  Site planning principles. 
4.  Drawings To Be Submitted. 
a.  Drawings shall be submitted to the SMV DRB with an application for any site plan review, conditional use permit, planned unit development, tentative subdivision map, tentative parcel map, or administrative approval permit. 
1.  Architectural drawings, drawn to scale, showing all elevations of the proposed structures by point of compass, as they will appear upon completion of construction. All exterior surfacing materials and colors shall be specified. 
2.  Scale drawings of all signs by point of compass that are subject to architectural design review, showing size, location, material, colors and any proposed illumination. 
3.  The SMV DRB may require additional information of the applicant if necessary to carry out the purposes of this section. 
5.  Referral and Action. 
a.  The SMV DRB shall act to approve, deny or require modifications of the drawings submitted for DRB review within thirty days of the determination by the SMV DRB that the application for Design Review is deemed complete as specified in the SMV Design Standards. 
b.  The authority of the SMV DRB with respect to site and building design shall extend to reviewing the plans and making recommendations to the appropriate City permitting authority or for all other discretionary entitlements. Any appeal of the SMV DRB recommendations shall be in accordance with Chapter 17.25, Article XII. 
(Ord. No. 824, § 2(Exh. A), 9-14-2010)  
17.06.830 - Zoning and regulating plan. 
The SMV Zoning and Regulating Plan shows the zoning using "Transects," a term explained below. The Regulating Plan also shows zones for parks and other civic spaces, and the locations where shopfronts are permitted and required. 
A.  Transect Zones. The term "Transect" is used in mixed-use planned developments to define zones in which a wide variety of uses may occur, but which have distinctly different levels of density, lighting, noise and development regulation. Figure 1 shows the progression of increasing density from left to right. The intensity increases from low in the T1 Natural Zone to high in T6 Urban Core. In addition to regulating such factors as building height, setbacks and road types, transects are also used to regulate allowed uses. For example, a detached single family home is allowed in the lower density T3 and T4 but not in the higher density T5 or T6, and a grocery store is allowed in T5 and T6 but not in T3 or T4. 
The SMV P-D contains four of the six transect zones depicted below: T3, T4, T5 and T6. 
FIGURE 1. ILLUSTRATED DEFINITION OF MIXED-USE TRANSECTS 
    
In addition to the transects described above, the SMV P-D has three additional zones for civic spaces: CB for civic buildings, CS for civic spaces (parks and recreational fields), and CP for civic parking (structured parking). 
B.  Regulating Plan Map. The Zoning and Regulating Plan map is on the following page. 
FIGURE 2. SMV P-D ZONING AND REGULATING PLAN 
  
(Ord. No. 824, § 2(Exh. A), 9-14-2010)  
17.06.840 - Permitted land uses. 
Pursuant to Section 17.06.220 of the Municipal Code, this section describes the permitted uses in each transect within the SMV P-D and the circumstances under which such uses are allowed. 
A.  Application. The uses listed in Table 1 shall be permitted by right, conditionally permitted, administratively permitted, or otherwise limited or prohibited as indicated therein. It is recognized that in the preparation of the development code, ambiguity may arise concerning the appropriate classification or permission of an unlisted particular use in each of the various transects. Uses that are not specifically listed on Table 1 or which are not otherwise designated as permitted, conditionally permitted or administratively permitted, are prohibited unless determined by the Planning Commission to be a similar and/or compatible use in accordance with Section 17.06.840 (B) below. 
B.  Approval of Uses Not Listed. 
a.  Planning Commission Findings. The City's Planning Commission shall be responsible for determining whether an unlisted use is similar and/or compatible to a listed use and thus allowed within a particular transect. Similar and/or compatible uses which are not listed in Table 1 may be allowed if the applicant obtains written approval from the SMV DRB and the Planning Commission is able to make all of the following findings: 
1.  The characteristics of and activities associated with the proposed use is similar to one or more of the listed uses within the applicable transect; 
2.  The proposed use will not involve a greater intensity than the use(s) listed in the applicable transect; 
3.  The proposed use is consistent and compatible with the purposes of the applicable transect; 
4.  The proposed use is consistent with the goals of the SMV P-D Article XV.A, the City of Rohnert Park General Plan, and all other applicable regulations; 
5.  The proposed use will not cause substantial injury to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants or their property with the applicable transect. 
b.  Applicable Standards and Permit Requirements. When the Planning Commission determines that a proposed use is similar and/or compatible to a listed use, the proposed use will be treated in the same manner as the listed use in determining where the use is allowed, what permits are required, and what other standards and requirements of this development code apply. 
c.  Appeal. A similar and/or compatible use determination by the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council as set forth in Chapter 17.25, Article XII, of the Municipal Code (commencing with Section 17.25.120). 
C.  Multiple Uses on Single Lot. Where a single lot is proposed to be simultaneously occupied by two or more uses listed TABLE 1, the overall project shall be subject to the most stringent permit level required for any individual use. (For example, a lot proposed for development or occupancy with a use listed as P (permitted), and also a use listed as CUP (conditionally permitted) shall require Conditional Use Permit approval for all development and uses.) 
D.  Land Use Table. The follow terms are used in the Land Uses table. Note that an asterisk indicates that the use is subject to the applicable provisions of Chapter 17.07 of the Municipal Code. 
a.  Permitted Uses ("P"). The use shall be permitted by right. 
b.  Conditionally Permitted Uses ("CUP"). The use shall be permitted, subject to the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to Chapter 17.25, Article I, of the Municipal Code (commencing with Section 17.25.010). 
c.  Administratively Permitted Uses ("A"). The use shall be permitted, subject to the issuance of an Administrative Permit pursuant to Chapter 17.25, Article V, of the Municipal Code (commencing with Section 17.25.050). 
TABLE 1. LAND USES 
A. RESIDENTIAL 	T3 	T4 	T5 	T6 	CS 	CP 	CB 
 Accessory Building 	P 	P 	P 				
 Dwelling, Multifamily 		P 	P 1 	P 1 			
 Dwelling, Single Family 	P 	P 					
 Guest House 	P 	P 					
 Home Occupancy 	A 	A 	A 	A 			
 Large Family Daycare (9-14) 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 
 Live-Work Unit 	P 	P 	P 	P 			
 Manufactured/Mobile Home 	CUP 	CUP 	CUP 				
 Recreational Courts* 	P 	P 					
 Row House 		P 	P 2 	P 1,2 			
 Small Family Daycare Home (8 or Less) 	P 	P 	P 	P 			
 Temporary Use 	See Section 17.06.030 for all transects 
 Water Storage Cisterns 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
 
  
B. LODGING 	T3 	T4 	T5 	T6 	CS 	CP 	CB 
 Bed and Breakfast Inn (up to 5 rooms) 	P 	P 	P 	P 			
 Hotel (no room limit) 			P 	P 			
 Inn (up to 12 rooms) 		P 	P 	P 			
 School Dormitory 		P 	P 	P 			
 
C. OFFICE 	T3 	T4 	T5 	T6 	CS 	CP 	CB 
 Office 2 		P 	P 	P 			P 
 
  [] 
D. RETAIL, GENERAL 	T3 	T4 	T5 	T6 	CS 	CP 	CB 
 Adult Entertainment* 			CUP 	CUP 			
 Alcoholic Beverage Establishment* 			CUP 	CUP 			
 Cinema 			P 	P 			
 Commercial Recreation—Indoor* 		A 	P 	P 			
 Bar/Tavern/Night Club* 			CUP 	CUP 			
 Farmer's Market (daily or weekly, year-round) 		A 	A 	A 	A 		A 
 Groceries, Specialty Foods 		A 	P 	P 			
 Kiosk 		A 	A 	A 	A 		A 
 Liquor Store* 		CUP 	CUP 	CUP 			
 Live-Work Unit 	P 	P 	P 	P 			
 Mobile Home, RV and Boat Sales 							
 Market Hall 3 		P 	P 	P 			P 
 Outdoor and Sidewalk Cafes* 		P 	P 	P 			P 
 Paraphernalia Store 			CUP 4 [] 
CUP 3 			
 Plant Nursery 	CUP 	P 	P 				
 Push Cart 			P 	P 	P 		P 
 Restaurant, Cafe, Coffee Shop 		P 	P 	P 			CUP 
 Retail, General 		P 	P 	P 			CUP 
 Smoking/Tobacco Store 			CUP 5 	CUP 4 			
 Theater/Performing Arts (for Movies, see "Cinema") 		P 	P 	P 			P 
 
E. CIVIC 	T3 	T4 	T5 	T6 	CS 	CP 	CB 
 Art, Public (fountains, statues, kinetic, participatory) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
 Amphitheater (outdoor) 		CUP 	CUP 	CUP 	CUP 		CUP 
 Club, Lodge, Private Meeting Hall 		P 	P 	P 			
 Auditorium (indoor) 		P 	P 	P 			P 
 Library, Museum, Art Gallery 		P 	P 	P 			P 
 Parking, Surface Lot 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 
 Parking, Structured 		A 	P 	P 		P 	
 Parks 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 
 Recycling Facility 		A* 	A* 				A* 
 Religious Assembly 	A 	A 	P 	P 			P 
 Temporary Use/Event 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 		A 
 
F. AGRICULTURE, FOOD and ANIMALS 	T3 	T4 	T5 	T6 	CS 	CP 	CB 
 Beekeeping—Commercial Roof (up to 10 hives) 6 [] 
		P 	P 		P 	P 
 Beekeeping—Residential Yard (up to 2 hives) 6 	P 	P 					
 Chickens (up to 5 hens; no roosters) 7 	P 	P 	P 				P 
 Crop Production, Horticulture, Orchard, Vineyard 	P 	P 	P 				
 Domestic Animals 	P 	P 	P 	P 			
 Domestic Animal Daycare 		P 	P 	P 			
 Animal Rescue 	CUP 	CUP 					
 Garden, Private or Community (less than 2 acres) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 
 Garden, Private or Community (more than 2 acres) 	A 	A 	A 		A 		
 Goats (up to 2 females; no males) 	P 	P 			A 		
 Green Roof/Green Balcony 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
 Greenhouse 8 (commercial) 	CUP 	CUP 	CUP 	CUP 	CUP 		CUP 
 Kennel 			CUP 				
 Plant Nursery 	CUP 	P 	P 				
 Slaughterhouse 	Not allowed in any transect 
 Small Animals* 	P* 	P* 	P* 				
 Trees—Fruit or Nut 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
 Vertical Garden/Green Wall 			P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
 
G. RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEMS 	T3 	T4 	T5 	T6 	CS 	CP 	CB 
 Cogen/Combined Heat and Power (biogas source) 			CUP 	CUP 		CUP 	CUP 
 Cogen/Combined Heat and Power (natural gas source) 	Not allowed in any transect 
 Fuel Cell (biogas source) 			P 	P 		P 	P 
 Fuel Cell (natural gas source) 	Not allowed in any transect 
 Geo-Exchange System 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
 Solar Photovoltaic System (pole mounted) 	A 				P 	P 	P 
 Solar Photovoltaic System (roof mounted) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
 Solar Water Heater (roof, wall or ground mounted) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 
 Wind Farm 					CUP 		
 Windmill (horizontal axis—propeller type) 	P 				P 	P 	P 
 Windmill (vertical axis—cylindrical type) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
 
H. SERVICES 	T3 	T4 	T5 	T6 	CS 	CP 	CB 
 Adult Day Program 		A 	P 	P 			CUP 
 Automated Teller Machine (ATM)—no drive-thru 		P 	P 	P 			P 
 Bank, Financial Services 	P 	P 	P 	P 			
 Business Support Services 	P 	P 	P 	P 			
 Catering 		P 	P 	P 			
 Child Day Care Facility 		A 	P 	P 			
 Health Care Facility 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 
 Incinerator (waste, medical waste, cremation) 	Not allowed in any transect 
 Laboratory—Animal Testing 	Not allowed in any transect 
 Laboratory—Medical, Analytical and Research 		A 	A 	A 			A 
 Laundry, Coin-Operated 			P 				
 Laundry, Dry Cleaning Plant 			A 	A 			
 Maintenance Repair Service—Client Site Services 			P 	P 			
 Maintenance Repair Service—Equipment, Appliances 			P 	P 			
 Meals Assembly 		P 	P 	P 			P 
 Media Production 		A 	P 	P 			P 
 Medical Service—Major 			P 	P 			CUP 
 Medical Service—Minor 	CUP 	P 	P 	P 			
 Mortuary, Funeral Home 		A 	A 	A 			
 Office—Business, Service, Government 		P 	P 	P 			P 
 Office—Professional, Administrative, Processing 		P 	P 	P 			
 Personal Services 	P 	P 	P 	P 			
 Personal Services—Restricted 		A 	P 	P 			
 Printing and Publishing 		P 	P 	P 			P 
 Seasonal Services 					CUP 		
 Storage—Outdoor Storage Yard 		CUP 	CUP 	A 			
 Storage—Warehouse/Indoor 		A 	P 				
 Studio—Art, Dance, Martial Arts, Music, etc. 		P 	P 	P 			P 
 Veterinary Clinic, Animal Hospital 		CUP 	P 	P 			
 
I. AUTOMOTIVE 	T3 	T4 	T5 	T6 	CS 	CP 	CB 
 Auto Vehicle Sales and Rental 			CUP 				
 Carshare/Bicycleshare Stations 		P 	P 	P 		P 	P 
 Electric Vehicle Charging Stations 		P 	P 	P 		P 	P 
 Fueling Station (including alternative fuels) 			CUP 				
 Vehicle Services 			CUP 				
 
J. CIVIL SUPPORT 	T3 	T4 	T5 	T6 	CS 	CP 	CB 
 Cemetery 		CUP 					
 Public Safety Facility 	A 	A 	A 	A 			P 
 Residential Care Facilities for the Elderly (RCFE) 		A 	A 	A 			
 Residential Care Facilities for the Chronically Ill (RCFCI) 		A 	A 	A 			
 Homeless Shelter* 		CUP 	CUP 				
 Telecommunication Facility 		CUP 	CUP 	CUP 		CUP 	CUP 
 Transitional Housing 		CUP 	CUP 	CUP 			
 
K. EDUCATION 	T3 	T4 	T5 	T6 	CS 	CP 	CB 
 College 			CUP 	CUP 			
 Elementary School—Private 		CUP 	CUP 	CUP 			
 Elementary School—Public 		P 	P 	P 			
 Junior High and High School—Private 		CUP 	CUP 	CUP 			
 Junior High and High School—Public 		P 	P 	P 			
 Childcare Center 	A 	A 	A 	A 			P 
 Research and Development (R&D) 		P 	P 	P 			
 School—Specialized Education and Training 	A 	A 	P 	P 			P 
 
L. INDUSTRY, MANUFACTURING AND WHOLESALE 	T3 	T4 	T5 	T6 	CS 	CP 	CB 
 Commercial Food Processing 			CUP 	CUP 			
 Furniture/Fixtures Manufacturing, Cabinet Shop 			P 	P 			
 Manufacturing/Processing—Light 		CUP 	P 	CUP 			
 Manufacturing/Processing—Heavy 			CUP 				
 Wholesale Operations 			A 				
 
P 	PERMITTED 
CUP 	CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED 
A 	ADMINISTRATIVE USE PERMIT REQUIRED 
* 	USES MARKED WITH AN ASTERISK ARE SUBJECT TO THE APPLICABLE PROVISIONS OF CHAPTER 17.07. 
 
(Ord. No. 824, § 2(Exh. A), 9-14-2010) 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
Only allowed on the ground floor where shop front or gallery is not required. 
For Live-work units, see the Residential category. 

--- () --- 
A single story building with a taller story of up to 25 feet is allowed for this use. 
Paraphernalia stores are subject to Municipal Code 8.33. 
Smoking/tobacco stores are subject to Municipal Code 8.32. 

--- () --- 
Minimum 20 feet away from property line. 
A chicken coop or other suitable structure for hens as approved by the SMV DRB is required. 
For residential greenhouse, see Accessory Building under Residential. Note that the minimum two-story requirement does not apply to the greenhouse use. 
 
17.06.850 - Transect zones. 
The SMV P-D zones are referred to as "Transect zones" or "T zones" as defined in Section 17.06.800 (B). Pursuant to Section 17.06.210.B. of the Municipal Code, the following sections describe the specific development standards for each of the transect zones within the SMV P-D. 
A.  Specific Requirements for T3 - Suburban Zone. T3 Sub-Urban Zone consists of low density residential areas, adjacent to higher density zones with limited mixed use. Home occupations and accessory buildings are allowed. Planting is naturalistic and setbacks are relatively deep. The standards in this section shall apply only to properties located in areas designated T3 on the Zoning and Regulating Plan. See the Land Uses table for details on the allowed uses. 
1.  Density and Block Size. 
a.  The residential density may range from two to five units per gross acre. 
b.  The maximum block perimeter is one thousand seven hundred feet, measured at the Lot Line. 
2.  Building Disposition. 
a.  Lots may be sixty to one hundred twenty feet wide at the Principal Frontage. 
b.  Allowed lot configurations: 
1.  Edge Yard. 
2.  Courtyard. 
c.  The front of the Principal Building shall be at least fifty percent as wide as the Principal Frontage. 
d.  Buildings shall be set back from the frontages and centerline of the alley as shown. 
  
e.  Accessory buildings must be set back a minimum of forty feet from the Principal Frontage. 
f.  Encroachments: 
1.  Stoops, bay windows and open porches may encroach on these setbacks up to fifty percent; a minimum of three feet clear must be maintained on three sides. 
2.  Encroachments of up to three feet are allowed at the rear between garage driveways so long as twenty foot clear is maintained in the alley. 
3.  Building Height. 
a.  The maximum building height is three stories for the principal building and two stories for an accessory building. 
b.  The minimum building height is two stories for the principal building except in the T3 Special area shown on the Regulating Plan and for special uses noted in Table 1. Land Uses. 
  
c.  Each story shall not exceed fourteen feet clear, floor to ceiling. 
d.  For fire access, any building having a clear street width of less than twenty-six feet shall be limited to two stories or shall have other such provisions as to accommodate fire access to the roof. Roof access could be provided with a ladder access point at a maximum height of twenty-one feet or a continuous connection to an adjacent accessible roof. 
4.  Allowed Private Frontages. 
a.  Common Yard. 
b.  Porch and Fence. 
5.  Fences. 
a.  Fences must be setback from the Principal Frontage at least ten feet more than the front Facade, and may occupy no more than thirty percent of the Lot width on the Principal Frontage and no more than fifty percent of the Lot width on the Secondary Frontage. 
6.  Landscaping. 
a.  A minimum of one tree shall be planted within the setback from the Principal Frontage. 
b.  Food gardens are allowed in Private Frontages, private yards, and Public Frontages. 
c.  Turf area is limited to thirty percent of the landscaped area within the Principal and Secondary Frontages. 
d.  Streets trees are required. See Section 17.06.870 (F) for details. 
B.  Specific Requirements for T4 - General Urban Zone. T4 General Urban Zone consists of a mixed use but primarily residential urban fabric. It may have a wide range of building types. The standards in this section shall apply only to properties located in areas designated T4 on the Zoning and Regulating Plan. 
1.  Density and Block Size. 
a.  The residential density may range from ten to thirty units per gross acre. 
b.  The maximum block perimeter is one thousand seven hundred feet, measured at the Lot Line. 
2.  Building Disposition. 
a.  Lots may be eighteen to ninety feet wide at the Principal Frontage. 
b.  Allowed lot configurations: 
1.  Edge Yard. 
2.  Zero Lot Line. 
3.  Rear Yard. 
4.  Courtyard. 
c.  The front of the Principal Building shall be at least sixty percent as wide as the Principal Frontage. 
d.  Buildings shall be set back from the frontages and centerline of the alley as shown. 
  
e.  Accessory buildings must be set back a minimum of thirty feet from the Principal Frontage. 
f.  Encroachments: 
1.  Stoops may encroach one hundred percent of the depth of a setback. 
2.  Open porches and awnings may encroach up to fifty percent of the depth of the setback. 
3.  Balconies and bay windows may encroach up to twenty-five percent of the depth of the setback. 
4.  Encroachments of up to three feet are allowed at the rear between garage driveways so long as twenty foot clear is maintained in the alley. 
3.  Building Height. 
a.  The maximum building height is three stories for the principal building and two stories for an accessory building. 
b.  The minimum building height is two stories for the principal building except for special uses noted in Table 1. Land Uses. 
  
c.  Each story shall not exceed fourteen feet clear, floor to ceiling. 
d.  For fire access, any building having a clear street width of less than twenty-six feet shall be limited to two stories or shall have other such provisions as to accommodate fire access to the roof. Roof access could be provided with a ladder access point at a maximum height of twenty-one feet or a continuous connection to an adjacent accessible roof. 
4.  Allowed Private Frontages. 
a.  Porch and Fence. 
b.  Terrace. 
c.  Forecourt. 
d.  Stoop. 
e.  Shopfront and Awning. 
f.  Gallery. 
5.  Fences. 
a.  Fences must be setback from the Principal Frontage at least five feet more than the front Facade, and may occupy no more than thirty percent of the Lot width on the Principal Frontage and no more than fifty percent of the Lot width on the Secondary Frontage. 
6.  Landscaping. 
a.  A minimum of one tree shall be planted within the setback from the Principal Frontage. 
b.  Food gardens are allowed in Private Frontages, private yards, and Public Frontages. 
c.  Turf area is limited to thirty percent of the landscaped area within the Principal and Secondary Frontages. 
d.  Streets trees are required. See Section 17.06.870 (F) for details. 
C.  Specific Requirements for T5 - Urban Center Zone. T5 Urban Center Zone consists of higher density mixed use buildings that accommodate retail, offices, rowhouses and apartments. It has a tight network of streets, with wide sidewalks, steady street tree planting and buildings set close to the sidewalks. The standards in this section shall apply only to properties located in areas designated T5 on the Zoning and Regulating Plan. 
1.  Density and Block Size. 
a.  The residential density may range from fifteen to forty-five units per gross acre. 
b.  The maximum block perimeter is two thousand one hundred feet, measured at the Lot Line. 
2.  Building Disposition. 
a.  Lots may be eighteen to two hundred fifty feet wide at the Principal Frontage. 
b.  First story commercial is permitted throughout and is required at mandatory shop fronts per the Zoning and Regulating Plan. 
c.  Allowed lot configurations: 
1.  Zero Lot Line. 
2.  Rear Yard. 
3.  Courtyard. 
d.  The front of the Principal Building shall be at least eighty percent as wide as the Principal Frontage. 
e.  Buildings shall be set back from the frontages and centerline of the alley as shown. 
  
f.  Accessory buildings must be set back a minimum of thirty feet from the Principal Frontage. 
g.  Encroachments: 
1.  Stoops may encroach one hundred percent of the depth of a setback. 
2.  Open porches may encroach up to fifty percent of the depth of the setback. 
3.  Awnings may encroach up to one hundred percent of the depth of the setback, and may overhang the public sidewalk by up to six feet. 
4.  Balconies and bay windows may encroach up to twenty-five percent of the depth of the setback. 
5.  Encroachments of up to three feet are allowed at the rear between garage driveways so long as twenty foot clear is maintained in the alley. 
3.  Building Height. 
a.  The maximum building height is five stories for the principal building and two stories for an accessory building. 
b.  The minimum building height is three stories for a residential principal building and two stories for a mixed-use or non-residential building except for special uses noted in Table 1. Land Uses. 
  
c.  Each story above the ground floor shall not exceed fourteen feet clear, floor to ceiling. All renovations to buildings constructed prior to January 1, 2010 are exempt from this ceiling height limit. 
d.  For fire access, any building having a clear street width of less than twenty-six feet shall be limited to two stories or shall have other such provisions as to accommodate fire access to the roof. Roof access could be provided with a ladder access point at a maximum height of twenty-one feet or a continuous connection to an adjacent accessible roof. 
e.  First floor residential or lodging shall be raised a minimum of two feet and a maximum of four feet above the average sidewalk grade. 
4.  Expression Line. 
a.  The street level facade of any building with a shopfront shall be distinguished from the remainder of the building with a horizontal expression line on the facade located between the highest point of the second floor and the bottom edge of the third floor windows. The purpose of this architectural feature is to create a comfortable and cohesive public space. 
b.  The expression line shall be incorporated into the facade as a permanent design element and shall be created by a change in building material, architectural design, setback, recess, projection, cornices, belt courses, corbelling, molding, stringcourses or other sculptured design element. Where city staff determines that a consistent expression line has been established on adjacent buildings, it shall be continued on any new construction or expansion, or a transitional design element (such as columns, piers, bays or changes in facade materials) between the existing and proposed expression lines may be required. 
  
5.  Allowed Private Frontages. 
a.  Terrace. 
b.  Forecourt. 
c.  Stoop. 
d.  Shopfront and Awning. 
e.  Gallery. 
6.  Fences. 
a.  Fences are generally not allowed in the T5 transect zone on the Principal and Secondary Frontages, however, they may be approved in special circumstances. 
7.  Landscaping. 
a.  Trees are allowed but not required in the Private Frontage. 
b.  Streets trees are required. See Section 17.06.870 (F) for details. 
c.  Food gardens are allowed in Private Frontages, private yards, and Public Frontages. 
d.  Turf is not allowed in T5. 
D.  Specific Requirements for T6 - Urban Core Zone. T6 Urban Core Zone consists of the highest density and height, with the greatest variety of uses. It may have larger blocks; streets have steady street tree planting and buildings set close to the wide sidewalks. The standards in this section shall apply only to properties located in areas designated T6 on the Zoning and Regulating Plan. 
1.  Density and Block Size. 
a.  The residential density may range from twenty-five to seventy units per gross acre. 
b.  The maximum block perimeter is one thousand eight hundred feet, measured at the Lot Line. 
2.  Building Disposition. 
a.  Lots may be eighteen to two hundred fifty feet wide at the Principal Frontage. 
b.  First story commercial is permitted throughout and is required at mandatory shop fronts per the Zoning and Regulating Plan. 
c.  Allowed lot configurations: 
1.  Rear Yard—Which includes buildings at the lot line on frontages and between buildings. 
2.  Courtyard. 
d.  The front of the Principal Building shall be at least eighty percent as wide as the Principal Frontage. 
e.  Buildings shall be set back from the frontages and centerline of the alley as shown. 
  
f.  Accessory buildings must be set back a minimum of thirty feet from the Principal Frontage. 
g.  Encroachments: 
1.  Stoops may encroach one hundred percent of the depth of a setback. 
2.  Awnings may encroach up to one hundred percent of the depth of the setback, and may overhang the public sidewalk by up to ten feet. 
3.  Balconies and bay windows may encroach up to twenty-five percent of the depth of the setback. 
4.  Encroachments of up to three feet are allowed at the rear between garage driveways so long as twenty foot clear is maintained in the alley. 
3.  Building Height. 
a.  The maximum building height is seven stories for the principal building and two stories for an accessory building. 
b.  The minimum height is three stories except for special uses noted in Table 1. Land Uses. 
  
c.  Each story above the ground floor shall not exceed fourteen feet clear, floor to ceiling. All renovations to buildings constructed prior to January 1, 2010 are exempt from this ceiling height limit. 
d.  For fire access, any building having a clear street width of less than twenty-six feet shall be limited to two stories or shall have other such provisions as to accommodate fire access to the roof. Roof access could be provided with a ladder access point at a maximum height of twenty-one feet or a continuous connection to an adjacent accessible roof. 
e.  Residential and Office Uses. 
1.  Residential and office uses are not allowed on the ground floor. 
2.  Entryways to residential and office uses may be located on the ground floor, and are limited to eight feet of width at the Principal Frontage. 
4.  Expression Line. 
a.  The street level facade of any building with a shopfront shall be distinguished from the remainder of the building with a horizontal expression line on the facade located between the highest point of the second floor and the bottom edge of the third floor windows. The purpose of this architectural feature is to create a comfortable and cohesive public space. 
b.  The expression line shall be incorporated into the facade as a permanent design element and shall be created by a change in building material, architectural design, setback, recess, projection, cornices, belt courses, corbelling, molding, stringcourses or other sculptured design element. Where city staff determines that a consistent expression line has been established on adjacent buildings, it shall be continued on any new construction or expansion, or a transitional design element (such as columns, piers, bays or changes in facade materials) between the existing and proposed expression lines may be required. 
  
5.  Allowed Private Frontages. 
a.  Forecourt. 
b.  Stoop. 
c.  Shopfront and Awning. 
d.  Gallery. 
6.  Fences. 
a.  Fences are generally not allowed in the T6 transect zone on the Principal and Secondary Frontages, however they may be approved in special circumstances. 
7.  Landscaping. 
a.  Trees are allowed but not required in the Private Frontage. 
b.  Streets trees are required. See Section 17.06.870 (F) for details. 
c.  Food gardens are allowed in Private Frontages, private yards, and Public Frontages. 
d.  Turf is not allowed in T6. 
E.  Specific Requirements for CS - Civic Space Zone. CS Civic Space Zone consists of parks, playgrounds, recreational fields and similar uses. The standards in this section shall apply only to properties located in areas designated Civic Space Transect Zone (CS). 
1.  Absence of Development Requirements. The CS Transect is intended for open space, parkland, and/or habitat preservation only. Thus, no specific design, architectural, or development requirements shall apply to properties located in areas designated Civic Space Zone (CS). 
F.  Specific Requirements for CP - Civic Parking Zone. CP Civic Parking Zone consists of public parking garages. The standards in this section shall apply only to properties located in areas designated Civic Parking Transect Zone (CP). 
1.  Approval. Uses and structures within the Civic Parking Zones shall be approved by the Planning Commission. 
G.  Specific Requirements for CB - Civic Building Zone. CB Civic Building Zone consists of civic buildings appropriate to the location. The standards in this section shall apply only to properties located in areas designated Civic Building Transect Zone (CB). 
1.  Absence of Development Requirements. 
a.  The CB Transect is intended for development of city buildings and/or civic or public spaces of the City of Rohnert Park and/or other public agencies only. 
b.  Control over the design, architectural, and development features in such areas is therefore left to City of Rohnert Park and/or such agencies. Thus, no specific design, architectural, or development requirements shall apply to properties located in areas designated Civic Building Zone (CB). 
H.  Overlay Districts. 
1.  Authority. 
a.  The Planning Commission has the authority to establish overlay districts for the purpose of accommodating uses which support the goals of the SMV P-D but which may not meet the specific criteria of a particular transect zone. 
b.  An overlay district may be combined with any other transect zone, which allows compatible densities, by a change in district to include the overlay in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.25, Article VII (commencing with Section 17.25.070). 
2.  Process. 
a.  Define the specific locations on the SMV P-D Zoning Map. 
b.  Define the allowed uses for the overlay zone. 
c.  Define special criteria which differ from the underlying transect zone for parking requirements, building disposition, building heights and other elements as needed. 
(Ord. No. 824, § 2(Exh. A), 9-14-2010)  
17.06.860 - Development standards. 
A.  Application. The standards in this section shall apply to all transects within SMV P-D boundaries. 
B.  Bicycle Parking Requirements. 
1.  General Requirements. 
a.  All the requirements of Municipal Code Section 17.16.140 apply within SMV P-D boundaries except for the numbers of required spaces which are given below in Section 17.06.860 (B) (2). 
2.  Required Spaces: 
a.  All Transect Zones. One publicly accessible bicycle parking space for every four multifamily dwelling units. 
b.  T3 Suburban Zone. No bicycle parking is required for single family residential uses. 
c.  T4 General Urban Zone. On block faces having an entry to a non-residential use, a minimum of one bicycle parking space is required in a highly visible location in the public or private frontage. 
d.  T5 Urban Center Zone. On block faces having an entry to a non-residential use, a minimum of two bicycle parking spaces are required in highly visible locations in the public or private frontages. 
e.  T6 Urban Core Zone. A minimum of two bicycle parking spaces are required per block face in highly visible locations in the public or private frontages. 
f.  CS Civic Space Zone. Any civic space of at least 0.25 acres must have a minimum of two bicycle parking spaces. Spaces designed for active play, such as sports fields and jogging tracks, require an additional four bicycle parking spaces per acre. 
g.  CP Civic Parking Zone. A minimum of one covered bicycle parking space is required near the main entry for every twenty covered vehicle parking spaces in the facility, and must be provided free of charge. 
h.  Civic Building Zone. Provide a minimum of one bicycle parking space for every ten employees plus two for visitors in a highly visible location in the public or private frontage. 
C.  Vehicle Parking Requirements. The off-street parking requirements contained in this section are intended to ensure that off-street parking facilities are provided for new land uses and for enlargements of existing uses. Off-street parking facilities may be designed for efficiency by utilizing shared parking criteria as set forth herein. 
1.  General Requirements. 
a.  On-street parking along the frontage lines of a lot shall be counted toward fulfilling the parking requirements. 
b.  When the required number of parking spaces cannot be provided on-site or along the frontage lines of the lot, parking spaces may be provided within one-quarter mile of the lot. In such situations, the property owner of the lot requiring the parking shall enter into a written agreement with the property owner of the off-site location (if different from the property owner of the lot requiring parking). The agreement shall provide for the required number of parking spaces to serve the lot. The terms of any such agreement shall be approved by the Development Services Director or his or her designee. 
c.  The standard on-street parallel parking space shall be twenty-three feet long by the width as shown as the Parking Lane on the Street and Alley Plan (Section 17.06.870). 
d.  All surface parking shall be in the rear half of a lot except in the Civic Parking Zone where ground-level parking is allowed throughout the lot if screened from the frontages with an architectural feature such as a vented masonry or steel wall. 
e.  Parking lots shall be screened from the frontage by a building or street screen. 
f.  The vehicle entrance of a parking lot or garage on a frontage shall be no wider than thirty feet. Pedestrian entrances to parking lots and garages shall be directly at a frontage and shall not require a pedestrian to pass through a building or enter through an alley. 
g.  Loading docks and service areas are not permitted on the Principal or Secondary Frontages. 
2.  Required Vehicle Spaces. 
a.  Required Parking: The minimum parking required for a use is given in Table 2 when parking is not shared with another use. 
TABLE 2. REQUIRED VEHICLE PARKING 
	T3 	T4 	T5 and T6 	CB 
RESIDENTIAL 	2.0/dwelling 	1.5/dwelling 	1.0/dwelling 	not applicable 
LODGING 	1.0/bedroom 	1.0/bedroom 	1.0/bedroom 	not applicable 
WAREHOUSE and DISTRIB. 	2.0/1000 sq. ft. 	2.0/1000 sq. ft. 	1.0/1000 sq. ft. 	1.0/1000 sq. ft. 
MANUF. and PROCESSING 	2.5/1000 sq. ft. 	2.5/1000 sq. ft. 	1.5/1000 sq. ft. 	1.5/1000 sq. ft. 
OFFICE and LT. INDUSTRIAL 	3.0/1000 sq. ft. 	3.0/1000 sq. ft. 	2.0/1000 sq. ft. 	2.0/1000 sq. ft. 
RETAIL 	4.0/1000 sq. ft. 	4.0/1000 sq. ft. 	3.0/1000 sq. ft. 	not applicable 
CIVIC 	CUP 	CUP 	CUP 	CUP 
OTHER 	CUP 	CUP 	CUP 	CUP 
 
b.  Shared Parking: When adjacent uses share parking, the required number of spaces is reduced by following this procedure: 
1.  Base Parking. Add up the base required parking from Table 2. 
2.  Look up the Shared Parking Factor from Table 3. If parking is shared between more than two uses, then select the largest Shared Parking Factor. 
3.  Multiply the Base Parking with the Shared Parking Factor to get the actual required parking. 
4.  The Shared Parking Factor for Civic and Other uses may be established by the Development Services Director or his or her designee. 
TABLE 3. SHARED PARKING FACTOR 
	RESIDENTIAL 	LODGING 	WAREHOUSE and DISTRIB. 	MANUF. and PROCESSING 	OFFICE and LT. INDUSTRIAL 	RETAIL 
RESIDENTIAL 	1.0 	0.9 	0.7 	0.7 	0.7 	0.8 
LODGING 	0.9 	1.0 	0.6 	0.6 	0.6 	0.8 
WAREHOUSE and DISTRIB. 	0.7 	0.6 	1.0 	0.9 	0.9 	0.8 
MANUF. and PROCESSING 	0.7 	0.6 	0.9 	1.0 	0.9 	0.8 
OFFICE and LT. INDUSTRIAL 	0.7 	0.6 	0.9 	0.9 	1.0 	0.8 
RETAIL 	0.8 	0.8 	0.8 	0.8 	0.8 	1.0 
 
3.  Example Vehicle Parking Calculation. To illustrate how parking requirements are calculated, consider the situation in Figure 3. The block has a twelve thousand square foot retail use at A, and fifteen apartments at B. Parking for the block is located around its perimeter and also at the interior of the block. The block is located in transect zone T5. 
Step 1. Find the Base Required Parking. From Table 2, the base parking requirements are: 
For Use A: (3.0/1,000 square feet) × 12,000 square feet = 36 spaces 
For Use B: (1.0/dwelling) × 15 units = 15 spaces 
Total of A + B = 51 spaces. 
Step 2. Find the Shared Parking Factor. From Table 3, the Shared Parking Factor is 0.8 for residential sharing parking with retail. 
Step 3. Multiply to Obtain the Actual Required Parking. The total actual required parking is then 51 spaces × 0.8 = 41 spaces. These spaces may be located anywhere allowed by Section C, but would generally be located in areas similar to those shown in Figure 3. 
FIGURE 3. EXAMPLE PARKING 
CALCULATION SCENARIO 
  
D.  Signage. Signage requirements for size, type, location, lighting and materials are contained in the SMV DRB Design Standards. 
E.  Exterior Lighting. 
a.  Street lighting requirements are in Section 17.06.870 (E). 
b.  All other exterior lighting requirements are found in the SMV-DRB Design Standards. 
F.  Waste. 
a.  Containers for recycling of green waste, compost and landfill shall be stored in the rear half of the lot and accessed from the alley. 
b.  Provision must be made for recycling of at least aluminum, cardboard, mixed consumer container metals, mixed consumer container plastics, paper and greenwaste. 
c.  If curbside food waste collection is available, containers must be provided. 
(Ord. No. 824, § 2(Exh. A), 9-14-2010)  
17.06.870 - Streets and public frontages. 
A.  Street and Alley Plan. Street types and accompanying public amenities are identified on Figure 4 in this section. The color-coded map uses private alleys shown in grey and four street types: Neighborhood Streets, Minor Streets, Main Streets and Modified Main Streets. The details for these street types and the requirements for bicycle lanes, parking lanes, planter strips, sidewalks and street lights are detailed in Table 4. Details on the one-way streets and angled parking will be provided during preparation of Tentative Maps and will be included in the SMV P-D through the zoning amendment process as set forth in Chapter 17.25 Article VII (commencing at 17.25.070). 
FIGURE 4. SMV P-D STREET AND ALLEY PLAN 
  
B.  Street Types. 
TABLE 4. STREET TYPES 
	(See FIGURE 4 on the next page) 

ALLEY 
Street Type 	Access to private parking. No through traffic. Maximum alley length is three hundred feet without review of Rohnert Park Fire Marshal. 
Right-of-Way Width 	Twenty feet min. 
Twenty-six feet at garage entries 
Pavement Width 	Sixteen feet paved plus two feet driveable surface on each side 
Design Speed 	Ten mph 
Curb Radius 	Ten feet 
Sidewalk 	None 
Planter Type 	Planters allowed between driveway aprons 
Bike Lane 	None 
Trees 	In planters between driveway aprons 
Street Lighting 	Full cutoff decorative fixtures are allowed, but no lighting is required. Maximum of 0.2 average footcandles. 
 
FIGURE 4. ALLEY PLAN VIEW 
  
TABLE 4. STREET TYPES 
	  
	NEIGHBORHOOD STREET 
Street Type 	Access to small residential areas 
Right-of-Way Width 	Fifty-five feet 
Pavement Width 	Thirty-two feet 1 [] 
Design Speed 	Fifteen mph 
Curb Radius 	Fifteen feet with no bulb-out or up to thirty feet with bulb-out 
Sidewalk 	Six feet wide level sidewalk. Alley entry slopes up before level sidewalk. 
Planter Type 	Five and one-half-foot continuous planter 
Bike Lane 	None 
Trees 	Average of thirty feet on center 
Street Lighting 	Min. 0.20 and max. 0.40 average maintained footcandles 
Full cutoff fixture required. 
Max. sixteen-foot pole height. 
 
TABLE 4. STREET TYPES 
	  
	MINOR STREET 
Street Type 	Serves abutting land use and carries traffic to nearest collector 
Right-of-Way Width 	Fifty-nine feet 
Pavement Width 	Thirty-six feet 2 [] 
Design Speed 	Twenty mph 
Curb Radius 	Twenty feet with no bulb-out or up to thirty feet with bulb-out 
Sidewalk 	Six feet wide level sidewalk. Alley entry slopes up before level sidewalk. 
Planter Type 	Five and one-half-foot continuous planter 
Bike Lane 	None 
Trees 	Average of thirty feet on center 
Street Lighting 	Min. 0.20 avg. maintained footcandles 
Max 0.50 avg. maintained footcandles 
Full cutoff fixture required. 
Max. sixteen-foot pole height. 
 
TABLE 4. STREET TYPES 
	  
	MAIN STREET 
Street Type 	Provides main access to commercial district and includes Class 2 bike lanes 
Right-of-Way Width 	Seventy-two feet 
Pavement Width 	Forty-six feet 3 [] 
Design Speed 	Twenty-five mph 
Curb Radius 	Twenty feet with no bulb-out or up to thirty-five feet with bulb-out 
Sidewalk 	Thirteen feet wide level sidewalk. Alley entry slopes up before level sidewalk. 
Planter Type 	4'×4' tree well and/or five and one-half-foot continuous planter 
Bike Lane 	Five foot wide striped on both sides 
Trees 	Average of thirty feet on center 
Street Lighting 	Minimum 0.50 and maximum 1.00 avg. maintained footcandles 
Full cutoff fixture required. 
Max. fourteen-foot pole height. 
 
TABLE 4. STREET TYPES 
	  
	MAIN STREET: MOD 1 
Street Type 	Provides main access to commercial district with wider driving lanes and no bike lanes 
Right-of-Way Width 	Sixty-six feet 
Pavement Width 	Forty feet 4 [] 
Design Speed 	Twenty-five mph 
Curb Radius 	Twenty feet with no bulb-out or up to thirty-five feet with bulb-out 
Sidewalk 	Thirteen feet wide level sidewalk. Alley entry slopes up before level sidewalk. 
Planter Type 	4'×4' tree well and/or five and one-half-foot continuous planter 
Bike Lane 	None 
Trees 	Average of thirty feet on center 
Street Lighting 	Minimum 0.50 and maximum 1.00 average maintained footcandles 
Full cutoff fixture required. 
Max. fourteen-foot pole height. 
 
TABLE 4. STREET TYPES 
	  
	MAIN STREET: MOD 2 
Street Type 	Provides main access to commercial district with wider driving lanes and no bike lanes 
Right-of-Way Width 	Seventy-six feet 
Pavement Width 	Fifty feet 5 [] 
Design Speed 	Twenty-five mph 
Curb Radius 	Twenty feet with no bulb-out or up to thirty-five feet with bulb-out 
Sidewalk 	Thirteen feet wide level sidewalk. Alley entry slopes up before level sidewalk. 
Planter Type 	4'×4' tree well and/or five and one-half-foot continuous planter 
Bike Lane 	Five foot wide striped on both sides 
Trees 	Average of thirty feet on center 
Street Lighting 	Minimum 0.50 and maximum 1.00 average maintained footcandles 
Full cutoff fixture required. 
Max. fourteen-foot pole height. 
 
C.  Sidewalks. 
a.  In the Public Frontage, a continuous level sidewalk is required around every block. 
b.  The same sidewalk standards as defined in Table 4 shall be applied on each side of the street within a block. 
c.  The required width of a sidewalk is defined by the Street Type in Table 4. 
d.  Sidewalks shall not have railings, and therefore the site grading must be made to address proper drainage without the need for unusually elevated sidewalks. 
e.  Sidewalks must comply with all relevant state and federal law. 
D.  Planter Strips. 
a.  Planter strips are required where indicated in Table 4. 
E.  Street Lighting. 
a.  All public streets shall use the City's Street Lighting Design Standards. 
b.  Lighting for private alleys and streets shall use the SMV P-D Street Lighting Design Standards and shall comply with the SMV DRB Design Standards. 
c.  Gallery frontage types preclude the use of typical street lighting. Therefore, decorative surface mounted lights are required on gallery soffits. This lighting needs to provide an appropriate amount of lighting for the sidewalk and adjacent parking lane, as determined by the current Illuminating Engineering Society (IES) Guidelines. The City may require these lights to be controlled by photocells and/or timers to assure appropriate lighting of the public way. Gallery lights are not intended to provide roadway lighting and must be coordinated with adjacent street lights to ensure safety. 
F.  Street Trees. Table 5 gives the allowed species of street trees in the SMV P-D. Any tree which meets the following criteria may be proposed as an alternate and must be approved by the Director of Development Services or his or her designee: 
• Non-invasive. 
• Has low potential for causing damage to adjacent sidewalks, curbs and roadway. 
• Fruit does not cause damage to cars, clog storm drains or attract rats. 
• Tree is hearty and disease resistant. 
• Appropriate for clay-rich soil and seasonal rainfall. 
TABLE 5. ALLOWED STREET TREE SPECIES 
Botanic Name 	Common Name 
Acer bueregerianum 	Trident Maple 
Acer freemanii 	Autumn Blaze Maple 
Acer rubrum 'Bowhall' 	Red Maple 
Arbutus unedo 'Marina' 	Strawberry Tree 
Carpinus betulus 	European Hornbeam 
Celtis australis 	European Hackberry 
Celtis occidentalis 	Common Hackberry 
Ceratonia siliqua 	Carob 
Cercis canandensis 	Eastern Redbud 
Cercis reniformis 	Oklahoma Redbud 
Chilopsis linearis 	Desert Willow 
Ginkgo biloba 'Princeton Sentry' 	Gingko 
Gymnocladus dioica 	Kentucky Coffee Tree 
Koelreuteria bipinnata 	Chinese Flame Tree 
Koelreuteria paniculata 	Flamegold Tree 
Lagerstroemia indica 'Natchez' 	Crape Myrtle 
Lagerstroemia indica x L. fauri clones 	Crape Myrtle 
Laurus Nobilis 	Grecian Laurel 
Liriodendron tulipfera 	Tulip Tree 
Magnolia grandiflora 	Southern Magnolia 
Malus arnoldiana 	Anold Crabapple 
Olea europaea 	Fruitless Olive 
Pistacia chinensis 	Chinese Pistache 
Prunus ceraifera 	Cascade Snow 
Pyrus calleryana 'Aristocrat' 	Flowering Pear 
Quercus agrifola* 	Coast Live Oak* 
Quercus buckleyi 	Texas Red Oak 
Quercus douglasii* 	Blue Oak* 
Quercus lobata* 	Valley Oak* 
Quercus rubra 	Red Oak 
Quercus suber* 	Cork Oak* 
Quercus wislizenii* 	Interior Live Oak* 
Tilia cordata 	Littleleaf Linden 
Zelkova serrata 	Sawleaf Zelkova 
Zelkova serrata* 	Green Vase* 
 
*Tree having an asterisk require a minimum of ten-foot radius without concrete or asphalt. 
a.  Street tree spacing shall be an average of thirty feet on center for Principal and Secondary Frontages. 
b.  Tree wells and root barriers are required for all street trees in T5 and T6 which are within five feet of publicly-maintained concrete or asphalt. 
(Ord. No. 824, § 2(Exh. A), 9-14-2010) 
_____
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
Pavement width may be reduced where parking is not allowed on one or both sides of the street. 

--- () --- 
Pavement width may be reduced where parking is not allowed on one or both sides of the street. 

--- () --- 
Pavement width may be reduced where parking is not allowed on one or both sides of the street. 

--- () --- 
Pavement width may be reduced where parking is not allowed on one or both sides of the street. 

--- () --- 
Pavement width may be reduced where parking is not allowed on one or both sides of the street. 
 
Glossary. 
A.  Purpose. The glossary of terms and phrases used in the SMV P-D are technical or specialized and may not reflect common usage. If a definition in this section conflicts with a definition in another provision of the Municipal Code, the definitions in this section shall control. If a word is not defined in this section, refer to Chapter 17.04 of the Zoning Ordinance. The Development Services Director shall determine the meaning of terms when a definition is ambiguous or when a term is not defined in accordance with Section 17.02.090 of the Municipal Code. 
B.  Definitions of Specialized Terms and Phrases. The definitions provided in the Municipal Code shall apply to Article XV.A. If there is a conflict between the definitions in the Municipal Code and the definitions provided in the Article, the definitions in this Article shall control. 
"Abut." Adjoin or border on. This term is used in several of the other definitions. 
"Administrative Use Permit." A use permit which is granted by the City's Planning Department without requiring the approval of the Planning Commission. 
"Adult Day Program." Any community-based facility or program that provides care to persons eighteen years of age or older in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of these individuals on less than a 24-hour basis. 
"Alcoholic Beverage Establishment." A commercial and non-commercial establishment wherein alcoholic beverages are sold, served, or given away for consumption on the premises, excluding full-service restaurants. Typical alcoholic beverage establishments include but are not limited to the following recognized types of establishments: Bars, cocktail lounges, ballrooms, dance bars, piano bars, billiard or game parlors, bowling alleys and nightclubs. 
"Alley." A public or private way which affords only secondary access to abutting property. 
"Amphitheater." An outdoor venue for concerts, storytelling, plays and other related events with seating, a stage and which may include minor lighting of up to five thousand watts total, a concessions kiosk, ticket sales booth, storage, restrooms and other similar facilities. The venue may have raised seating, a sunken stage or both. Sunshades and wind screens are allowed, but the facility must have a general open quality without major roofs or enclosed spaces. 
"Animal Rescue." A facility for taking in animals for placement in homes and shelters which may provide minor medical services and boarding facilities for up to one week. 
"Auto and Vehicle Sales and Rental." A retail or wholesale establishment selling and/or renting automobiles, trucks and vans, trailers and motorcycles (bicycle sales are included under "General Retail"). May also include repair shops and the sales of parts and accessories, incidental to vehicle dealerships. Does not include: The sale of auto parts/accessories separate from a vehicle dealership (see "Auto Parts Sales"); mobile home, recreational vehicle, or watercraft sales (see "Mobile Home, RV and Boat Sales"); tire recapping establishments (see "Vehicle Services"); businesses dealing exclusively in used parts, (see "Recycling—Scrap and Dismantling Yards"); or "Gas Stations," which are separately defined. 
"Automated Teller Machine (ATM)." Computerized, self-service machines used by banking customers for financial transactions, including deposits, withdrawals and fund transfers, without face-to-face contact with financial institution personnel. The machines may be located at or within banks, or in other locations. 
"Balcony, French." A shallow balcony, almost flush with a facade, accessed by a single pair of inward-swinging doors. French balconies do not dematerialize the spatially-defining character of facades as does the "egg-crate" of conventional deep balconies. French balconies virtually transform the adjacent interior room into an outdoor space and are encouraged. 
"Balcony." A partially enclosed, habitable structure, usually cantilevered from a facade or an elevation, providing private outdoor space to an apartment. Balconies in great numbers with significant depth tend to dematerialize the vertical plane of a facade, interfering with its role of spatial definition. A better alternative to avoid this is to use a French balcony and the loggia. 
"Bank, Financial Services." Financial institutions including: banks and trust companies, other investment companies, credit agencies, securities/commodity contract brokers and dealers, holding (but not primarily operating) companies, security and commodity exchanges, lending and thrift institutions, vehicle finance (equity) leasing agencies. See also, "Automated Teller Machine." 
"Bar/Tavern/Night Club." A business where alcoholic beverages are sold for on-site consumption, which are not part of a larger restaurant. Includes bars, taverns, pubs, night clubs, live music and/or dancing, comedy and similar establishments where any food service is subordinate to the sale of alcoholic beverages. May also include beer brewing as part of a microbrewery. Requires compliance with Section 8.34. 
"Bed and Breakfast Inn (B&B)." A residential structure with one household in permanent residence, with one or up to five bedrooms rented for overnight lodging, where meals may be provided subject to applicable Health Department regulations. Does not include room rental, which is separately defined (see "Rooming, Lodging, or Boarding House"). 
"Bedroom." Any space in the conditioned area of a dwelling unit or accessory structure located along an exterior wall, but not including the following: hall; bathroom; kitchen; living room, dining room, family room, laundry room, closet/dressing room opening off of a bedroom. If a home office, library or similar room is proposed, it may be exempted from being considered a bedroom if there is no closet and at least one of the following is present: a) a minimum four-foot opening, without doors, into another room; or b) a half wall (four-foot maximum height) between the room and another room. A detached building which contains only a half bath will not routinely be considered as having a bedroom unless it is specifically identified and permitted as a guest house. 
"Block Face." The aggregate of all the building facades on one side of a block. The Block Face provides the context for establishing architectural harmony. 
"Block." The properties abutting on one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, or nearest intersecting or intercepting street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided land, or watercourse. 
"Building Configuration." The form of a building, based on its massing, private frontage, and height. 
"Building Disposition." The placement of a building on its lot. See "Lot Configuration." 
"Building Height." The vertical extent of a building is measured by number of stories, not including an inhabited attic. Heights are measured from the average finish grade of the frontage line to the eave of a pitched roof or to the surface of a flat roof. The maximum building height is determined by the clear street width at the Principal or Secondary Frontage. 
  
"Building Identification Sign." Any sign containing the name or address of a building and may include hours of operation and emergency information, such sign being located on the same site as the structure. 
"Building and Landscape Materials Sales—Indoor." See "General Retail." 
"Building and Landscape Materials Sales—Outdoor." See "Storage-Yard, Outdoor." 
"Building." See "Structure." 
"Business Support Service." An establishment within a building that provides services to other businesses. Examples of these services include: Blueprinting, film processing and photo finishing (retail), computer related services (rental, repair), protective services, copying and quick printing services, and security systems service. 
"Carshare/Bicycleshare Stations." An established location where cars, vans, scooters, bicycles or other vehicles are provided for use through a club or rental service, generally not staffed. 
"Catering." A business that prepares and delivers food for consumption on the premises of a client. Does not include mobile food vendors. 
"Cemetery." A park established for the purpose of providing a location for grieving, remembering and religious ceremony. Either human (cemetery) or animal (pet cemetery) remains are permanently stored on site. Tombstones, urns and other markers may be placed within designated burial and ash storage areas. A cemetery may be enclosed with a see-through iron fence, but must leave its gates open during daylight hours and allow unrestricted access without charge. 
"Child Day Care." Facilities that provide care, protection and supervision of children, in the care giver's home or a separate commercial business, for periods of less than twenty-four hours per day, while the parents or authorized guardians are away. These facilities include the following, all of which are required to be licensed by the State of California Department of Social Services. 
(1)  Large Family. A home that provides family child care for up to twelve children. These capacities include children under age ten who live in the licensee's home and the assistant provider's children under age ten. A large family day care home is required to comply with the requirements of Section 7.060. 
(2)  Small Family. A home that provides family child care for up to six children, or for up to eight children. These capacities include children under age ten who live in the licensee's home. 
"Childcare Center." Commercial child care facility for children ages zero to thirteen years in a commercial building or the commercial portion of a mixed-use building. Allowed as an accessory use. 
"Cinema." For live performances, see "Theater." A movie theater containing at least one and no more than ten screens. A window for selling tickets may open directly onto the Public Frontage. The building may include food, candy and drink concessions, and may also include a cafe or restaurant. In addition to showing films and serving food, the facility may host public lectures, meetings, educational courses and other similar functions. Parking is generally shared with another use in a public or private garage. 
"Civic Building." A building designed specifically for a civic use such as a not-for-profit organization dedicated to arts, culture, education, recreation, government, transit, or for a use approved by the City of Rohnert Park or the County of Sonoma. 
Civic Space. Parks, Squares and other civic spaces are illustrated below. 
a. Park: A natural preserve available for unstructured recreation. A park maybe independent of surrounding building Frontages. Its landscape shall consist of Paths and trails, meadows, waterbodies, woodland and open shelters, all naturalistically disposed. Parks may be lineal, following the trajectories of natural corridors. The minimum size shall be eight acres. Larger parks may be approved by Warrant as Special Districts in all zones. 	  
b. Green: An Open Space, available for unstructured recreation. A Green may be spatially defined by landscaping or building Frontages. Its landscape shall consist of grasses and trees, naturalistically disposed, and may include vegetable gardens. The minimum size shall be one-half acre and the maximum shall be eight acres. 	  
c. Square: An Open Space available for unstructured recreation and Civic purposes. A Square is spatially defined by building Frontages. Its landscape shall consist of paths, lawns and trees, formally disposed. Squares shall be located at the intersection of important Thoroughfares. There is no minimum size, and the maximum shall be five acres. 	  
d. Plaza: An Open Space available for Civic purposes and Commercial activities. A Plaza shall be spatially defined by building Frontages. Its landscape shall consist primarily of pavement. Trees are optional. Plazas should be located at the intersection of important streets. The minimum size shall be one-half acre and the maximum shall be two acres. 	  
e. Playground: An Open Space designed and equipped for the recreation of children. A playground should be fenced and may include an open shelter. Playgrounds shall be interspersed within Residential areas and may be placed within a Block. Playgrounds may be included within parks and greens. There shall be no minimum or maximum size. 	  
 
"Club, Lodge, Private Meeting Hall." Permanent, headquarters-type and meeting facilities for organizations operating on a membership basis for the promotion of the interests of the members, including facilities for: business associations, political organizations, civic, social, and fraternal organizations, professional membership organizations, labor unions and similar organizations, other membership organizations. 
"Commercial." The term collectively defining workplace, Office, Retail, and Lodging Functions. 
"Commercial Recreation—Indoor." Establishments providing indoor amusement and entertainment services for a fee or admission charge, including: bowling alleys, electronic game arcades (video games, pinball, etc.), coin-operated amusement arcades, ice skating and roller skating, dance halls, clubs and ballrooms, pool and billiard rooms as primary uses. This use does not include adult oriented businesses, which are separately defined. Four or more electronic games or coin-operated amusements in any establishment, or a premise where fifty percent or more of the floor area is occupied by amusement devices, are considered an electronic game arcade as described above; three or fewer machines are not considered a land use separate from the primary use of the site. 
"Commercial Recreation—Outdoor." Facilities for various outdoor recreational activities, where a fee is charged for use. Examples include: Amusement and theme parks, miniature golf courses, go-cart tracks, water slides, golf driving ranges. May also include commercial facilities customarily associated with the above outdoor commercial recreational uses, including bars and restaurants, video game arcades, etc. 
"Conference/Convention Facility." One or more structures accommodating multiple assembly, meeting, and/or exhibit rooms, and related support facilities (e.g., kitchens, offices, etc.). 
"Coverage." The percent of the total site area covered by structures, open or enclosed, excluding uncovered steps, patios and terraces. 
"Crop Production, Horticulture, Orchard, Vineyard." Commercial agricultural production field and orchard uses, including the production of the following, primarily in the soil on the site and not in containers, other than for initial propagation prior to planting in the soil on the site: flowers and seeds, ornamental crops, tree nuts, field crops, trees and sod, melons, vegetables, grains, wine and table grapes, fruits. 
Also includes associated crop preparation services and harvesting activities: Mechanical soil preparation; irrigation system construction; composting. Chemical sprays are not allowed. May also include the sale of products grown on site. See also "Greenhouse (Commercial)." 
"Disposition." See "Building Disposition." 
"Driveway, Residential." A vehicular lane within a Lot, often leading to a garage. 
"Dwelling, Accessory/Second Unit." An attached or detached residential dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons with permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation on the same parcel as the single household dwelling. 
"Dwelling, Attached." A building containing a single dwelling unit and having one or more walls in common with another such unit with each unit located on a separate lot. 
"Dwelling, Detached." A building designed for and/or occupied exclusively by one household that has no walls in common with any other structure or dwelling unit. 
"Dwelling, Multifamily." A building which includes residential use including two or more separate dwelling units, and which may include other uses as well. This definition includes but is not limited to duplexes, triplexes, apartments, and condominiums under a common ownership. 
"Dwelling, Single Family." A freestanding building designed for and/or occupied by one household. 
"Expression Line." The street level facade of any building with a shopfront shall be distinguished from the remainder of the building with a horizontal expression line on the facade located between the highest point of the second floor and the bottom edge of the third floor windows. The purpose of this architectural feature is to create a comfortable and cohesive public space. 
The expression line shall be incorporated into the facade as a permanent design element and shall be created by a change in building material, architectural design, setback, recess, projection, cornices, belt courses, corbelling, molding, stringcourses or other sculptured design element. Where city staff determines that a consistent expression line has been established on adjacent buildings, it shall be continued on any new construction or expansion, or a transitional design element (such as columns, piers, bays or changes in facade materials) between the existing and proposed expression lines may be required. 
  
"Farmer's Market." A market held in a Town Square, public park, or prominent building with highly visible entries from a Town Square or public park. The vendors may sell any items they have assembled, manufactured, grown or processed that are otherwise allowed by law, including but not limited to vegetables, fruits, jams, nuts, fish, meats, eggs, cheeses, juices, honey, soap, clothing, furniture, tools, seeds, plants and art. A minimum of one-third of all vendors must sell primarily food. 
"Fence." A device or portion thereof designed to separate or screen property areas and not to carry any structural loads. 
"Frontage, Line" and related terms. 
"Frontage Line." The portion of the property line along the Principal and Secondary Frontages. 
"Lot Line." The portion of the property line between adjacent Lots. 
"Facade." The faces of buildings which are visible from the Principal and Secondary Frontages. 
"Elevation." The faces of a building which is visible from the rear of the Lot or from an adjacent Lot. 
  
"Frontage, Principle and Secondary." 
"Principal Frontage." The main point of access for pedestrians into a building. On corner Lots, the Private Frontage designated to bear the address and Principal Entrance to the building, and the measure of minimum Lot width. 
"Secondary Frontage." The Private Frontage which does not have the main point of access for pedestrians into a building. 
  
_____
"Frontage, Private and Public." 
"Private Frontage." The privately owned area between the Frontage Line and the Principal Building Facade. See Types of Private Frontages, below and the Land Use table for where each type is allowed. 
"Public Frontage." The area between the Curb of the vehicular lanes and the Frontage Line. 
  
"Types of Private Frontages." The following figures illustrate the types of Private Frontages. See the Land Use table for information about where each type is allowed. 
  
  
  
  
a. Common Yard: A frontage wherein the facade is set back substantially from the frontage line. The front yard created remains unfenced and is visually continuous with adjacent yards, supporting a common landscape. The deep setback provides a buffer from the higher speed thoroughfares. 
  
  
  
  
b. Porch and Fence: A frontage wherein the facade is set back from the frontage line with an attached porch permitted to encroach. A fence at the frontage line maintains the demarcation of the yard. The porches shall be no less than eight feet deep and two feet above sidewalk elevation. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
c. Terrace or Light Court: A frontage wherein the facade is set back from the frontage line by an elevated terrace or a sunken light court. This type buffers residential use from urban sidewalks and removes the private yard from public encroachment. The terrace is suitable for conversion to outdoor cafes. 
  
  
  
  
d. Forecourt: A frontage wherein a portion of the facade is close to the frontage line and the central portion is set back. The forecourt created is suitable for vehicular drop-offs. This type should be allocated in conjunction with other frontage types with no more than one per block face. Large trees within the forecourts may overhang the sidewalks. 	  
 
  
  
  
  
  
e. Stoop: A frontage wherein the facade is aligned close to the frontage line with the first story elevated between three feet to six feet above the sidewalk elevation to secure privacy for the windows. The entrance is usually an exterior stair and landing. This type is recommended for ground-floor residential use. This type may be interspersed with the Shopfront and Awning frontage. 
  
  
  
f. Shopfront and Awning: A frontage wherein the facade is aligned close to the frontage line with the building entrance at sidewalk grade. This type is conventional for retail use. It has a substantial glazing on the sidewalk level and an awning that may overlap the sidewalk to the maximum extent possible. Where required, shopfronts are to be spaced every thirty feet or more across the frontage. 
  
  
  
  
g. Gallery*: A frontage wherein the facade is aligned close to the frontage line with an attached cantilevered shed or a lightweight colonnade overlapping the sidewalk. This type is conventional for retail use. The gallery shall be no less than nine feet wide. The remaining distance to the curb shall be no less than four feet. 	  
 
* An easement or encroachment permit for private use of the right-of-way is usually required. Alternatively, the City of Rohnert Park may require that the full width of the gallery be private with a public easement. Decorative surface mounted lights are required on soffit of gallery. This lighting needs to provide an appropriate amount of lighting for the sidewalk and adjacent parking lane. The City of Rohnert Park may require these lights to be controlled by photocells and/or timers to assure appropriate lighting of public way. The coordination of the gallery lights with the streetlights is required. 
_____
"Fueling Station." A retail business selling gasoline, petrodiesel, biodiesel, ethanol and/or other motor vehicle fuels, and related products. A gas station may also include a convenience store of less than four hundred square feet. 
"Function." The use or uses accommodated by a building and its Lot, categorized as Permitted, Administratively Permitted or Conditionally Permitted. 
"Furniture/Fixtures Manufacturing, Cabinet Shop." Manufacturers producing: wood and metal household furniture and appliances; bedsprings and mattresses; all types of office furniture and public building furniture and partitions, shelving, lockers and store furniture; and miscellaneous drapery hardware, window blinds and shades. Includes furniture re-upholstering businesses, wood and cabinet shops, but not sawmills or planing mills, which are instead included under "Manufacturing—Heavy." 
"Gallery." See "Frontage Types." 
"Garage" or "Carport." Parking space and shelter for automobiles or other vehicles, where the size of the parking space complies with the provisions of Section 11.070(I) (Parking Stall Size). 
1.  A garage is a completely enclosed attached or detached accessory structure with an operational door. 
2.  A carport is an attached or detached accessory structure enclosed on no more than two sides. 
A garage or carport complies with the requirements of this Zoning Code for "covered" parking spaces. 
"Garage Sale." A sale of articles belonging to one or more households, held for a period not to exceed three consecutive days, at a frequency not to exceed once every two months at any single location. 
"General Retail." Stores and shops selling many lines of merchandise. Examples of these stores and lines of merchandise: Antique stores, drug stores and pharmacies, art galleries, retail, furniture, furnishings, and appliances, artists' supplies, hobby materials, auction rooms, jewelry, auto parts sales, luggage and leather goods, bicycles, musical instruments, parts and accessories, books, magazines, and newspapers, orthopedic supplies, building and landscape materials indoor, religious goods, cameras and photographic supplies, second hand stores, clothing, shoes, and accessories, small wares, collectibles (cards, coins, comics, stamps, etc., specialty shops, convenience stores, sporting goods and equipment, department stores, stationery. 
"Groceries, Specialty Foods." A retail business where the majority of the floor area open to the public is occupied by food products packaged for preparation and consumption away from the store. 
"Guest House." A detached living quarters of permanent construction, without kitchen or cooking facilities, clearly subordinate and incidental to the main building on the same lot, and intended for use by occasional guests of the occupants of the main building. 
"Health Care Facility." A facility which treats patients during normal office hours, offering advice, tests or minor medical procedures which do not require hospital support. Pharmacy services and the sale of medical equipment may be provided as an accessory use. 
"Health Club." A public or private club providing fitness facilities and training. May include fitness machines, running tracks, swimming pools, spas, saunas, free weights, fitness classes, diet and nutrition counseling, stress relief/relaxation counseling and classes, showers and locker area, and other similar health and fitness services. The sale of drinks and food, fitness equipment or clothing is allowed as an accessory use. 
"Home Occupation." A commercial activity conducted in a dwelling located in a Residential, Mixed Use, or Commercial zoning district, which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes and in accordance with the provisions of Section 7.050. 
"Hotel." A facility with guest rooms or suites, with or without kitchen facilities, rented to the general public for transient lodging. Hotels typically include a variety of services in addition to lodging; for example, restaurants, meeting facilities, personal services, etc. Also includes accessory guest facilities such as swimming pools, tennis courts, indoor athletic facilities, accessory retail uses, etc. 
"Household." A person or group of people who live together in a single dwelling unit, but not including the renting of rooms. 
"Inn." A facility with up to twelve guest rooms or suites, with or without kitchen facilities, rented to the general public for transient lodging. Inns may include a variety of minor uses in addition to lodging; for example, a small restaurant, a swimming pool or spa, or a garden. 
"Kennel, Animal Boarding." A commercial facility for the grooming, keeping, boarding or maintaining of four or more dogs (four months of age or older), or four dogs or cats for sale in pet shops or patients in animal hospitals. See also "Veterinary Clinic, Animal Hospital." 
"Kiosk." A structure of two hundred fifty square feet or less in which information is provided or concessions are sold. May include such uses as flower sales, coffee, ice cream, bicycle rentals, transit or rideshare information. 
"Laboratory—Animal Testing." A facility for testing and research which uses live animals. Such facilities are prohibited. 
"Laboratory—Medical, Analytical and Research." A facility for testing, analysis, and/or research. Examples of this use include medical labs, soils and materials testing labs, and forensic labs. 
"Laundry, Coin-Operated." A self-service laundry facility of between five and twenty washers and dryers. May include ancillary equipment such as a laundry centrifuge and vending for soaps and other laundry items. 
"Laundry, Dry Cleaning Plant." A service establishment engaged primarily in high volume laundry and garment services, including: carpet and upholstery cleaners; diaper services; dry cleaning and garment pressing; commercial laundries; linen supply. These facilities may include accessory customer pick-up facilities. These facilities do not include coin-operated laundries or dry cleaning pick-up stores without dry cleaning equipment; see "Personal Services." 
"Library, Museum, Art Gallery." A public or quasi-public facility, examples of which include: Aquariums, arboretums, art galleries and exhibitions, botanical gardens, exhibits, libraries, museums and planetariums. May also include accessory retail uses such as a gift/book shop, restaurant, etc. 
"Liquor Store." A retail establishment for the sale of alcoholic beverages, including specialty stores for wine or beer, and general sales of wine, beer and spirits. 
The SMV P-D is subject to Section 17.07.020 Footnotes with the following two exceptions: 
1.  Section 17.07.020 R1. Because the SMV P-D is zoned Mixed Use, and because certain Residential uses are allowed in each transect, a Liquor Store may be operated within a Mixed Use district in the T4, T5 or T6 transect. 
2.  Section 17.07.020 R2a. Because the SMV P-D is programmed with small blocks and small businesses, the required minimum store size is reduced in this section so that the location limitations of Section 17.07.020 R2 do not apply for retail markets having a minimum of one thousand square feet of floor area which devote no more than five percent of such floor area to the sale, display and storage of alcoholic beverages. 
"Live/Work Sign." A sign that identifies the location of a live/work unit within the SMV-PD. A live work unit consists of a Mixed Use unit of Commercial and Residential Function. The Commercial Function may be anywhere in the unit. It is intended to be occupied by a business operator who lives in the same structure that contains the Commercial activity or industry. 
"Lot Area." Gross lot area is the total area included within the lot lines of a lot, exclusive of adjacent dedicated street rights-of-way. Net lot area is the gross area of the lot, exclusive of: 
(1)  Easements for streets or driveways that are not for the exclusive use of the lot on which the easement is located; 
(2)  The access strip required to serve a flag lot. 
"Lot Configuration." Buildings may be situated on a Lot in different ways depending on the configurations allowed in the Land Use table. These illustrations approximate the location of the structure relative to the boundaries of each individual lot, establishing suitable basic building types for each Transect zone. 
a. Edge Yard: Single family detached house. (A variety of detached house sizes and types are encouraged and allowed.) A building that occupies the center of its lot with Setbacks on all sides. This is the least urban of types as the front yard sets it back from the frontage, while the side yards weaken the spatial definition of the public Thoroughfare space. The front yard is intended to be visually continuous with the yards of adjacent buildings. The rear yard can be secured for privacy by fences and a well-placed Accessory Structure. 	  
b. Zero-lot-line (Side Yard): A building that occupies one side of the lot with the Setback to the other side. The visual opening of the side yard on the street frontage causes this building type to appear freestanding. A shallow frontage Setback defines a more urban condition. If the adjacent building is similar with a blank party wall, the yard can be quite private. This type permits systematic climatic orientation in response to the sun or the breeze. 	  
c. Rear Yard: Specific Types—Single Family Attached and Multifamily (including Townhouse, Rowhouse and Live-Work unit). A building that occupies the full frontage, leaving the rear of the lot as the sole yard. This is a very urban type as the continuous Facade steadily defines the public Thoroughfare. The rear Elevations may be articulated. In its Residential form, this type is the Rowhouse. For its Commercial form, the rear yard can accommodate substantial parking. 	  
d. Courtyard: A building that occupies the boundaries of its lot while internally defining one or more private patios. This is the most urban of types, as it is able to shield the private realm from all sides while strongly defining the public Thoroughfare. Because of its ability to accommodate incompatible activities, masking them from all sides, it is recommended for workshops (crafts, art, woodworking, etc), Lodging and schools. The high security provided by the continuous enclosure is useful forcrime-prone areas. 	  
 
"Lot Frontage." The property line of a site abutting a street, other than the street side line of a corner lot. 
"Lot Line" or "Property Line." Any recorded boundary of a lot. The types of lot lines are as follows: 
(1)  Front Lot Line. On an interior lot, the property line separating the parcel from the street. The front line on a corner lot is the line with the shortest frontage. If the street fronting lot lines of a corner lot are equal in length, the front lot line shall be determined by the Development Services Director or his or her designee. On a double frontage lot, both lot lines are front lot lines and the lot is considered to have no rear lot line. 
(2)  Interior Lot Line. Any lot line not abutting a street that is not a rear lot line. 
(3)  Rear Lot Line. A property line that does not intersect the front lot line, which is most distant from and most closely parallel to the front lot line. 
(4)  Side Lot Line. Any lot line that is not a front or a rear lot line. 
(5)  Street Side Lot Line. On a corner lot, the lot line with the longest frontage. 
"Lot" or "Parcel." A recorded lot or parcel of real property lawfully created as required by applicable Subdivision Map Act and City ordinance requirements, including this Zoning Ordinance. Types of lots include the following: 
(1)  Corner Lot. A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets, where they intersect at an interior angle of not more than one hundred thirty-five degrees. If the intersection angle is more than one hundred thirty-five degrees, the lot is an interior lot. 
(2)  Flag Lot. A lot having access from the building site to a public street by means of private right-of-way strip. 
(3)  Interior Lot. A lot abutting only one street. 
(4)  Reverse Corner Lot. A corner lot the side line of which is substantially a continuation of the front property line of the first lot to its rear. 
(5)  Double Frontage Lot. An interior lot with frontage on two generally parallel streets. 
"Lot, Depth." The average linear (or mean horizontal) distance between the front and rear lot line lines or between the front lot line and the intersection of the two side lot lines if there is no rear not line. 
"Lot, Width." The horizontal distance between the side lot lines. 
"Lot." A parcel of land accommodating a building or buildings of unified design. The size of a Lot is controlled by its width in order to determine urban sensibility of the Block Face. 
"Maintenance/Repair Service—Client Site Services." Base facilities for various businesses that provide services on the premises of their clients. Includes gardening, janitorial, pest control, water and smoke damage recovery, and similar services; and maintenance/repair services for appliances, computers, electronics, elevators, equipment, HVAC, instrument, where the service is provided on the client site. 
"Maintenance/Repair Service—Equipment, Appliances." A business that provides repair and/or maintenance services for appliances, computers, electronics, and other types of non-vehicular related equipment that is brought to the facility by the client. These businesses do not operate on the same site as a retail establishment that sells the product being maintained or repaired. When these services operate from a retail establishment that sells the products being maintained or repaired, they are instead considered part of the retail use. 
"Manufactured/Mobile Home." A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width, or forty body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, water heating, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification and complies with the standards established under this part. California Health and Safety Code Section 18007. 
"Manufacturing/Processing—Heavy." A facility accommodating processes that involve and/or produce basic metals, chemicals, hot-processed metals, glazing fabrication, paper products, machinery, textiles, and/or transportation equipment where the intensity and/or scale of operations may cause significant impacts on surrounding land uses or the community. 
"Manufacturing/Processing—Light." A facility accommodating manufacturing processes and establishments engaged in the assembly, fabrication, and conversion of already processed raw materials into products, where the operational characteristics of the manufacturing processes and the materials used are unlikely to cause significant impacts on surrounding land uses or the community. Examples of light manufacturing uses include the following: Clothing and fabric product manufacturing, metal products fabrication including of building materials, machine and welding shops, electronics, equipment, and appliance manufacturing, paper product manufacturing food and beverage product manufacturing, photo/film processing lab (Does not include small-scale photo, handcraft industries, small-scale manufacturing, processing machines accessory to other retail businesses). 
"Market Hall." An open hall that contains a minimum of three retail enterprises (no maximum) all sharing one large open area. 
"Meals Assembly." A facility that provides a location for clients to assemble meals from ingredients and take them offsite for cooking and consumption. Meals may also be assembled onsite for clients to pickup at the facility. No eating facilities are provided. 
"Media Production." Facilities for motion picture, television, video, sound, computer, and other communications media production. 
"Medical Service—Health Care Facility." A facility, place, or building that is maintained and operated to provide medical care. Includes nursing homes, intermediate care facilities, medical clinics, and home health agencies, all of which are licensed by the California State Department of Health Services, and defined in Health and Safety Code Section 1200 et seq. 
"Medical Service—Major." Hospitals and similar facilities engaged primarily in providing diagnostic services, and extensive medical treatment, including surgical and other hospital services. These establishments have an organized medical staff, inpatient beds, and equipment and facilities to provide complete health care. May include on-site accessory clinics and laboratories, accessory retail uses and emergency heliports (see the separate definition of "Accessory Retail Uses"). 
"Medical Service—Minor." A facility other than a hospital where medical, dental, mental health, surgical, and/or other personal health care services are provided on an outpatient basis. Includes medical offices (for example offices for chiropractors, dentists, medical doctors, optometrists, prescription opticians, psychologists, etc.), outpatient facilities which may include surgery, urgent care facilities, dental laboratories, and medical laboratories. Counseling services by other than medical doctors or psychologists are included under "Offices—Professional." 
"Mixed Use." Multiple Functions within the same building through superimposition or adjacency, or in multiple buildings by adjacency. 
"Mobile Home, RV, and Boat Sales." Retail establishments selling mobile home dwelling units and/or various vehicles and watercraft for recreational uses. Includes the sales of boats, campers and camper shells, jet skis, mobile homes, motor homes, and travel trailers. 
"Monument Sign" A ground sign having a horizontal dimension greater than its vertical dimension. This sign type is not allowed. 
"Mortuary, Funeral Home." Funeral homes and parlors, where deceased are prepared for burial or cremation, funeral services may be conducted. 
"Multifamily." See "Dwelling, Multiple." 
"Office." This Code distinguishes between the following types of offices. These do not include medical offices (see "Medical Service—Minor"). 
(1)  Accessory. An office facility incidental and accessory to another business or sales activity that is the primary use. These are permitted accessory to any other use allowed in all zones established by this code. 
(2)  Business/Service. An establishment providing direct services to customers. Examples of these uses include employment agencies, insurance agent offices, real estate offices, travel agencies, utility company offices, etc. This use does not include "Bank, Financial Services," which is separately defined. 
(3)  Government. An administrative, clerical, or public contact and/or service office of a local, state, or federal government agency. Includes post offices, but not bulk mailing distribution centers. 
(4)  Processing. An office-type facility characterized by high employee densities, and occupied by businesses engaged in information processing, and other computer-dependent and/or telecommunications-based activities. Examples of these uses include: Reservation centers for airlines or rental cars, computer software and hardware design and development, consumer credit reporting, data processing services, health management organization (HMO) offices where no medical services are provided, insurance claim processing, mail order and electronic commerce transaction processing, telecommunications facility design and management, telemarketing. 
(5)  Professional/Administrative. An office-type facility occupied by businesses that provide professional services and/or is engaged in the production of intellectual property. Examples of these uses include: Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services, financial management and investment counseling, advertising agencies, literary and talent agencies, attorneys, management and public relations services, commercial art and design services, media production services, construction contractors (office facilities only), news services, counseling services, photographers and photography studios, court reporting services, psychologists, detective agencies and similar services, secretarial, stenographic, word processing, and design services including architecture, engineering, temporary clerical employee services, landscape architecture, urban planning, security and commodity brokers, educational, scientific and research organizations, writers' and artists' offices. 
"Park." City-owned land whose primary purpose is recreation, includes, but is not limited to, playfields and courts, swimming pools, recreational facilities, community gardens, playgrounds, trails, and nature preserves. 
"Parking, Structured." Includes both day-use and long-term public and private commercial garages and structures. 
"Parking, Surface Lot." Surface parking lots are allowed only in the rear half of a lot, except in Transect Civic Parking where it is allowed throughout the lot but must be screened from all Frontages. 
"Personal Services—Restricted." Personal services that may tend to have a potentially offensive effect upon surrounding areas and which may need to be dispersed to minimize their adverse impacts. Examples of these uses include: Check cashing stores, soup kitchens, fortune tellers, spas and hot tubs for hourly rental, palm and card readers, tattoo and body piercing services, psychics. 
"Personal Services." Establishments providing non-medical services to individuals as a primary use. Examples of these uses include: Barber and beauty shops, massage (licensed, therapeutic, non-sexual), clothing rental, pet grooming with no boarding, dry cleaning pick-up stores with limited equipment, shoe repair shops, home electronics and small appliance repair, tailors, laundromats (self service laundries), tanning salons, locksmiths. These uses may also include accessory retail sales of products related to the services provided. 
"Plant Nursery." A commercial agricultural establishment engaged in the production of ornamental plants and other nursery products, grown under cover either in containers or in the soil on the site, or outdoors in containers. The outdoor production of ornamental plants in the soil on the site is instead included under "Crop Production, Horticulture, Orchard, Vineyard." Also includes establishments engaged in the sale of these products (e.g., wholesale and retail nurseries) and commercial-scale greenhouses. The sale of house plants or other nursery products entirely within a building is also included under "General Retail." 
"Principal Frontage." See "Frontage." 
"Printing and Publishing." A small scale establishment engaged in printing by letterpress, lithography, gravure, screen, offset, or electrostatic (xerographic) copying; and other establishments serving the printing trade such as bookbinding, typesetting, engraving, photoengraving and electrotyping. This use also includes establishments that publish newspapers, books and periodicals; establishments manufacturing business forms and binding devices. "Quick printing" services are included in the definition of "Business Support Services." 
"Private Frontage." See "Frontage." 
"Public Frontage." See "Frontage." 
"Public Safety Facility." A facility operated by a public agency including fire stations, other fire prevention and fire fighting facilities, police and sheriff substations and headquarters, including interim incarceration facilities. 
"Push Cart." A non-motorized mobile vending cart on wheels no larger than ten feet by five feet which may be used for the purpose of selling food, clothing, jewelry, artwork, tools, and for providing services, including watch repair, shoe shine and repair, and bicycle maintenance. 
"Rear Lane or Alley." A vehicular way located to the rear of Lots providing access to service areas, parking, and outbuildings. 
"Recreational Facility (Indoor)." A fitness center, gymnasium, health and athletic club, which may include any of the following: Sauna, spa or hot tub facilities; indoor tennis, handball, racquetball, archery ranges and other indoor sports activities. Does not include adult entertainment businesses. 
"Recycling Facility." This land use type includes a variety of facilities involved with the collection, sorting and processing of recyclable materials. Recyclable materials include reusable domestic containers and other materials which can be reconstituted, re-manufactured, or reused in an altered form, including glass, metals, paper and plastic. Recyclable material does not include refuse or hazardous materials. 
"Religious Assembly." A permanent facility operated by a religious organization exclusively for worship, or the promotion of religious activities, including accessory uses on the same site. Examples of these types of facilities include churches, mosques, synagogues, and temples. Examples of allowable accessory uses on the same site include living quarters for ministers and staff, facilities for child day care and religious instruction operated at the same time as religious services (where authorized by the same type of land use permit required for the religious facility itself). May also include fund-raising sales, bazaars, dinners, parties, or other indoor and outdoor events on the same site. Other facilities maintained by religious organizations, including full-time day care centers, full-time educational institutions, hospitals and other potentially related operations (for example, a recreational camp) are defined in this Article according to their respective activities. Does not include the temporary use of an approved public assembly facility (for example, a private meeting hall, community center, theater, or auditorium) by a congregation for religious meetings, which is instead defined under the type of meeting facility hosting the congregation. 
"Research and Development (R&D)." A facility for scientific research, and the design, development and testing components in advance of product manufacturing, and the assembly of related products from parts produced off-site, where the manufacturing activity is secondary to the research and development activities. Uses which may involve chemicals or processes listed by Greenseal Standards 11, 34, 36 and 47 or listed as a candidate chemical of High Concern by the EU Commission on Registration, Authorization and Evaluation of Chemicals (REACH) are designated as Laboratory—Medical, Analytical and Research. 
"Residential Care Facilities for the Chronically Ill (RCFCI)." Facilities with a maximum licensed capacity of twenty-five. Care and supervision is provided to adults who have Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS), the Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) and other similar chronic illnesses. 
"Residential Care Facilities for the Elderly (RCFE)." Provide care, supervision and assistance with activities of daily living, such as bathing and grooming. They may also provide incidental medical services under special care plans. 
The facilities provide services to persons sixty years of age and over and persons under sixty with compatible needs. RCFEs may also be known as assisted living facilities, retirement homes and board and care homes. The facilities can range in size from six beds or less to over one hundred beds. The residents in these facilities require varying levels of personal care and protective supervision. Because of the wide range of services offered by RCFEs, consumers should look closely at the programs of each facility to see if the services will meet their needs. 
"Residential." Characterizing premises available for long-term human dwelling. 
"Restaurant, Cafe, Coffee Shop." A retail business selling ready-to-eat food and/or beverages for on- or off-premise consumption. These include eating establishments where customers are served from an ordering counter for either on- or off-premise consumption ("counter service"); establishments where customers are served food at their tables for on-premise consumption ("table service"), which may also provide food for take-out; and exclusively pedestrian-oriented facilities that serve from a walk-up ordering counter. This use does not include a mobile food vendor. 
"Retail, General." This use category includes all retail establishments which are not otherwise listed in Table 1. Land Uses or restricted elsewhere in the code. General retail includes establishments selling clothing, furniture, gifts, skin and hair products, tools, books, etc. 
"Rowhouse." A single family dwelling of two or three stories which is attached to at least two other similar dwellings in a row. 
"School—Specialized Education and Training." A private academic educational institution, providing specialized education/training. Examples include the following: Art school, establishments providing courses by mail, ballet and other dance school, language school, business, secretarial and vocational, music school, computers and electronics school, professional school (law, medicine, etc.), drama school, seminaries/religious ministry training facility, driver education school. 
Also includes facilities, institutions and conference centers that offer specialized programs in personal growth and development, such as fitness, environmental awareness, arts, communications, and management. Does not include pre-schools and child day care facilities (see "Child Day Care Facilities"). See also the definition of "Studios—Art, Dance, Martial Arts, Music, etc." for smaller-scale facilities offering specialized instruction. 
"Secondary Frontage." See "Frontage." 
"Setback, Front." The required area extending across the full width of a site measured from the front property line, street plan line, or access easement to the primary structure. The depth of the front setback is measured as the minimum horizontal distance between the front property line, street plan line, or access easement and a line parallel thereto with the required minimum distance determined by the development standards for the applicable zoning district. 
"Setback, Rear." The required area extending across the full width of a site measured from the rear lot line and a structure. The depth of a rear setback is measured as the minimum horizontal distance between the rear property line and a line parallel thereto with the required minimum distance determined by the development standards for the applicable zoning district. 
"Setback, Side." The required area extending from the front property line, street plan line, or access easement to the rear property line. The width of a side setback is the minimum horizontal distance between an interior side property line and a line parallel thereto with the required minimum distance determined by the development standards for the applicable zoning district. 
"Setback, Street Side." The required area extending from the front property line, street plan line, or access easement to the rear property line. The width of a street side setback is the minimum horizontal distance between the street side property line and a line parallel thereto with the required minimum distance determined by the development standards for the applicable zoning district for a corner or reverse corner lot. 
"Setback." The area of a Lot measured from the Lot line to a building Facade or Elevation that is maintained clear of permanent structures, with the exception of encroachments. 
"Shopfront." See "Storefront/Shopfront." 
"Special Event Sign." A sign authorized through the SMV-PD Design Review Board for the purposes of a special event or activity. 
"Sports and Entertainment Assembly Facility." A large-scale indoor or outdoor facility accommodating spectator-oriented sports, concerts, and other entertainment activities. Examples of this land use include amphitheaters, race tracks, stadiums and coliseums. May also include commercial facilities customarily associated with the above uses, including bars and restaurants, gift shops, video game arcades, etc. 
"Stoop." A Private Frontage wherein the Facade is aligned close to the Frontage Line with the first Story elevated from the Sidewalk for privacy, with an exterior stair and landing at the entrance. 
"Storage—Outdoor Storage Yard." The open storage of various materials outside of a structure other then fencing, either as an accessory or principal use. 
"Storage—Warehouse, Indoor Storage." Facilities for the storage of commercial goods of any nature. Includes cold storage. Does not include storage or mini-storage facilities offered for rent or lease to the general public. (see also "Wholesaling and Distribution" and "Truck or Freight Terminal"). 
"Storefront/Shopfront." A Private Frontage for Retail use, with no less than seventy percent of the width of the facade glazed in clear glass, having an awning overhanging the sidewalk, and wherein the Facade is aligned close to the Frontage Line with the building entrance at Sidewalk grade. The first floor shall be confined to Retail use through the first thirty feet in depth. 
"Story." A habitable level within a building, excluding an Attic or raised basement. 
"Street." A public or private right-of-way which provides a public means of access to abutting property. The term "street" shall include avenue, drive, circle, road, parkway, boulevard, highway, thoroughfare, or any other similar term, but not alley. The term shall include the total width of the dedicated right-of-way. 
"Street screen." An artistic wall with plants, murals or other decorative artwork, and is used to improve the quality of pedestrian life by partially obscuring a parking lot in the rear. 
"Structure, Accessory Detached." An accessory building or structure with a minimum separation from a primary structure or building of at least three feet. For purposes of measurement, roof eaves and overhangs, bays, balconies, and other projections shall be considered points of reference. For the purposes of this code, any structure not meeting the separation requirement is considered attached to the primary structure and is subject to the development standards for the primary structure. 
"Structure, Accessory." A building or structure normally subordinate, and the use of which is incidental, to the primary use of the site. 
"Structure." Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or which is attached to something having location on the ground, excluding vehicles designed and used only for the transportation of people or goods, a swimming pool or spa, a fence, or a wall used as a fence. 
"Studio—Art, Dance, Martial Arts, Music, etc." Small scale facilities, typically accommodating one group of students at a time, in no more than one instructional space. Larger facilities are included under the definition of "Schools—Specialized education and training." Examples of these facilities include: Individual and group instruction and training in the arts; production rehearsal; photography, and the processing of photographs produced only by users of the studio facilities; martial arts training studios; gymnastics, yoga and similar instruction; and aerobics and gymnastics studios with no other fitness facilities or equipment. 
"Swimming Pool." A pool, pond, land, or open tank intended for swimming or recreational bathing that contains water over eighteen inches deep. "Swimming pool" includes in-ground and above ground pools, hot tubs and spas and portable spas, non-portable wading pools and interactive spray parks. 
"Telecommunication Facility." A facility that transmits and/or receives electromagnetic signals. Includes antennas, microwave dishes, horns, and other types of equipment for the transmission or receipt of such signals, telecommunication towers or similar structures supporting said equipment, equipment buildings, parking area, and other accessory development. Private, residential telecommunication equipment is not a part of this use. 
"Theater." See also "Cinema." An indoor facility for public assembly and group entertainment, other than sporting events. Examples of these facilities include: Civic theaters, and facilities for live theater and concerts, similar public assembly facilities. 
"Thoroughfare." An assembly of sidewalks, planters, parking lanes, bicycle lanes, and driving lanes. See Section 5. 
"Transect Zone." One of several areas on a Zoning Map within the SMV P-D. Transect Zones are administratively similar to the land use zones in conventional codes, except that in addition to the usual building use, density, height, and setback requirements, other elements of the intended habitat are integrated, including those of the private lot and building and public frontage. 
"Transitional Housing." A facility for residence and care of people moving out of Homeless Shelters or other care facilities who are not yet able to live on their own. May include minor accessory uses of related services such as counseling, job placement and training. Usual tenure is less than three years. Further restrictions in locating Transition Housing may be made on the basis of proximity to schools, daycare, playgrounds and other sensitive uses. 
"Use, Accessory." A use customarily incidental to, related and clearly subordinate to a primary use on the same parcel, which does not alter the primary use nor serve property other than the parcel where the primary use is located. See also "Primary Use." 
"Use, Conditional." A use of a site for which application for and approval of a Conditional Use Permit is required. 
"Use, Permitted." For the purpose of this ordinance, a permitted use in any district shall include any use listed as a Permitted Principal Use or Accessory Use. 
"Use, Primary." The main purpose for which a site is developed or occupied, including the activities that are conducted on the site a majority of the hours during which the activities occur. 
"Vehicle Services." The repair, servicing, alteration, restoration, towing, or cleaning of personal vehicles no greater than eighteen feet in length as a primary use, including the incidental wholesale and retail sale of vehicle parts as an accessory use. Painting and finishing is prohibited except for minor applications of touch-up paint. This use is limited to minor maintenance and repair such as car stereo and alarm installers and detailing services, and specifically excludes painting (except for minor application of touch-up paint), finishing, tires, car wash structures, collision repair and other body work, quick-lube services or dismantling. 
"Veterinary Clinic, Animal Hospital." Office and indoor medical treatment facilities used by veterinarians, including large and small animal veterinary clinics, and animal hospitals. 
"Wall Sign." Any sign attached to or painted on the wall of a building or structure in a plane parallel or approximately parallel to the plane of said wall. 
"Water Cistern." A container storing rainwater collected from a building's roof or containing fully treated greywater. A Water Cistern must be placed within ten feet of a building. It may be up to twenty feet tall, but in no case may it exceed the height of the adjacent building. Structural support for the slab it sits on and to ensure seismic safety will be reviewed and approved by engineering on a case-by-case basis. 
"Wayfinding/Directional Sign." Sign that is designed and erected for the sole purpose of directing vehicular, bicycle and/or pedestrian traffic within a project. 
"Wholesaling and Distribution." Establishments engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to contractors, industrial, commercial, institutional, farm, or professional business users; to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers in buying merchandise for or selling merchandise to such persons or companies. Examples of these include: Agents, merchandise or commodity brokers, and commission merchants, assemblers, buyers and associations engaged in the cooperative marketing of farm products, merchant wholesalers, stores primarily selling electrical, plumbing, heating and air conditioning supplies and equipment. 
"Yard." An open space on the same site as a structure, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward. 
"Zoning District." Any of the residential, commercial, public, or overlay districts established by this Zoning Code (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Permit Requirements), within which certain land uses are allowed or prohibited, and certain site planning and development standards are established (e.g., setbacks, height limits, site coverage requirements, etc.). 
"Zoning." The act of regulating the use of land and the size of and location of buildings on the land, such regulations are designed to assure the health, safety and general welfare of a community. 
"Zoning/Regulating Plan." The official map or maps that are part of the zoning ordinance and delineate the boundaries of individual zones and districts. See Figure 2. SMV P-D Zoning and Regulating Plan. 
(Ord. No. 824, § 2(Exh. A), 9-14-2010)  
Chapter 17.07 - LAND USE FOOTNOTES/SPECIAL PROVISIONS 
 
17.07.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards for the approval, conditional approval or disapproval of particular uses that typically have unusual site development features or operating characteristics requiring the establishment of standards to ensure that the use is designed, located, and operated compatibly with uses on adjoining properties and in the surrounding area. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.07.020 - Footnotes. 
The following standards apply to the land use indicated by corresponding number in the zoning district use charts: 
A.  ADULT ENTERTAINMENT. 
Adult businesses may be permitted in indicated districts only with approval of a conditional use permit and subject to the provisions of Chapters 8.37, 8.38, and 8.39. 
B.  ARCADE GAMES AND CYBER CAFES (a.k.a. mechanical or electronic games). 
1.  Computers and/or games may be permitted with approval of an administrative permit and subject to the following provisions. Except that these provisions shall not apply to the following uses: 
a.  Any operation involving three or fewer computers and/or mechanical or electronic games, except where such computers and/or games provide the main or primary source of income for the proprietor thereof; 
b.  The operation or maintenance of such computers and/or games within recreational enterprises, such as bowling alleys or poolrooms, where a use permit has already been obtained for a recreational use; and 
c.  Premises or operations licensed by the department of alcoholic beverage control of the state for on-sale consumption of alcoholic beverages, excepting therefrom any such premises or operations that lawfully permit minors, such as bona fide public eating places. 
2.  It shall be unlawful for any proprietor to install, operate, or maintain to be operated more than three computers and/or mechanical or electronic games without first having obtained a use permit. 
3.  The permit shall be conspicuously posted at the location of the computers and/or games in the premises and shall not be removed during the period for which the license was issued. In cases where the computers and/or mechanical or electronic games occupy more than fifty percent of the premises' customer floor space, or account for fifty percent or more of the premises' gross revenue, or where ten or more such computers and/or games are proposed, the use permit shall be referred to the council for final approval pursuant to the provisions of this title. The use permit shall state the number of computers and/or games, and the use of additional computers and/or games shall require a new or modified permit. 
4.  Applicants for administrative permits shall undergo a background check by the department of public safety. The permit may be denied if the applicant has been convicted of a crime which has relevance to the operation of the premises. 
5.  No such administrative permit shall apply to any premises other than the location originally approved. Upon change of ownership, the new owner shall receive clearance from the department of public safety; however, no other use permit proceedings shall be required for such transfer if the new owner received police clearance. 
6.  There shall be a minimum of one adult employee managing the cyber cafe or arcade during all operating hours. If the business has more than twenty computers, one additional adult employee shall be added for every additional twenty computers, or fraction thereof. Employees managing the operation shall be required to wear a badge identifying the business, the employee's full name, and the employee's title. 
7.  Patrons shall not become a nuisance to the properties within the immediate vicinity. 
8.  It shall be unlawful for any proprietor of a computer and/or mechanical or electronic game to cause, permit, or allow such computers and/or game to be located, operated, or maintained to be operated within five hundred feet of the nearest street entrance to or exit from any public playground or public or private school of elementary or high school grades, such distance to be measured from such entrance or exit in the most direct line or route on, along, or across such street or streets adjacent to such public playground or public or private school of elementary or high school grade. 
9.  Hours of operation shall be limited to between 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Sundays through Thursdays and between 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Fridays and Saturdays. No minors shall be allowed in the facility between 8:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. on regularly scheduled school days. 
10.  "No loitering" signs shall be posted at the front and rear of the operation. A waiting area shall be provided for customers waiting to use the facility, at a ratio of one seat for every eight computers/games, with no fewer than four seats to be provided. No waiting outdoor of the facility shall be permitted and patrons shall not be allowed to become a nuisance to the properties within the immediate vicinity. 
11.  All windows shall be kept clear of any item or tint that would obscure views from the exterior into the operation. 
12.  Adult-oriented internet sites shall be prohibited unless the business has an adult business permit issued under Chapter 8.37. 
13.  No such administrative permit shall apply to any premises other than the location originally approved. Upon change of ownership, the new owner shall receive clearance from the department of public safety; however, no other use permit proceedings shall be required for such transfer if the new owner receives police clearance. 
C.  AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. 
1.  Service station uses may be permitted in indicated districts only with approval of a conditional use permit and subject to the following provisions. The provisions of this section shall apply to all new service stations and to any expansion of thirty percent or greater in floor area, or a remodeling or any on-site development that would cost more, than fifty percent of the value of the improvements on the parcel at the time of remodeling, excluding land value. The provisions of this section shall also apply to a service station which after being closed for more than one hundred eighty days is to be reopened. 
2.  Minimum site standards. 
a.  No service station shall be constructed or operated on a lot having a depth or width less than one hundred fifty feet. 
b.  No building or structure (including canopies) shall be located within twenty feet from any curb face, or within ten feet of any interior parcel. No service station building shall be located nearer than thirty-five feet from any street property (such setback shall be measured at the building foundation). 
c.  No gasoline pump or facility for dispensing gasoline or other fuel, and no dispenser in which the same is or may be located, shall be nearer than twenty feet from any property line nor nearer than thirty-five feet from any parking space. Further, no dispenser, pump, or facility for dispensing gasoline or other fuel shall be located on a residential street frontage serving as a secondary access to the service station site. 
d.  All outdoor storage shall be screened as provided for in this ordinance, however, a display rack for automobile products no more than four feet wide may be maintained at each dispenser area of a service station. If display racks are not located on dispenser areas, they shall be placed within three feet of the principal building, and shall be limited to one per street frontage. The location of display racks and vending machines shall be specified by the use permit. The storage of inoperative vehicles is prohibited. 
e.  Gas tank vent pipes or venting equipment for other fuels shall be incorporated into the structures and concealed from public view. 
3.  Site Development Standards. 
a.  If a lot upon which a service station is constructed or maintained abuts a residential use or a residentially zoned parcel, a six foot high solid masonry wall shall be constructed along the full length of each property line abutting such properties; provided, however, such wall height shall be reduced to three feet adjacent to the front yard of each adjacent residential property or residentially zoned property. 
b.  All restroom entrances, unless interior to a main building, shall be screened from the view of all adjacent properties and streets by means of decorative screens six feet in height. The bottom of such screens shall be raised no less than twelve inches and no more than eighteen inches above the finished grade for visibility and ventilation. Public restrooms that are accessible to the general public and physically handicapped shall be provided during all hours that the service station is open to the public. 
c.  All outside trash, garbage, refuse and recycling storage areas shall be enclosed by a gated masonry structure not less than six feet in height, ten feet in width (outside dimension), and ten feet in length (outside dimension). Openings to the storage areas shall be designed so as to prevent a view of trash or materials stored from the street or adjacent properties. Provisions for adequate vehicular access for the collection of such trash and materials shall be provided to and from such areas. 
d.  Provisions shall be made in the area where Class II flammable liquids may be spilled to prevent liquids from flowing into the interior of the service station buildings. Such provisions may include grading driveways, raising doorsills, or other equally effective means. Crankcase drainings and flammable liquids shall not be dumped into sewers but shall be stored in tanks or tight drums outside buildings in a designated screened area until removed from the premises by a licensed disposal company. 
e.  Tanks installed for crankcase drainings shall be installed in accordance with the requirements for flammable liquid storage. In addition thereto, drainage lines terminating inside a building shall be equipped with a suitable trap or check valve. 
f.  Service stations constructed in areas that are predominantly of residential character shall be designed to maintain a residential atmosphere. 
g.  A water and air supply station is required. It shall be located out of traffic flow areas and be shielded so to not create noise audible beyond the property line and shall be kept in working condition. 
h.  Any loudspeaker system shall not be audible above daytime ambient noise levels beyond the property boundaries. The system shall be designed to compensate for ambient noise levels in the immediate area, and shall be directed away from, and not be located within thirty feet of, any residential uses or residential districts. 
i.  Car wash facilities located next to residential uses or residential districts shall not be operated between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. More restrictive time requirements may be established as a condition of any conditional use permit. 
4.  Landscaping standards. 
a.  Planters shall be installed and maintained adjacent to every street frontage for the full length thereof except for driveways. The street frontage landscaping shall be bermed to be of sufficient height to help screen the dispenser areas from passing motorists. 
b.  A planting area shall be installed and maintained at the intersection of property lines at a street corner to conform to the radius of such corner; provided, however, at no time shall such planting area be less than one hundred fifty square feet. All plants shall respect the visibility triangle provided in this ordinance. 
c.  All planting areas shall be separated from adjacent asphalt paving by concrete curbing at least six inches in height. The site shall be entirely paved, except for buildings and landscaped areas. 
d.  Planters shall comply with the parking lot landscaping requirements of this ordinance. 
e.  All plants in any planter adjacent to a perimeter wall shall, when required by the planning commission, be of a variety capable of growing to the height of such wall. 
f.  Permanent underground sprinkler systems shall be installed and maintained for every landscaped area, and all such landscaped areas shall be planted and maintained in a neat, orderly, and healthy manner. 
5.  Surface drainage. Flow lines shall be shown on all service station plans. Sheet flow shall not be permitted across property lines. Surface runoff shall be carried under sidewalks into the gutter or other drainage facility by means of a drainage structure approved by the city engineer. 
6.  Utilities. All utilities, including electrical, telephone, C.A.T.V., and similar service wires or cables which provide direct service to the property, shall, within the exterior boundaries of the station property, be installed underground. Related electrical equipment, such as, but not limited to, surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes, and meter cabinets, may be placed above ground if they are enclosed and screened by fencing and/or landscaping as appropriate. 
7.  Equipment. All hydraulic hoists and pits and equipment for lubrication, greasing, automobile washing, and permitted repairs shall be enclosed entirely within a building. 
8.  Exterior lighting. All exterior lighting shall be so arranged and shielded as to prevent any glare or reflection upon and cause any nuisance, inconvenience, or hazardous interference of any kind with adjoining streets or properties. 
9.  Architectural control. All exterior walls should be constructed of rock, brick, stucco, wood, treated metal or any combination thereof. All exterior elevations shall be compatible in design with adjacent structures. Service bays should be oriented to have minimal visibility from adjacent roadways. Service stations within shopping centers/business parks or similar complexes shall be designed to reflect the architectural theme of the complex. Signage and exterior elevations shall be subject to review and approval by the planning commission. 
10.  Access, parking, and circulation. 
a.  No such site shall have more than two driveways or means of access to any one street. 
b.  Each driveway shall be separated from adjacent residential property by a full height curb extending at least five feet in length from the residential property line. 
c.  No driveway shall exceed a width of twenty feet at the sidewalk. 
d.  No driveway shall be permitted to encroach onto the return or curve of a street corner. A distance of twenty feet, or more if needed for vehicle stacking distance, shall be maintained between the return point and the beginning of the driveway depression. 
e.  Every service station shall have access to a collector or arterial standard street. 
f.  All deliveries shall be made on the service station site itself. 
g.  If a towing service is combined with a service station, a storage area completely screened from public view, by a six foot high solid wall or fence, shall be provided at the rear of the site. The size of the storage area, and extent of screening, shall be determined through the use permit process. This area shall be added to the minimum lot size requirements. 
h.  No vehicles, trailers, or campers on any service station premises may be advertised or offered for sale. There shall be no permanently disabled, junked, or wrecked vehicles stored on site, except in cases of a tow service. Towed permanently disabled, junked, or wrecked vehicles shall be stored on-site no longer than one week and they shall be stored within the designated storage area. 
D.  BED and BREAKFAST INN. 
1.  General Standards. Bed and breakfast inns may be permitted in all indicated districts only with approval of a conditional use permit and subject to the following provisions. 
a.  A bed and breakfast inn shall be operated by a property owner living on the premises. 
b.  The bed and breakfast inn shall conform to the design and development standards below and be compatible with adjacent buildings in terms of building materials, colors and exterior finishes. Facilities requiring conversion of existing structures shall maintain existing elevations to the extent feasible. 
c.  Public and utility services including emergency access shall be adequate to serve the maximum number of occupants proposed. 
d.  No more than five rooms shall be rented for lodging unless the planning commission can make an additional special finding that due to the size of the property, the relationship to surrounding residential properties and the availability of on-site parking, that more guest rooms will not negatively impact the residential neighborhood. In no case shall there be more than ten guestrooms. 
e.  Rooms shall be rented for no more than fourteen consecutive days. 
f.  No internal illumination of any signage from an interior light source shall be permitted and all signs shall be subject to planning commission approval. Signage shall only identify, rather than advertise, the establishment. The words "hotel" or "motel" shall not be allowed. 
g.  The facility is located on or within five hundred feet of an arterial or collector street. 
h.  No bed and breakfast inns shall be located on a lot closer than five hundred feet from any other lot containing a bed and breakfast inn. 
i.  The only meal provided shall be breakfast. Other meals may be served at special events. 
j.  On-site required parking that is not located within a garage or on the paved driveway for the garage shall be screened from view. 
k.  The planning commission may allow special events at the facility if such events are permitted or conditionally permitted in the district in which the bed and breakfast is located. If the planning commission determines that the proposed bed and breakfast inn is an appropriate location for special events to occur with regard to, but not limited to, access, property size, parking, and surrounding uses, additional conditions relating to hours of operation, number of guests, additional parking requirements and music or entertainment provisions may be imposed. 
E.  Intentionally omitted. 
F.  COMMUNICATION FACILITIES. 
1.  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this section is to establish development standards to regulate the placement and design of communication facilities so as to preserve the unique visual character of the city; to establish development standards which are consistent with federal law related to the development of communication facilities; to acknowledge the community benefit associated with the provision of communication services within the city; and to provide incentives for well designed and well placed facilities. 
2.  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words, phrases, and terms shall have the meanings set forth herein. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
"Antenna" means any system of poles, panels, rods, reflecting discs or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves or radio frequency signals. 
"Collocation" means the location of two or more wireless, hard wire, or cable communication facilities on a single support structure or otherwise sharing a common location. Collocation shall also include the location of communication facilities with other facilities such as water tanks, light standards, and other utility facilities and structures. 
"Communication facility" means an unstaffed facility, generally consisting of antennas, and equipment cabinet or structure, and related equipment, which receives and/or transmits electromagnetic waves, light waves, radio frequencies or other types of signals. 
"Equipment cabinet" means a cabinet or structure used to house equipment associated with a wireless, hard wire, or cable communication facility. 
"Monopole" means a single freestanding pole, post, or similar structure, used to support equipment associated with a single communication facility. 
"Multipoint distribution service" means a microwave communication service that delivers video programming, data and/or voice communication directly to subscribers, including multichannel multipoint distribution series, instructional television fixed services, and local multipoint distribution services, or as defined by the Section 207 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Section 1.4000 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations and any interpretative decisions thereof issued by the Federal Communications Commission. 
"Service provider" means any authorized provider of communication services. 
"Tower" means any ground or roof mounted pole, spire, structure, or combination thereof taller than fifteen feet, including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, and masts, intended primarily for the purpose of mounting an antenna or similar apparatus above grade. 
3.  Applicability. This section shall apply to all proposed communication facilities, except as provided for in subsection D below. A conditional use permit is required for the following uses: 
a.  A communications facility that does not meet the applicable site development criteria, general development standards, and operation and maintenance standards outlined in subsections E, and G below. 
b.  A tower in a non-residential and non-mixed-use zoning district over thirty-five feet in height; provided, however, that a tower of any height shall be prohibited in all residential and mixed-use zoning districts, except as set forth in Section 17.08.040D below; 
c.  A communications facility, with a backup generator, located in a commercial or residential zoning district and a communication facility, in any zoning district, with an ancillary fuel storage tank(s) to support the backup power supply. 
d.  A communications facility or tower that would not otherwise be permitted by this chapter but that is necessary for the adequate development of facilities to serve all areas within the city, to promote competition and achieve open access if the planning commission can make the findings set forth in Chapter 17.25, Article I. 
All proposed communication facilities that require a conditional use permit shall also require environmental review in accordance with the California Environmental Quality Act. 
4.  Exemptions. A conditional use permit shall not be required for communication facilities meeting the follow[ing] criteria: 
a.  Antennas that are installed, placed, or maintained under the roof, or do not extend above the roof, or are behind and below an approved roof screen and do not protrude above the highest point of the building or are camouflaged in such a way as to not be visible from a public right-of-way or other property. However, staff approval from the planning department shall be required to ensure that such antennas comply with the standards set forth in this subsection. Historically significant buildings and structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the California Register, identified as an historic structure in a local historic survey or registry or as determined by a qualified architectural historian as having significant historic contribution to the area shall not be exempt. 
b.  The following communication facilities also shall not require a conditional use permit provided that the antenna is mounted on a mast less than twelve feet high, is not located on an historic building, and is not readily visible from a public right-of-way: 
(1)  Any antenna structure that is one meter (39.37 inches) or less in diameter and is designed to receive direct broadcast satellite service, including direct-to-home satellite service, as defined by Section 207 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, and any interpretive decisions thereof issued by the Federal Communications Commission. 
(2)  Any antenna structure that is two meters (78.74 inches) or less in diameter located in a commercial or industrial zone and is designed to transmit or receive radio communications by satellite or terrestrial communications antenna. 
(3)  Any antenna structure that is one meter (39.37 inches) or less in diameter or diagonal measurement and is designed for subscribing to a multipoint distribution service. 
(4)  Any antenna that is designed and used solely to receive television broadcast transmission. 
c.  Any antenna structure that is designed and used solely in connection with authorized operations of an amateur radio station licensed by the FCC (i.e., a "HAM" radio transmission) provided there is no more than one structure on a single parcel and that the antenna structure does not exceed maximum building height limits of the zoning district. 
d.  Any modification to the antennas located on an antenna structure that does not increase the height of the structure shall be subject to Administrative Review. 
5.  Site development criteria. The following development standards shall apply to the development of all new communication facilities within the city of Rohnert Park: 
a.  Spacing and collocation. 
(1)  New communication facilities shall be collocated with existing facilities and with other planned new facilities whenever feasible and aesthetically desirable. In addition, where feasible and aesthetically desirable, service providers are encouraged to collocate with other facilities such as water tanks, light standards, and other utility structures where the collocation, is found to minimize the overall visual impact. Service providers shall exhaust all reasonable measures to co-locate their communications facilities on existing towers or with or within existing ancillary support equipment facilities prior to applying for new communication facility sites. The service provider shall provide evidence that the provider has contacted all other potential providers who have, or who are reasonably likely to be installing facilities within the vicinity of the proposed facility and has offered to participate in a joint installation project on reasonable terms. In order to facilitate collocation, conditions of approval for conditional use permits for new facilities shall require all service providers to cooperate in the siting of equipment and antennas to accommodate the maximum number of operators at a given site where found to be feasible and aesthetically desirable. 
(2)  A minimum distance of one thousand feet shall be provided between towers. There shall be a maximum of two towers per assessor's parcel or developed site. 
(3)  A service provider shall not locate more than one antenna in any one neighborhood unless the planning commission approves additional antennas. 
b.  Height. 
(1)  All ground mounted communication equipment, antennas, poles or towers shall be of a minimum functional, height. 
(2)  The height of a tower located on the ground shall not exceed thirty-five feet. However, if a tower is located in a district with a height limit greater than thirty-five feet, then the tower may exceed thirty-five feet if a conditional use permit is first approved by the planning commission. A tower, however, shall not exceed sixty-five feet when located adjacent to residentially zoned properties and shall be setback at a ratio of two horizontal feet for every one-foot in height and shall not be readily visible to the nearest residentially zoned property. Under no circumstances shall a tower be higher than seventy-five feet. If it is determined that a tower requires hazard lights to meet the safety requirements of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), or the California Highway Patrol (CHP), then the tower shall be deemed too high. 
(3)  The height of a Communications Facility located on a building shall not exceed fifteen feet above the maximum height limit for that district. 
(4)  Antennas mounted on the side of a building shall not extend above the building parapet. 
c.  Colors and materials. All antennas, poles, towers or equipment, including ancillary support equipment, shall have a non-reflective finish and shall be painted or otherwise treated to match or blend with the primary background and minimize visual impacts. Antennas attached to a building shall be painted or otherwise treated to match the exterior of the building or the antenna's background color. All ground-mounted equipment shall be covered with a clear anti-graffiti type material of a type approved by the planning director or shall be adequately secured to prevent graffiti. 
d.  Screening. All ground mounted equipment, antennas, poles, or towers shall be sited to be screened by existing development, topography, or vegetation, to the extent feasible. Ground mounted facilities are encouraged to be located within buildings, underground, or in areas where substantial screening by existing buildings or vegetation can be achieved. Additional new vegetation or other screening may be required by the planning director or by the planning commission if a conditional use permit is required. The applicant shall use the smallest and least visible antennas possible to accomplish the owner/operator's coverage objectives. (See also subsection e Siting, below.) 
e.  Siting. 
(1)  Communication facilities located on the roof of a building of legally conforming height shall be set back from the nearest roof edge the equivalent of the height of the tower or a minimum of ten feet, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Towers and antennas shall be setback at a ratio of two horizontal feet for every one foot in height and shall not be readily visible to the nearest residentially zoned property. 
(3)  Towers and antennas shall be set back from any site boundary or public right-of-way by a minimum of twenty-five feet. No part of any tower shall extend into any required front yard or beyond the property lines of the development site. 
(4)  In order of preference, ancillary support equipment for a communication facility shall be located either within a building, underground, in a rear yard or on a screened roof top area. Ground mounted facilities that are located within the front or side yard or public right-of-way shall be located so as to be screened by landscaping, in close proximity to existing above ground utilities (such as electrical tower or utility poles), light poles, trees of comparable height, water tanks, and other areas where the ground mounted facility will not detract from the image or appearance of the city. (See also subsection d, Screening, above.) 
f.  Power lines. All power lines to and within a communications site shall be underground. 
g.  Backup Power Supplies. All backup power supplies (e.g., generators) located in an industrial zoning district shall be enclosed within an equipment enclosure and operated in accordance with this section. Backup power supplies for communication facilities located in commercial or residential zoning districts shall require the approval of a conditional use permit by the planning commission. In any zoning district, ancillary fuel storage tank(s) to support backup power supplies shall require approval of a conditional use permit by the planning commission. 
6.  General development standards. 
a.  Each facility shall comply with any and all applicable provisions of the Rohnert Park Municipal Code and any state or federal agency including, but not limited to, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). 
b.  Certification must be provided that the proposed facility will at all times comply with all applicable health requirements and standards pertaining to electromagnetic and/or radio frequency radiation. 
c.  Interference with city communication systems is prohibited. All proposed facility applications shall include reports, as required by the Department of Public Safety, to evaluate for potential interference (e.g., HF, UHF, VHF, eight hundred mHz). The applicant shall be responsible for any costs incurred by the city, including the costs of retaining consultants, to review and analyze the reports. 
d.  The owner or operator of any facility shall submit and maintain current at all times basic contact and site information. Applicant shall notify city of any changes to the information submitted within thirty days of any change, including change of the name or legal status of the owner or operator. This information shall include, but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  Identity, including name, address, and telephone number, and legal status of the owner of the facility including official identification numbers and FCC certification, and if different from the owner, the identity and legal status of the person or entity responsible for operating the facility; 
(2)  Name, address and telephone number of a local contact person for emergencies; and 
(3)  Type of service provided. Identification signs, including emergency phone numbers of the utility provider, shall be posted at all communication facility sites. 
e.  As part of project review, the planning commission, the city council (on appeals), or staff may require additional screening and/or landscaping, undergrounding, an alternative color scheme, or relocation of a tower or ancillary equipment to a less obtrusive area of the site where it would have a less prominent visual presence due to slope, topography, size or relationship to public right-of-ways. 
f.  Discontinuation of use. All equipment associated with a communication facility shall be removed within thirty days of the discontinuation of the use and the site shall be restored to its original pre-construction condition. In addition, the service provider shall provide the city with a notice of intent to vacate a site a minimum of thirty days prior to the vacation. For facilities to be located on public property, this removal requirement, and appropriate bonding requirement, shall be included within the terms of the lease. For facilities to be located on private property, since the subject property owner shall be ultimately responsible for removal of the equipment, the terms of private leases are encouraged to include the equipment removal as a provision of the lease. 
g.  A communication facility shall not adversely affect the public health, peace, safety or welfare. 
h.  For service providers, who plan to establish multiple wireless communication facilities within the city, the service provider is encouraged to apply for approval of all facilities under a master use permit application. Under this approach, all proposed facilities may be acted upon by the city as a single application. 
i.  In the event that the planning director or planning commission needs assistance in understanding the technical aspects of a particular proposal, services of a communications consultant may be requested to determine the engineering or screening requirements of establishing a specific wireless communications facility. This service will be at the applicant's expense. 
7.  Operations and maintenance standards. 
a.  All communication facilities and related equipment, including lighting, fences, shields, cabinets, and poles shall be maintained in good repair, free from trash, debris, litter and graffiti and other forms of vandalism, and any damage from any cause shall be repaired as soon as reasonably possible so as to minimize occurrences of dangerous conditions or visual blight. Graffiti shall be removed from any facility or equipment as soon as practicable, and in no instances more than forty-eight hours from the time of notification by the city. 
b.  Each communication facility which contains trees, foliage or other landscaping elements, whether or not used as screening, shall be maintained in good condition at all times in accordance with the approved landscape plan, and the owner or operator of the facility shall be responsible for replacing any damaged, dead or decayed landscaping as promptly as reasonably possible. Amendments or modifications to the landscape plan shall be submitted for approval to the planning director. 
c.  Each communication facility shall be operated in such a manner so as to minimize any possible disruption caused by noise. Backup generators shall only be operated during periods of power outages, and shall not be tested on weekends or holidays, or between the hours of 10 p.m. and 7 a.m. on weekday nights. At no time shall equipment noise from any source exceed an exterior noise level of sixty dB at the property line. 
d.  Each owner or operator of a facility shall routinely and regularly inspect each site to ensure compliance with the standards set forth in this section. 
G.  DAY CARE HOME, FAMILY. 
1.  Small Family Day Care: A small family day care is a home which provides family day care to eight or fewer children, on a less than twenty-four basis, including children under the age of twelve who reside in the home. Small family day cares are permitted in all districts where residences are permitted. The use of single-family residences as small family day care homes shall be considered a residential use of property. 
2.  Large Family Day Care: A home which provides family day care to nine to fourteen children, inclusive, on a less than a twenty-four hour basis, including children under the age of twelve who reside in the home. Large family day care homes may be allowed in detached single-family dwellings located on residentially zoned lots with approval of a conditional use permit and subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Site factors to be considered shall include, but not be limited to, available play area, local traffic, and street design, and impacts on surrounding land uses. 
b.  No conditional permit shall be issued if there is another approved large family day care home operating adjacent to the proposed site or if the granting of the permit will result in a residence being bounded on more than one side by a large family day care facility. 
c.  If the operator is to have more than one employee or care provider other than himself or herself, off-street parking shall be provided for each such additional employee or provider. 
d.  Garages shall be allowed for use as a family day care area only if a conditional use permit for a garage conversion is approved. 
e.  The use shall be subject to the noise provisions of Chapter 9.44 of the Rohnert Park Municipal Code. 
f.  There shall be no sign or other exterior evidence identifying the day care operation. 
H.  DENSITY BONUS FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING. 
1.  Applicability. The purpose of this section is to comply with the state density bonus law (California Government Code Section 65915) and to implement the housing element of the Rohnert Park general plan, by providing increased residential densities for projects that guarantee that a portion of the housing units will be affordable to households of low or very low income. The provisions of this section shall apply to the construction of five or more units of housing that satisfies one or more of the following criteria: 
a.  At least ten percent of the total units are designated for low income households. 
b.  At least five percent of the total units are designated for very low income households. 
c.  A senior citizen housing development as defined in Sections 51.3 and 51.12 of the Civil Code. 
d.  At least ten percent of the total in a condominium project for moderate income households. 
The density bonus shall not be included when determining the number of housing units that are to be affordable. 
2.  Definitions. The following terms are hereby defined for the purposes of this section: 
"Affordable housing units" means housing units affordable to low and very low income persons provided through the affordable housing density bonus program pursuant to California Government Code Section 65915. 
"Condominium project" means a development consisting of condominiums. A condominium consists of an undivided interest in common in a portion of real property coupled with a separate interest in space called a unit, the boundaries of which are described on a recorded final map, parcel map, or condominium plan in sufficient detail to locate all boundaries thereof. 
"Low income household" means a household whose income is equal to or less than eighty percent of the area median income, as published by the California Department of Housing and Community Development, and is considered to be able to afford rent that does not exceed thirty percent of sixty percent of the area median income. 
"Very low income household" means a household whose income is equal to or less than fifty percent of the area median income, as published by the California Department of Housing and Community Development, and is considered to be able to afford rent that does not exceed thirty percent of fifty percent of the area median income. 
"Density bonus" means a density increase of at least twenty percent (rounded up to the nearest whole unit) up to a maximum of thirty-five percent in accordance with Government Code Section 65915, unless a lesser percentage is elected by the applicant, over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the applicable zoning ordinance and land use element of the Rohnert Park General Plan as of the date the application by the developer is accepted by the city as complete. For condo developments as identified in subsection (H)(1)(d) of this section, the minimum density bonus shall be at least five percent, up to a maximum of thirty-five percent in accordance with Government Code Section 65915 over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density, unless a lesser percentage is elected by the applicant, if at least ten percent of the total dwelling units are reserved for persons and families of moderate income. The granting of a density bonus shall not be interpreted in and of itself to require a general plan amendment, zoning change, or other discretionary approval. For purposes of calculating a density bonus, the residential units do not have to be based upon individual subdivision maps or parcels. 
"Housing development" means one or more projects for new residential development consisting of five or more units. 
"Senior citizens" means qualifying residents as defined in Section 51.2 of the California Civil Code. 
3.  Criteria and standards for density bonus and incentive: 
a.  In accordance with Government Code Section 65915, when a developer agrees to construct affordable housing, at least one of the following incentives or concessions, at the city's option, shall be granted if requested, in addition to a density bonus; provided the findings outlined in subsection (H)(4) (b)(3) of this section are satisfied: 
(1)  A reduction in site development standards or a modification of zoning requirements or architectural design requirements such as, but not limited to, private and common open space, landscaping, parking, minimum lot sizes, and setbacks. 
(2)  Approval of mixed-use zoning within the housing development where it is demonstrated that commercial, office, or other nonresidential land uses will reduce housing costs over residential-only uses on a site and will be compatible with the existing and planned housing units on the site and the surrounding neighborhood where the proposed housing development will be located. 
(3)  Other incentives proposed by the developer or the city which result in identifiable cost reductions, such as one of the following: 
(i)  Expedited "fast track" processing of development applications and permits ( e.g., allowing plan check to begin during planning application process); 
(ii)  Use of redevelopment funds or powers, or other public financing. 
There is no requirement, however, for the city to provide any direct financial assistance, to waive fees and/or dedication requirements, or to provide publicly owned land for a housing development. 
b.  If the developer agrees to construct twenty percent of the total units for low income households, ten percent of the units for very low income households, or at least twenty percent for persons and families of moderate income in a condominium or planned development, at least two of the above incentives or concessions, at the city's selection, shall be granted in addition to the density bonus. 
c.  If the developer agrees to construct at least thirty percent of the total units for low income households, at least fifteen percent for very low income households, or at least thirty percent for persons and families of moderate income in a condominium or planned development, at least three of the incentives or concessions, of the city's selection, shall be granted in addition to the density bonus. 
d.  If an applicant for a tentative subdivision map, parcel map, or other residential development approval donates land to the city for the provision of affordable housing in accordance with Government Code Section 65915(h), the applicant shall be eligible for a density bonus ranging from fifteen percent to a maximum of thirty-five percent in accordance with Government Code Section 65915(h). 
e.  The following standards shall apply to the granting of the density bonus and incentives: 
(1)  Duration of affordability. If an incentive is granted, the affordable housing units receiving a density bonus shall be affordable for a minimum period of thirty years, or longer if required by a construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, rental subsidy program, the city's redevelopment assistance program, city's inclusionary housing program or an affordable housing agreement. 
(2)  Location and density of affordable housing units. The affordable housing units shall be integrated with other housing units in the housing development with regard to siting and placement within buildings, and shall not differ in exterior appearance of the units. The location of the affordable housing units may or may not be on contiguous parcels within the site. In no event shall the affordable housing units be located in only one portion of the housing development or situated in one building of a multi-building development. 
(3)  Location of density bonus. The density bonus units can be located in geographic areas of the development site other than the areas where the units for the low income households are located, and can be located only on parcels for which the density bonus was granted. 
(4)  Zoning basis. The underlying zoning of the district and the number of units allowed in the district shall be the basis of which the density bonus is determined unless the project is a planned unit development, in which case the density bonus will be determined based on the general plan designation. 
4.  Procedures. 
a.  Preliminary proposal. A developer requesting a density bonus, or incentive(s) or concession(s) pursuant to this section may submit a preliminary proposal for staff comment (pursuant to item 4(b) below) prior to the submittal of any formal requests for approval of a density bonus and incentive(s) or concession(s) and other planning approvals such as a general plan amendment, subdivision map, development plan or design review, etc. The purpose of the preliminary proposal is to determine whether the proposed housing development is in compliance with applicable planning regulations and to establish the basis and procedures for granting the incentive(s). Approval of a preliminary proposal does not constitute approval of the housing development, but indicates that the housing development nominally complies with the city's applicable planning and zoning regulations, and establishes the type of incentive(s) or concession(s) and agreement to ensure compliance with this section to be recommended by staff. 
(1)  The following information shall be submitted for a preliminary proposal: 
(i)  A concise written description of the project, including location, number and type of housing units, including affordable units and bonus units, and the planning approval required. 
(ii)  A site map showing the location and general layout of the proposed housing development and surrounding land uses and roadways. 
(iii)  A written request for the specific incentive(s) sought, accompanied by the rationale and accurate supporting information sufficient to demonstrate that any requested incentive is necessary to make the affordable units economically feasible and set rents at qualifying levels. If applicable, the applicant shall identify the proposed use of any housing subventions or programs for the housing development such as State Housing Community Development Programs, redevelopment funds, or other sources of funding. 
(2)  Within forty-five days of receipt of a complete preliminary proposal, the planning and community development director shall notify the applicant in writing what the staff will recommend as to how the city will comply with this section, and shall indicate whether or not the housing development complies with this section and with the applicable planning and zoning regulations. 
b.  Housing density bonus and incentive(s) or concession(s) application and approval. 
1.  The request for approval of a density bonus and incentive(s) or concession(s) shall be made by applying for an administrative use permit. The procedures applicable to the processing of an administrative use permit shall apply to the request for approval of a density bonus and incentive(s) or concession(s). The findings required by Section 17.25.053 do not apply to Administrative Use Permits granted pursuant to this Section 17.07.020(H). 
The request for approval of a density bonus and incentive(s) or concession(s) pursuant to this section shall be made along with other applicable related planning action requests for the project as specified in the Rohnert Park zoning ordinance, except for projects for which one or more approvals has been sought prior to the adoption of this section. 
(2)  The request for approval shall include the items specified under subsection (H)(4)(a)(1) of this section. 
(3)  All of the following findings must be made, as applicable, in order to approve a density bonus and incentive(s) or concession(s): 
(i)  That the incentive(s) or concession(s) are required in order to make the affordable housing units economically feasible or to set rents at qualifying levels for low income or very low income households. 
(ii)  That design, siting and income thresholds of the affordable housing units substantially comply with all of the requirements and standards set forth in this section. 
(iii)  That, prior to issuance of any building or grading permit for the housing development, there will exist an enforceable recorded agreement to maintain the affordability of the affordable housing units for the duration required by this section. 
c.  Denial of incentive application. The request for approval of incentive(s) or concession(s) above and beyond a density bonus may be denied if the city makes a written finding, based upon substantial evidence, of either of the following: 
(1)  The concession(s) or incentive(s) are not required in order to provide for affordable housing costs, as defined in Section 50052.5 of the Health and Safety Code, or for rents for the targeted units to be set as specified in Section 17.08.050(A) of this title. 
(2)  The concession(s) or incentive(s) would have a specific adverse impact, as defined in paragraph (2) of subdivision (d) of Section 65589.5 of the Government Code, Title 7, Division 1, upon public health and safety or the physical environment or on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low- and moderate-income households. 
5.  Criteria to evaluate requested incentive(s) or concession(s). 
a.  At least one of the following criteria shall be used to evaluate whether incentive(s) or concession(s) are sufficient to make the affordable housing units economically feasible: 
(1)  A development pro forma with the capital costs, operating expenses, return on investment, revenues, loan-to-value ratio and the debt-coverage ratio including the contribution provided by any applicable subsidy programs, and the economic effect created by the thirty year use and income restrictions of the affordable housing units. 
(2)  An appraisal report indicating the value of the density bonus and of the incentive(s) and of the value of any other incentives. 
(3)  Sources and use of funds statement identifying the projected financing gap of the project with the affordable housing units that are the basis for granting the density bonus and incentive(s). The developer shall establish how much of the gap would be covered by the density bonus, leaving a remainder figure to be covered by an additional incentive. 
b.  Determination of the completeness and accuracy of the financial information submitted in support of a request for an incentive and evaluation of this information shall be made by the city, or by a third party agreed to jointly by the city and the developer. 
6.  Required affordable housing density bonus agreement. 
a.  Prior to the issuance of a building or grading permit for any dwelling unit in a development for which a density bonus has been awarded or incentives have been granted, the developer shall enter into a written agreement with the city for the duration of affordability. The terms and conditions of the agreement shall run with the land that is to be developed, shall be binding upon the successor in interest of the developer, and shall be recorded in the Sonoma County recorder's office. The agreement shall be approved by the city attorney and shall include provisions for the following: 
(1)  The number and proportion of housing units affordable to low income and very low income house-holds by type, location, and number of bedrooms. 
(2)  Standards for maximum qualifying household incomes and maximum rents or sale prices. 
(3)  The party responsible for certifying rents and sales prices of affordable housing units. 
(4)  The process that will be used to certify incomes of tenants or purchasers of the affordable housing units. 
(5)  The manner in which vacancies will be marketed and filled, including the screening and qualifying of prospective renters and purchasers of the affordable units. 
(6)  Deed restrictions on the affordable housing units binding on property upon sale or transfer. 
(7)  Enforcement mechanisms to ensure that the affordable units are continuously occupied by eligible households are not sold, rented, leased, sublet, assigned, or otherwise transferred to non-eligible households. 
(8)  Project phasing, including the timing of completions, and rental or sale of the affordable housing units, in relation to the timing of the market-rate units. 
I.  DRIVE-THROUGH WINDOW. 
1.  Drive-through window service may be permitted in indicated districts only with approval of a conditional use permit and subject to the following provisions. The provisions of this section shall apply to all new drive-through windows and existing businesses with drive-through window service proposing to expand their gross floor area by more than thirty percent or increase by more than fifty percent the number of restaurant seats. Floor area added for the purpose of compliance with state and local health laws or access requirements of the disabled shall not be included in floor area calculations for the purpose of determining the applicability of this section. 
2.  Minimum development standards. 
a.  When located on a site adjacent to, or separated by an alley from, any residentially zoned property, a drive-through window shall not open prior to 6:00 a.m., nor remain open after 10:00 p.m. 
b.  Premises with drive-through windows shall have two points of ingress/egress. 
c.  Drive-through windows shall have a capacity for queuing a minimum of six vehicles behind menu board. Queuing area shall not interfere with on or off-site circulation patterns and shall be reviewed and approved by the city engineer prior to approval of a conditional use permit. 
d.  A parking and vehicular circulation plan encompassing adjoining streets and alleys shall be submitted for review and approval by the city engineer and planning and community development director prior to approval of a conditional use permit. 
e.  A minimum of one outdoor trash receptacle shall be provided on-site adjacent to each driveway exit or as approved by the planning and community development director. At least one additional on-site outdoor trash receptacle shall be provided for every ten required parking spaces. 
f.  Any drive-up or drive-through speaker system shall be limited to one that emits no more than fifty decibels four feet between the vehicle and the speaker, and shall not be audible above daytime ambient noise levels beyond the property boundaries. The system shall be designed to compensate for ambient noise levels in the immediate area, and shall not be located within thirty feet of any residential uses or residential districts. 
g.  Premises with drive-through windows shall be located on a permanent foundation. 
h.  Premises with drive-through windows shall obtain development plan approval from the county health department. 
i.  Pedestrian walkways should not intersect the drive-through drive aisles, but where they do, they shall have clear visibility, and they must be emphasized by enriched paving or striping. 
j.  Drive-through aisles shall have a minimum fifteen-foot width on curves and a minimum eleven-foot width on straight sections. The outside radius of the curves shall be a minimum of thirty feet. 
k.  All service areas, rest rooms and ground-mounted and roof-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from view. 
l.  Landscaping shall screen drive-through or drive-in aisles from the public right-of-way and shall be used to minimize the visual impact of reader board signs and directional signs. 
m.  Drive-through aisles shall be paved. 
n.  Parking areas and the drive-through aisle and structure shall be setback from the ultimate curb face a minimum of fifteen feet. 
J.  FIREARM DEALERS AND FIREARM AMMUNITION DEALERS. 
1.  Firearm dealers and firearm ammunition dealers may be permitted in indicated districts only with approval of a conditional use permit and subject to the following provisions, except these provisions shall not apply to the following uses: 
a.  Dealers that sell five or less firearms per year. 
b.  Retail establishments where the sale of firearms is incidental to the primary business (i.e., less than five percent of the floor area is devoted to the sale, display and storage of firearms; e.g., sporting goods store or big box retailer). 
2.  The words and phrases "firearms" and "firearm dealer" shall be defined as set forth in Chapter 9.92, Retail Firearms Dealers, of this code. The words and phrases "firearm ammunition" and "firearm ammunition dealer" shall be defined as set forth below: 
a.  "Firearm ammunition" means any cartridge or encasement containing a bullet or projectile, propellant or explosive charge, and a primer which is used in the operation of firearms, and any component thereof. 
b.  "Firearm ammunition dealer" means any person engaged in the business of selling, leasing, or transferring of any firearm ammunition, or the preparation for such conduct of business, as evidenced by the application for or securing of applicable state or federal licenses; or the holding of oneself out as engaged in the business of selling, transferring, or leasing of any firearm ammunition; or the selling, transferring or leasing of firearm ammunition in quantity, in series or in individual transactions, or in any other manner indicative of trade. 
3.  The planning commission may approve a conditional use permit for a firearm dealer or a firearm ammunition dealer, provided that the use conforms to any and all applicable use permit or other criteria set forth in the particular zoning district regulations, and to all of the following criteria: 
a.  The dealer in firearms or dealer in firearm ammunition shall not be located within two hundred fifty feet of the exterior limits of: 
(1)  Any premises occupied by a public or private day care center, family day care home, or school; 
(2)  A public park, recreation center or other similar public property at which children regularly congregate; or 
(3)  Any premises occupied by a dealer in firearms, a business engaged in whole or in part in the retail sale of any alcoholic beverage whether for on-site or off-site consumption, massage establishments as defined in Chapter 8.36.010 of this code, or an adult business, as defined in Section 8.37.020 of this code. 
All distances referred to in this subsection shall be measured between the closest points of the exterior property lines or area boundaries of the parcels or areas involved, except that when a dealer in firearms subject to the provisions of the chapter occupies one unit of a multi-unit structure located on a single parcel, distances shall be measured from the exterior boundaries of the unit so occupied; 
b.  Prior to the commencement of operation of a firearm dealer and at all times thereafter, the firearm dealer shall have a valid and current license from the department of public safety pursuant to Chapter 9.92 of this code and shall be in full compliance therewith; 
c.  Prior to the commencement of operation of a firearm dealer or a firearm ammunition dealer and at all times thereafter, compliance with all of the following requirements: 
(1)  Adequate security measures to secure the premises where the firearms or firearm ammunition is sold and/or stored, subject to approval of the director of public safety or designee; 
(2)  Storage of firearms and firearm ammunition at all times in a secured locked location so that access is controlled by the dealer or employee, representative or agent thereof to the exclusion of others, with the adequacy of such storage methods subject to the approval of the director of public safety or designee; 
(3)  Storage of ammunition and other firearms-related merchandise classified as hazardous materials shall be subject to the approval of the fire marshal or designee; 
(4)  The firearm dealer and the firearm ammunition dealer at all times shall maintain in full force and effect all required federal, state and local licenses and/or permits. 
K.  HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. 
1.  Applicability. The provisions in this section shall govern all projects and activities that involve hazardous waste or hazardous materials. The purpose of this section is to establish a basis for the issuance of conditional use permits for projects and activities which could significantly and/or adversely affect public health or the environment and which generate, store, transport, treat or dispose of significant amounts of hazardous materials. Further, the intent is to encourage reductions in the amounts of hazardous wastes or materials managed for the benefit of the health, safety and general welfare of the residents and persons within the city of Rohnert Park. This section is not intended, and should not be deemed, to preempt or prevent compliance with Federal, State, and/or County laws, regulations, etc. In case of any conflict among Federal, State, County or local laws, then the most restrictive provisions will apply. 
2.  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words, phrases, and terms shall have the meanings set forth herein. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
"Dispose" means to discharge, deposit, inject, dump or place any hazardous waste into or on any land or water so that such hazardous waste or any constituent thereof may not enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including ground waters. 
"Generate" means an act or process of producing hazardous waste. 
"Hazardous material" means any substance that is regulated as a hazardous material and classified in the Appendix VI-A of the Uniform Fire Code, 1988 Edition. This reference to the 1988 Uniform Fire Code is for the purpose of definition only. These terms are also further defined under Fed-OSHA Title 29 and CFR Title 49 (Transportation). Hazardous materials belonging in more than one category are subject to the regulations of the more stringent category. 
"Hazardous waste" means any substance that is regulated as a hazardous waste by the California Department of Health Services under Title 25 California Administrative Code, Division 4, Chapter 30. 
"Bulk plant" means a plant primarily engaged in the manufacturing, synthesizing, processing, blending or packaging of hazardous materials. Materials are stored in large fixed containers. Bulk plant quantities are larger than the amount transported in or out in a single shipment. 
"Bulk storage and/or distribution" means the storage and/or distribution of hazardous materials which are collected, repackaged, blended or stored on-site; and may be used or sold on-site. The materials are generally transported to the site in an unpackaged form and are then transferred to storage containers by hose, pipeline, conveyor belt, etc. On-site usage of rail car, tanker truck or similar vehicle for storage is considered at this quantity level. 
"Commercial packaged" means hazardous materials that are stored in discrete containers which are handled individually, pelletized or utilized for purposes of transportation. Packaged materials are used or sold on site. Packages may include cylinders, drums, boxes, glass, jars, etc. 
"Lab amounts" means amounts of hazardous materials which are less than commercial packaged amounts, and are generally recognized by the industry as that which is required for normal laboratory research and development activities and which if an incident were to occur, would not have impacts beyond the immediate premises. 
"Household packages" means packaged and distributed hazardous material in a form intended or suitable for sale through retail sales outlets for consumption by individuals for purposes of personal care or household use. 
3.  Permitted Uses. The following table indicates under what conditions various uses and activities will be permitted: 
(Note: P = Permitted, C = Conditional Use Permit, NP = Not Permitted) 
ACTIVITY/ USE 	L-1 DISTRICT 
	Bulk Mfg. Plant 	Bulk Storage/ Distribution 	Commercial Package Amounts 	Lab Amounts 
Explosives and Blasting Agents including High Explosives, Peroxides capable of detonation, Low explosives and Blasting Agents. 	NP 	NP 	NP 	P 
Toxic Materials including Class A and B Poisons 	NP 	C 	C 	P 
Highly Unstable Materials including Organic Peroxides Class I-II, Oxidizers Class 4, Phyrophoric Materials, Unstable Materials Class 4-3 and Water-reactive Materials Class 3 	NP 	C 	C 	P 
Radioactive Materials in amounts licensed by State 	NP 	NP 	C 	P 
Moderately Hazardous Materials including Corrosives, Flammable Gases, Flammable Liquids, Flammable Solids, Organic Peroxides Class III, Oxidizers Class 3-2, Water-reactive Materials Class 2 	C 	C 	P 	P 
 
 Exceptions. The following are exceptions to the activities/uses allowed in the table above: 
 a. In addition to these regulations, all storage or use of hazardous materials must be approved by the fire Marshall and be in conformance with all applicable fire and building codes; 
 b. Unless otherwise stated in the preceding table, packaged quantities of hazardous substances for on-site use or sale are permitted in the zones. Household packaged hazardous materials that are packaged and distributed in a form intended or suitable for sale through retail sales outlets for purposes of personal care and household use are also permitted in zones where such retail sales is allowed; 
 c. An existing use would be subject to the table's requirements if the quantity of material used increases to a higher quantity level or the category of chemicals used changes to a higher (more hazardous) category (e.g., a change from a moderately hazardous material to a toxic material). 
4.  Conditional use permit. Where a conditional use permit is required for this section, the procedure will be as set forth in Section 17.25, Article I. 
a.  Application criteria. The project description for a conditional use permit shall also include, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The amount and level of hazard presented by the substance; 
(2)  Safety measures being proposed; 
(3)  The potential for odors and toxic fumes; 
(4)  The maximum number of people and amount of land and structures which would be at risk if there were an accident; 
(5)  Location of the site in relation to identified areas or special areas of environmental concern such as water courses, water wells, underground aquifers, or fish and wildlife habitats; 
(6)  Location of the site in relation to designated routes for the transport of hazardous substances; and 
(7)  Any other public welfare concerns identified by the staff. 
b.  Findings. In approving an application for hazardous materials or hazardous waste, the planning commission shall also make the following findings: 
(1)  The activity will not create an unreasonable risk to the public health and safety or to the surrounding properties and activities; 
(2)  The activity is consistent with the character and economic function of the surrounding area; 
(3)  The proposed activity with any required conditions will not result in significant impact on environmentally sensitive areas; 
(4)  The request has been approved by the department of public safety. 
(5)  The applicant demonstrates ability to comply with state and regional regulations. 
c.  Professional assistance for city determinations. Whenever an approval by the planning commission may be required in this section, the planning and community development director may, at such applicant's sole cost and expense, retain a suitably qualified independent engineer, or chemist, or other appropriate professional consultant regarding the adequacy of the application to achieve the purposes of this section. The planning commission shall be entitled to rely on such evaluation and/or opinion of such engineer, chemist or professional consultant in making the relevant determinations provided for in this section. 
L.  HOME OCCUPATIONS. 
1.  Definitions. A home occupation is a business enterprise conducted entirely within a dwelling unit, garage or accessory building by the occupant(s) of the primary dwelling, which occupation is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes, and which is consistent with the criteria below. 
2.  Criteria for Home Occupation Authorization. 
a.  Criteria. A home occupation in a residential district shall require a business license and no business license shall be granted unless the use conforms to all of the criteria listed below. 
(1)  Primary use must be the residence of the person conducting the occupation. 
(2)  The home occupation is conducted entirely within the principal dwelling. A garage shall not be used in connection with a home occupation, if such use interferes with its primary use as vehicular storage. 
(3)  There shall be no exterior indication of home occupation. The appearance of the dwelling in no way shall be altered, nor shall the occupation be conducted in a manner which would cause the residence to differ from its original residential character, either by the use of colors, materials, construction, lighting or signs. 
(4)  No outdoor storage, parking, or display of vehicles, equipment, materials or supplies related to the home occupation shall be permitted. Exception: one business vehicle, up to one-ton capacity, with signage, used for the home occupation shall be permitted. 
(5)  No more than one person other than resident(s) of the dwelling shall be employed on-site or report to work at the site of the home occupation except for other employees of licensed child care facilities. This prohibition also applies to independent contractors. 
(6)  The home occupation shall not generate vehicular or pedestrian traffic in excess of that which is normally associated with residential uses in the same district. Exceptions for home occupations in a single-family detached residence: 
(i)  Child care up to fourteen children (See section re: conditional use permit requirements for large family day cares). 
(ii)  Individual instruction or tutoring, professional services (e.g., tax services, insurance sales, etc.), massage, chiropractor, hairstyling, and consulting provided they serve one client at a time. 
(7)  The home occupation shall not create noise, odor, dust, vibration, smoke, electrical disturbance, or any other interference which is detectable to the normal senses beyond the property line or outside the dwelling unit if the occupation is conducted in other than a detached single-family dwelling unit. 
(8)  There shall be no excessive use of, or unusual discharge into, any one or more of the following utilities: water, sewers, electrical, garbage, or storm drains. 
(9)  Delivery vehicles shall be limited to those types of vehicles which typically make deliveries to single-family neighborhoods, such as the United States Postal Service, United Parcel Service, pickup trucks, and light vans. 
(10)  There shall be no repair of large appliances, internal combustion engines, automobiles, trucks, or motorcycles at the home. 
(11)  There shall be no motor power other than electrically operated motors. The horsepower of any single motor shall not exceed one-half horsepower, and the total horsepower of such motors shall not exceed one horsepower. 
(12)  There shall be no cooking or food preparation at the site for the purpose of retail sales from a vehicle and any permitted food preparation shall first receive a permit from the health department. 
(13)  Other than normal household quantities, there shall be no hazardous materials on-site. 
(14)  Home occupations shall comply with all other applicable city codes and ordinances; 
(15)  Home occupation business licenses apply to a specific site and owner and shall not be transferable to different persons or to different locations. 
b.  Content of application. An application for a home occupation authorization shall contain: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(2)  A complete written description of the proposed home occupation, including number of persons employed, in the case of child care facilities or consistent with exceptions noted above, amount of floor space occupied, provisions for storage of materials, and number and type of vehicles used. 
(3)  A signed statement that the applicant has read and understands the criteria outlined above for a home occupation and agrees to comply with the criteria. 
M.  HOMELESS SHELTER. 
1.  This section is intended to provide guidelines to be used to implement policies contained in the housing element of the Rohnert Park general plan with regard to the siting of housing facilities for the homeless in the city of Rohnert Park. 
2.  Applicability. A homeless shelter for six or fewer persons may be located in conjunction with an existing church or other places of religious assembly, and in any portion of the city zoned for residential or commercial development. To ensure that a concentration of persons within a single site is compatible with the neighborhood and adequate for the persons living on-site, homeless shelters for seven or more persons may be permitted in conjunction with an existing church or other places of religious assembly, and in any portion of the city zoned for high-density residential or commercial development. 
3.  Physical characteristics. Persons seeking to establish homeless shelters shall be required to demonstrate: 
a.  The facilities have adequate private living space, shower and toilet facilities, and secure storage areas for its intended residents. 
b.  The facility shall have at least one room, which has one hundred twenty square feet of floor area. Other habitable rooms shall have an area not less than seventy square feet. Where more than two persons occupy a room used for sleeping purposes, the required floor area shall be increased at the rate of fifty square feet for each occupant in excess of two. (Source: Uniform Housing Code.) Rooms used for sleeping shall meet requirements of the California Building Code and minimum health and safety requirements. 
c.  The facility has an enclosed yard area, especially if the facility is located on a major thoroughfare. 
d.  There shall be a minimum distance requirement of three hundred feet between such facilities as measured between the closest points on the exterior property lines or area boundaries of the parcels or areas involved. 
e.  Facilities for seven or more persons shall have two off-street parking spaces plus one space for every two employees. 
4.  Programmatic characteristics. 
a.  If the facility is proposed for a location in an area either zoned or developed as a residential area, all intake and screening shall be conducted off-site. 
b.  The program shall provide accommodations appropriate for a minimum stay of twenty-eight days and a maximum stay of one hundred eighty days per client. 
c.  The program shall identify a transportation system that will provide its clients with a reasonable level of mobility including, but not limited to, access to social services and employment opportunities. 
d.  The program shall provide specific mechanisms for residents to contact social service and employment programs. 
e.  If a program includes a drug or alcohol abuse counseling component, appropriate state licensing shall be required. 
f.  The program shall include clear arrangements for on-site meal preparation or providing food in accordance with county health department regulations. 
g.  The program shall, where applicable, provide a child care service and ensure that school-aged children are enrolled in school during their stay at the facility. 
h.  The program shall have an identified administrator and liaison personnel. 
i.  Administrators and operators of the program shall demonstrate experience in successfully running social service-related facilities. 
j.  The program shall provide clear and established operational standards and rules (e.g., standards governing expulsions and lights-out). 
k.  The program shall include identified funding mechanisms that are sufficient to ensure compliance with the required siting and programmatic criteria. 
N.  INCLUSIONARY HOUSING. 
1.  Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a housing trust fund and an inclusionary requirement or an in-lieu fee on developers of residential development projects to mitigate the impacts caused by these development projects on the rising land prices for a limited supply of available residential land. The fees will be used to defray the costs of providing affordable housing for very low-, low-, and moderate-income households in the city of Rohnert Park. The fees and inclusionary requirements required by this chapter do not replace other regulatory, development and processing fees or exactions, funding required pursuant to a development agreement or reimbursement agreement, assessments charged pursuant to special assessments or benefit assessment district proceedings, etc., unless so specified. 
2.  Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words, phrases, and terms shall have the meanings set forth herein. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
"Affordable rent" means: (1) monthly rent that does not exceed thirty percent of eighty percent of area median income for lower income households; and (2) monthly rent that does not exceed thirty percent of fifty percent of area median income for very low-income households. In each case, the median income applicable to Sonoma County is as determined annually by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, adjusted for household size, less a reasonable allowance for utilities. Affordable rent shall be based on presumed occupancy levels of one person in a studio unit, two persons in a one-bedroom unit, three persons in a two-bedroom unit, and one additional person for each additional bedroom thereafter. 
"Affordable sales price" means the maximum purchase price that will be affordable to the specified target income household. A maximum purchase price shall be considered affordable only if the owner-occupied monthly housing payment is equal to or less than one-twelfth of thirty percent of income for the specified target income household. Affordable sales price shall be based upon presumed occupancy levels of one person in a studio unit, two persons in a one-bedroom unit, three persons in a two bedroom unit, and one additional person for each additional bedroom thereafter. 
"Affordable units" means those dwelling units which are required to be rented at affordable rents or purchased at an affordable sales price to specified households. 
"Annual household income" means the combined gross income for all adult persons living in a dwelling unit as calculated for the purpose of the Section 8 program under the United States Housing Act of 1937, as amended, or its successor. 
"Building permit" means a permit issued pursuant to Chapter 15.08 of Title 15 of the Rohnert Park Municipal Code. 
"Building official" means the chief building official of the city of Rohnert Park, or the designee of such individual. 
"Concession" or "incentive" shall have the same meaning and applicability as set forth in Government Code Section 65915. Concessions and incentives may include, at the discretion of the city, any of the following: (1) a reduction in site development standards, or a modification of zoning requirements or architectural design requirements which exceed the minimum building standards approved by the State, including but not limited to minimum lot size, open space, yard, landscape maintenance, fencing, utility undergrounding, sidewalk, right-of-way dedication (not including curb-to-curb street width standards), parking and/or setback requirements; (2) approval of mixed use zoning in conjunction with the housing project if the non-residential uses will reduce the cost of the residential development and if the city determines that the non-residential uses are compatible with both the housing project and the existing or planned development in the area in which the housing project will be located; or (3) other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the developer which the developer shows will result in identifiable cost reductions, including but not limited to a waiver, reduction and/or reimbursement of taxes and fees which otherwise would be imposed on the project. 
"Construction costs" means the estimated cost per square foot of construction, as established by the building department of the city of Rohnert Park for use in the setting of regulatory fees and building permits, multiplied by the total square footage, minus the garage floor area, to be constructed. 
"Developer" means every person, firm, or corporation constructing, placing, or creating residential development directly or through the services of any employee, agent, independent contractor or otherwise. 
"Dwelling unit" shall have the meaning set forth in Chapter 17.04 of Title 17 of the city of Rohnert Park Municipal Code. 
"Housing fund" means the city of Rohnert Park affordable housing trust fund. 
"Housing In-lieu fee" means the fee established for residential development projects. 
"Low-income households" means those households with incomes of up to eighty percent of median income. 
"Market rate units" means those dwelling units in a residential project which are not affordable units. 
"Median income" means the median income, adjusted for family size, applicable to Sonoma County as published annually pursuant to Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations, Section 6932 (or its successor provision) by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
"Moderate income households" means those households with incomes of up to one hundred twenty percent of median income. 
"Owner-occupied monthly housing payment" means the sum equal to the principal, interest, property taxes, homeowner's insurance and homeowner's association dues paid on an annual basis divided by twelve. 
"Residential development project" means a project for the construction or placement of any dwelling unit in a permanent location, or the subdivision of land which is planned, designed, or used for the following land use categories: 
a.  Single-family residential: This category consists of single-family detached units and duplexes. 
b.  Multi-family residential: This category consists of buildings containing three or more dwelling units and mobile home parks. 
"Very low-income households" means those households with incomes of up to fifty percent of median income. 
3.  Housing trust fund. 
a.  There is hereby established the city of Rohnert Park affordable housing trust fund (the "housing fund"). Separate accounts within such housing fund may be created from time to time to avoid commingling as required by law or as deemed appropriate to further the purposes of the fund. 
b.  The housing fund shall be administered by the city manager, or his/her designee, who shall have the authority to govern the housing fund consistent with this chapter, and to prescribe procedures for said purpose, subject to approval by the council, and payment for all expenditures must be in accordance with city purchasing and budgetary policies. 
c.  Purposes and use of funds. 
(1)  Monies deposited in the housing fund along with any interest earnings on such monies shall be used solely to increase and improve the supply of housing affordable to households of moderate-, low- and very low-income households; including, but not limited to: 
(i)  Acquisition of property and property rights; 
(ii)  Cost of construction including costs associated with planning, administration, and design, as well as actual building or installation, as well as any other costs associated with the construction or financing of affordable housing; 
(iii)  Reimbursement to the city for such costs if funds were advanced by the city from other sources; and 
(iv)  Reimbursement of developers or property owners who have been required or permitted to install facilities which are beyond that which can be attributed to a specific development. 
Monies may also be used to cover reasonable administrative expenses not reimbursed through processing fees, including reasonable consultant and legal expenses related to the establishment and/or administration of the housing fund and reasonable expenses for administering the process of calculating, collecting, and accounting for inclusionary fees and any deferred city fees authorized by this section. No portion of the housing fund may be diverted to other purposes by way of loan or otherwise. 
(2)  Monies in the housing fund shall be used in accordance with the priorities identified in the Rohnert Park community development commission's five-year implementation plan, which must be consistent with the city's housing element, to construct, acquire, rehabilitate or subsidize very low-, low- and moderate-income housing and/or to assist other governmental entities, private organizations or individuals in the construction and rehabilitation of very low- low-, and moderate-income housing. To the extent possible as determined by the council, monies shall be targeted to benefit households at or below sixty percent of median income in Rohnert Park. Monies in the housing fund may be disbursed, hypothecated, collateralized or otherwise employed for these purposes from time to time as the city council determines is appropriate to accomplish the purposes of the housing fund. These uses include, but are not limited to, assistance to housing development corporations, equity participation loans, grants, pre-home ownership co-investment, pre-development loan funds, participation leases, or other public/private partnership arrangements. The housing fund monies may be extended for the benefit of rental or owner occupied housing or housing services. 
4.  Residential development project: Inclusionary/in-lieu fee requirements. 
a.  Inclusionary requirement. 
(1)  At least fifteen percent of all new dwelling units in a residential development of five or more units shall be affordable, and shall be constructed and completed not later than the related market rate units, as follows: 
(i)  In a rental housing project the affordable units shall be affordable to very low- and low-income households. 
(ii)  In a for-sale project the affordable units shall be affordable to low- and moderate-income households. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the above, this section shall not apply to projects which fall into one or more of the following categories: 
(i)  A residential development project to the extent it has received a vested right to proceed without payment of housing impact fees pursuant to state law. 
(ii)  Building permits for residential development projects if compliance with this section for such project has already been satisfied including, but not limited to, building permits on newly created lots where the subdivider has built affordable units or otherwise satisfied this section. 
(iii)  Any dwelling unit or residential development project which is damaged or destroyed by fire or natural catastrophes so long as the square footage and use of the building remains the same. 
b.  For fractions of required affordable units, the developer may elect, at his or her option, to construct the next higher whole number of affordable units, perform an equivalency action alternative which has received the approval of council pursuant to subsection C hereof, or pay the in-lieu fee specified in subsection D for such fraction. 
c.  Alternative equivalent action. 
(1)  A developer of a residential development project may propose to meet the requirements of subsection A hereof by an alternative equivalent action, subject to the review and approval by the city council. 
(2)  An alternative equivalent action may include, but is not limited to, donation of vacant land suitable for housing to a non-profit housing developer, transfer of inclusionary unit credits, construction of affordable units on another site or enforcement of required rental/sales price restrictions on existing market-rate dwelling units consistent with this section, and development of second dwelling units. All applicants proposing the use of an alternative equivalent action shall show how the alternative will further affordable housing opportunities in the city to an equal or greater extent than compliance with the express requirements of subsection A. 
(i)  Land donation. An applicant may donate land to a non-profit housing developer in place of actual construction of required affordable units upon approval of the city council. The dedicated land must be appropriately zoned, buildable, free of toxic substances and contaminated soils. It must be large enough to accommodate the number of required affordable units as indicated by a conceptual development plan. The land that is donated shall include lots that are fully improved with infrastructure, adjacent utilities, and grading, and fees paid. 
(ii)  Transfer of inclusionary unit credits. The requirements of this section may be satisfied by acquiring inclusionary unit credits that are transferable from one residential development project to another, upon approval of the city council and as set forth herein. The city council may approve issuance of a specified number of credit certificates for that number of affordable units provided by a particular residential development project in excess of the minimum number required for the project. Credit certificates shall be issued for specific income categories and may only be used to satisfy the requirements for affordable units within that same income category. If the holder of the credit certificates transfers any or all certificates to a developer of a residential development project, the parties shall report the transaction to the planning and community development director, who will document the transfer. When a credit certificate is applied to meet the affordable unit requirement of a particular project, it shall be recorded at the time of project approval, and the subject certificates must be returned to the community development director. 
(iii)  Second dwelling units. Not more than fifty percent of the requirements of this section may be satisfied through the development of second dwelling units at a ratio of two second dwelling units counted as one affordable housing unit. All second units counted toward meeting the affordable unit requirement shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.07.020.N.10., Continued Affordability. Second dwelling units shall only be allowed for meeting the affordability requirements for very-low and low-income households. 
C.  The city council's consideration of an alternative equivalent action shall follow the procedures outlined in subsection G.1.a. An alternative equivalent action shall be considered on a case-by-case basis by the city council and may be approved at the city council's sole discretion, if the city council determines that such alternative will further affordable housing opportunities in the city to an equal or greater extent than compliance with the express requirements of subsection A and that an over concentration of affordable housing in one area will not occur. 
5.  In-lieu housing fee. 
a.  For fractions of required affordable units or in the case of a residential development project that is on less than one acre or proposes ten or fewer units and is not, and has not been, part of a larger residential development project, a developer of a residential development project may propose to meet the requirements of subsection A hereof by submitting at the time of application for a discretionary or building permit, whichever comes first, a request to pay the in-lieu fee along with a report identifying: 
(1)  All overriding conditions impacting the project that prevent developer from meeting the requirement to construct the affordable units; 
(2)  Sufficient independent data, including appropriate financial information, that supports the developer's claim that it is not feasible to construct the required affordable units; and, 
(3)  A detailed analysis of why the concessions and incentives identified in subsection G will not mitigate the identified overriding conditions that are preventing the construction of the affordable units. 
b.  The city council's consideration of an in-lieu housing fee shall follow the procedures outlined in subsection G.1.a. In-lieu housing fees shall be considered on a case-by-case basis by the city council and may be approved at the city council's sole discretion, if the council determines that there are overriding conditions impacting the project that prevent developer of a residential development project from meeting the requirement to construct affordable units and that payment of the in-lieu fee will further affordable housing opportunities. 
c.  Time of payment of in-lieu fee. Unless otherwise preempted by law, the housing in-lieu fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
d.  Calculation of housing in-lieu fee. The housing in-lieu fee shall be based upon a percentage of the projected construction costs of market rate dwelling units. The amounts and calculation of the housing in-lieu fee shall be established by resolution of the city council. Construction costs of market rate dwelling units is determined in accordance with the definition in Section 17.07.020.N.2. For attached single-family residential and rental residential development projects, construction costs shall be separately calculated for each dwelling unit and the appropriate fee paid for each unit within the residential project. The housing in-lieu fee required by this section may be satisfied either by cash payment or upon the recommendation of the city manager and approval of the city council, by an alternative equivalent action which will provide city with a value equal to or greater than the amount of the required in-lieu fee. 
6.  Affordable housing concessions or incentives. 
a.  For residential development projects, which meet the requirements of subsection A through the construction of affordable units, the city shall follow the procedures described below and provide concessions and/or incentives as described in subsection 17.07.020.N.2. 
(1)  If requested by the applicant, within ninety days of submittal by the developer of a written preliminary conceptual development proposal describing and specifying the number, type, location and size of the housing development, and identifying any requests for density bonus, additional incentives, concessions or waivers or modification of development or zoning standards, necessary to make construction feasible for the proposed development, including the affordable units, prior to the submittal of any formal application for a discretionary approval (e.g., general plan amendment, rezoning, use permit, tentative subdivision or parcel map or other permit or entitlement), the city council shall review the preliminary development proposal at a public hearing noticed in accordance with Rohnert Park Municipal Code and indicate conceptual approval or disapproval of the proposed development and any requests for additional affordable housing incentives, concessions or waivers or modification of development or zoning standards. Such preliminary approval or disapproval shall not bind the city council but rather shall be subject to the discretion of the city council to modify its preliminary recommendations based upon a full review of all pertinent project information, including any environmental impact report, presented at the public hearing on the application. An application for such a request shall be submitted to the planning and community development director. 
(2)  Complete applications for a residential development project which include all required submittal documents and which include the construction of affordable units shall be processed by all city departments before other residential land use applications regardless of the original submittal date. Complete applications which include all required submittal documents and which include affordable rental units shall be processed before applications including owner-occupied units. 
(3)  Payment of all city-required fees on affordable units shall be deferred for payment, but shall be made prior to, and as a condition of, release of utilities and issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
b.  The city council may consider, on a case-by-case basis, in its sole discretion the provision of the following additional concessions or incentives identified in Government Code Section 65915 which are consistent with state law and the housing element of the city of Rohnert Park general plan for projects which meet or exceed the requirements of specified in subsection A: 
(1)  An additional density bonus or other incentives of equal financial value subject to the city council's review and approval. 
(2)  Waiver or modification of city standards that have a direct impact on reducing total project costs while remaining consistent with the latest edition of the California Building Code. The developer shall be responsible for documenting that the waiver or modification is necessary for the feasibility of the residential development project and is consistent with all applicable provisions of the California Building Code. 
(3)  Provision of direct financial assistance in the form of a loan or grant using trust fund or other appropriate available funds subject to the recommendation of the city manager. 
(4)  Deferral of payment of all city-required fees on market rate units, but payment shall be made prior to, and as a condition of, release of utilities and issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
c.  The city council may consider, on a case by case basis, at its sole discretion, the provision of additional concessions or incentives consistent with state law and the housing element of the city of Rohnert Park general plan for residential development projects which provide at least fifteen percent of the total dwelling units as affordable units. 
7.  Requirements for rental affordable units. 
a.  One-half of the affordable units which are required to be constructed in connection with construction of rental market rate units shall be available at affordable rents to very low-income households. The remaining one-half of the required affordable units shall be available at affordable rents to low-income households. Where the number of required affordable units is an odd number, the number of affordable units constructed for very low-income households may be one less than the number of affordable units construction for low-income households. 
b.  With respect to any particular rental residential project, the city council may, upon the recommendation of the city manager, forgive all or a portion of the affordability requirement set forth in subsection 1 above upon a showing by the applicant that imposition of such requirement on the residential project will cause undue hardship and that such residential project will contribute significantly to affordable housing opportunities in the city. 
8.  Requirements for owner-occupied affordable units. 
a.  One-half of the affordable units which are required to be constructed in connection with the construction of market rate units intended for owner-occupancy shall be available at affordable sales prices to moderate-income households whose annual household income does not exceed one hundred twenty percent of median income. If one-half of the affordable units required at an affordable sales price not exceeding one hundred twenty percent of median income are available at affordable sales prices to households whose annual household income does not exceed one hundred percent of median income, the developer shall be entitled to an additional density bonus of five percent for the proposed development. 
b.  As an alternative to receiving an additional density bonus of five percent, a developer may submit a request for another incentive of a financial value equal to the density bonus. Such requests shall be considered on a case-by-case basis by the city council and shall be approved, at the council's sole discretion, if the council determines that such alternative incentive will further affordable housing opportunities. 
c.  The remaining one-half of the required affordable units shall be available at affordable sales prices to households whose annual household income does not exceed eighty percent of median income. Where the number of required affordable units is an odd number, the number of units affordable to moderate income households may be one greater than the number affordable at or below eighty percent of median income. 
9.  Basic requirements for owner-occupied and rental affordable units. 
Affordable units shall be comparable in number of bedrooms, exterior appearance and overall quality of construction to market rate units in the same residential project. Subject to the approval of the planning and community development director and city manager, square footage of affordable units and interior features in affordable units may not be the same as or equivalent to those in market rate units in the same residential project, so long as they are of good quality and are consistent with contemporary standards for new housing. Affordable units shall be dispersed throughout the residential project, or, subject to the approval of the planning and community development director and city manager, may be clustered within the residential project when this furthers affordable housing opportunities. 
10.  Continued affordability. 
a.  Prior to the issuance of certificates of occupancy or approval of the final inspection for affordable units, regulatory agreements and, if the affordable units are owner-occupied, resale restrictions, deed restrictions, deeds of trust and/or other documents, all of which must be acceptable to the city manager and consistent with the requirements of this chapter, shall be recorded against parcels having such affordable units and shall be effective for a minimum of fifty-five years with respect to each affordable rental unit and a minimum of forty-five years with respect to each owner-occupied unit. 
b.  Notwithstanding any other provision in this section: (1) the maximum sales price permitted on resale of an affordable unit intended for owner-occupancy shall not exceed the seller's purchase price, adjusted for the percentage increase in median income since the seller's purchase, plus the value of substantial structural or permanent fixed improvements to the property, plus the cost of reasonable seller's broker fee as determined by the city manager; (2) the resale restrictions shall provide that in the event of the sale of an affordable unit intended for owner-occupancy, the city shall have the right to purchase or assign its right to purchase such affordable unit at the maximum price which could be charged to an eligible household. 
c.  No household shall be permitted to occupy an affordable unit, or purchase an affordable unit for owner-occupancy, unless the city or its designee has approved the household's eligibility, or has failed to make a determination of eligibility within the time or other limits provided by a regulatory agreement or resale restrictions if the city or its designee maintains a list of eligible households, households selected to occupy affordable units shall be selected first from that list to the extent provided in the regulatory agreement or resale restrictions. 
11.  Annual Monitoring and Transfer Fees. 
a.  For each rental affordable unit provided hereunder, the current owner may be required to pay an annual monitoring fee for the term of required affordability. Such fee shall be specified in the regulatory agreement(s) required hereunder. 
b.  For each owner-occupied affordable unit provided under this section, the current owner may be required to pay a transfer fee for any change of ownership during the term of required affordability. Such fee shall be specified in the resale restrictions required by subsection K. 
12.  Discretionary Permit Requirements. Every discretionary permit for a residential development project of five or more units approved after the effective date of this chapter shall contain a condition detailing the method of compliance with this chapter. Every final and parcel map shall bear a note indicating whether compliance with the requirements of this section must be met prior to issuance of a building permit for each lot created by such map. 
13.  Requirements for certificate of occupancy/final inspection. 
a.  No temporary or permanent certificate of occupancy shall be issued, final inspection approved or release of utilities authorized for any new dwelling unit in a residential development project until the developer has satisfactorily completed the requirements hereunder, i.e., on-site construction of affordable units, alternative equivalent action(s) or payment of the housing in-lieu fee. 
b.  No temporary or permanent certificate of occupancy shall be issued, final inspection approved or release of utilities authorized for a dwelling unit described as exempt from the requirements of this chapter in subsection A above until the developer has made a showing acceptable to the city manager that such an exemption is appropriate. 
14.  Enforcement Provisions. 
a.  It is unlawful, a public nuisance and a misdemeanor for any person to sell or rent an affordable unit at a price or rent exceeding the maximum allowed under this chapter or to a household not qualified under this chapter, and such person shall be subject to a five hundred dollar fine per month from the date of original noncompliance until the affordable unit is in compliance with this section. 
b.  The Rohnert Park city attorney's office or the Sonoma County district attorney, as appropriate, shall be authorized to abate violations of this chapter and to enforce the provisions of this chapter and all implementing regulatory agreements and resale controls placed on affordable units by civil action, injunctive relief, and any other proceeding or method permitted by law. 
c.  The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive and shall not preclude the city from any other remedy or relief to which it otherwise would be entitled under law or equity. 
15.  Adjustment. 
a.  A developer of any project subject to the requirements of this chapter may appeal to the city council for a reduction, adjustment, or waiver of the requirements based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the impact of the development and either the amount of the fee charged or the inclusionary requirement. 
b.  A developer subject to the requirements of this chapter who has received an approved tentative subdivision or parcel map, use permit or similar discretionary approval and who submits a new or revised tentative subdivision or parcel map, use permit or similar discretionary approval for the same property may appeal for a reduction, adjustment or waiver of the requirements with respect to the number of lots or square footage of construction previously approved. 
c.  Any such appeal shall be made in writing and filed with the city clerk not later than ten calendar days before the first public hearing on any discretionary approval or permit for the development, or if no such discretionary approval or permit is required, or if the action complained of occurs after the first public hearing on such permit or approval, the appeal shall be filed within ten calendar days after payment of the fees objected to. 
d.  The appeal shall set forth in detail the factual and legal basis for the claim of waiver, reduction, or adjustment. The city council shall consider the appeal at the public hearing on the permit application or at a separate hearing within sixty calendar days after the filing of the appeal, whichever is later. The appellant shall bear the burden of presenting substantial evidence to support the appeal including comparable technical information to support appellant's position. 
e.  No waiver shall be approved by the city council for a new tentative subdivision or parcel map, use permit or similar discretionary approval on property with an approved tentative subdivision or parcel map, use permit or similar discretionary permit unless the council finds that the new tentative subdivision or parcel map, use permit or similar discretionary approval is superior to the approved project both in its design and its mitigation of environmental impacts. The decision of the council shall be final. If a reduction, adjustment, or waiver is granted, any change in the project shall invalidate the waiver, adjustment, or reduction of the fee or inclusionary requirement. 
O.  KENNEL. Commercial kennels may be permitted in indicated districts only with approval of a conditional use permit and subject to the following provisions. 
1.  The kennel area shall be sound attenuated so the noise level measured at the property line does not exceed standards set for the adjacent use. 
2.  No animal runs, exercise areas, or keeping of the kenneled animals for commercial or noncommercial purposes shall be located within the required setback area. 
P.  LIVE/WORK. 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to make new and existing commercial buildings available for joint living and work quarters for individuals and families engaged in art-making, small-scale custom manufacturing and similar creative endeavors. The cultural and economic life of the city is enhanced by the residents regularly engaged in the arts. It is the intent of these regulations to: 
a.  Allow the reuse of existing buildings as live/work space. 
b.  Allow for the construction of new buildings specifically designed for live/work. 
c.  Ensure that the permitted commercial uses shall not be interfered with or compromised by the live/work uses allowed under these regulations. 
2.  Permitted Use. Live/work uses will be permitted in commercial and mixed-use districts only with approval of a conditional use permit and subject to the following provisions, except as modified by a conditional use permit. 
3.  Live/Work Standards. Live/work buildings shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  The minimum total gross square footage of a live/work space shall be seven hundred fifty square feet. The maximum density for a live/work development is one live/work space for each three thousand square feet of lot area. 
b.  The workspace must meet the requirements of the building code for the type of activity/use being undertaken. The living portion of the unit shall be incidental to the live/work space and the live/work space shall be maintained and classified as a business use. 
c.  The parking and loading requirements for live/work shall be the same as for the similar commercial/industrial use. A minimum of two parking spaces per unit shall be provided. 
d.  The yard/setback requirements shall be the same as the base zoning designation. 
e.  The height limit requirements shall be the same as the base zoning designation. 
f.  The permitted work activities shall be in accordance with the base zoning designation. 
g.  The reuse of existing commercial or industrial buildings for live/work occupancy shall not necessarily constitute a change of use. 
h.  The occupant of a live/work space, by selecting this type of occupancy accepts the conditions found in the area including, but not limited to, industrial noise, pollution, fumes, dirt, traffic, and odors to the extent that they are permitted by law in the base district. The planning commission may include conditions to this effect that would be recorded as part of the approval of a live/work application. 
i.  The live/work use must be in compliance with all applicable performance standards. 
j.  The living space shall not be rented separately from the working space. 
k.  Signs that identify the location of an occupation in a live/work unit provided the sign does not exceed one square foot, is attached to the wall of the building in which the use is housed and is nonilluminated. For building groups that involve four or more live/work units, an integrated sign program shall be required in accordance with Section 17.27.030(B) (Sign programs). 
l.  Live/work units shall be occupied and used only by a business operator, or a family of which at least one member shall be the business operator. 
Q.  MANUFACTURED HOME. Certified manufactured homes on approved foundations may be permitted in the indicated districts only with zoning compliance approval that the proposed home is consistent with the city's adopted design guidelines for single-family residential developments. 
R.  REPEALED. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 841, § 3, adopted Dec. 13, 2011, repealed § 17.07.020.R. Former subsection R pertained to ON-SALE AND OFF-SALE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES. See Code Comparative Table and Disposition List for derivation. 
S.  OUTDOOR AND SIDEWALK CAFE. 
1.  General Provisions. 
a.  Permit Required. Outdoor dining on a public sidewalk may be permitted in designated districts only with approval of an administrative permit and subject to the following provisions. A revocable license shall also be required if the activity is located in the public right-of-way. 
b.  Prohibited Locations. Outside dining will not be permitted on sidewalks designated as bicycle paths. 
c.  Permit Transfer. A revocable license may be transferred to a subsequent operator of the same establishment subject to approval by the city engineer and payment of a revocable license transfer fee established by the city council. Prior to approval of the transfer the city engineer may modify the terms of the permit as deemed appropriate to protect public health, safety and welfare. 
d.  Zoning Requirements. A revocable license may be processed concurrently with the administrative permit. 
e.  Conditions of Approval. The city engineer shall have the authority to apply conditions to the approval of a revocable license as appropriate to ensure compliance with the provisions of this policy. 
2.  Development Standards. 
a.  Horizontal Clearance: A clear, continuous pedestrian path not less than six feet in width shall be required for sidewalk cafes. The city engineer may require more than six feet if necessary to protect the public safety. This requirement may be modified at the discretion of the city engineer in locations where unusual circumstances exist and where public safety would not be jeopardized. 
b.  Setbacks from corners, streets and alleys: When an outdoor dining area is located at a street corner, all furniture, barriers, etc. over three feet in height must be located outside of the clear vision zone for that street corner. When an outdoor dining area is located adjacent to a driveway or an alley, a five-foot setback shall be maintained from the driveway or alley. These requirements may be modified at the discretion of the city engineer in locations where unusual circumstances exist and where public safety would not be jeopardized (e.g., the sidewalk adjacent to the proposed outdoor dining areas is wider than usual or the perimeter of the building has an unusual configuration). 
c.  Extension to Adjacent Properties. Subject to approval of the city engineer, an outdoor dining area may extend onto the sidewalk in front of an adjacent business with the written consent of both the adjacent business owner and property owner. 
3.  Barriers. 
a.  Establishments that serve alcoholic beverages in the outdoor dining area shall provide a physical barrier that meets the requirements of this subsection and of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board. 
b.  Barriers should compliment the building facade as well as any street furniture and be somewhat transparent (such as wrought iron) and shall be able to withstand inclement weather. 
c.  Barriers and furniture shall be removed at the end of each business day unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. 
d.  The height of any barrier shall not exceed thirty-six inches. 
4.  Awnings and Umbrellas. The use of awnings over the outdoor dining area and removable table umbrellas may be permitted, provided they do not interfere with street trees or are located within the clear vision zone. No portion of an awning or umbrella shall be less than eight feet above the sidewalk. Awnings may extend up to five feet from the building front or cover up to fifty percent of the outdoor dining area, whichever is less. Awnings shall have no support posts located within the public right-of-way. A building permit must be obtained prior to installation of an awning. A revocable license shall be required for awnings projecting into the public right-of-way. 
5.  Lighting. Outdoor lighting fixtures should compliment the style of the building. Lighting fixtures shall not be glaring to motorists or pedestrians on the adjacent right-of-way, and shall illuminate only the outdoor dining area. Outdoor lighting may be installed on the facade of the building. Electrical fixtures shall not be permitted in the public right-of-way. Lighting shall be subject to an electrical permit from the building department. Battery operated lamps or candles will be permitted. Extension cords shall not be used in place of permanent wiring. 
6.  Design. The design, material, and colors used for chairs, tables, umbrellas, awnings and other fixtures should compliment the architectural style and colors of the building facade and street furniture. 
7.  Heaters. Portable propane heaters may be allowed within the outdoor dining area as approved by the fire marshal. 
8.  Furniture Removal. When the establishment stops serving for the day and patrons already seated in it leave, further seating in the outdoor dinning area shall be prohibited and the outdoor dining furniture shall be removed from the right-of-way unless otherwise approved in the revocable license. 
T.  PERMIT A USE LISTED IN A LESS RESTRICTED DISTRICT IN A MORE RESTRICTIVE DISTRICT. Any use permitted in any commercial district may be permitted with approval of a conditional use permit in any other commercial district; provided such use, due to its limited nature, modern devices, building design or other features or method of operation or development will conform to the intent of such district and will be no more objectionable than the uses permitted in such district. 
U.  RECREATIONAL COURTS. 
1.  Permanent private recreational courts may be permitted with approval of an administrative permit subject to the following provisions, except as modified by a conditional use permit. 
2.  The maximum height of fences enclosing recreational courts shall be six feet, unless a conditional use permit is obtained allowing a greater height. 
3.  Recreational courts shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from side and rear property lines. 
4.  All lighting shall be: 
a.  Designed, constructed, mounted, and maintained such that the light source is cut off when viewed from any point above five feet. 
b.  Used only between the hours of seven a.m. and ten p.m. 
5.  The surface of any recreational court shall be designed, painted, colored, and/or treated reduce reflection from any lighting thereon. 
6.  The above standards shall be considered minimum standards. 
V.  RECYCLING FACILITY. 
1.  Reverse Vending Machine(s). Reverse vending machine(s), as defined in Section 17.04.030 of this title, may be permitted in indicated districts with zoning compliance approval subject to the following provisions. 
a.  Shall be established in conjunction with a commercial use or community service facility that is in compliance with the zoning, building and fire codes of the city of Rohnert Park; 
b.  Shall be located within thirty feet of the entrance to the commercial structure and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation; 
c.  Shall not occupy parking spaces required by the primary use. (Reverse vending machines do not require additional parking spaces for recycling customers); 
d.  Shall occupy no more than fifty square feet of floor space per installation, including any protective enclosure, and shall be no more than eight feet in height; 
e.  Shall be constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rust-proof material; 
f.  Shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material to be deposited, operating instructions, and the identity and phone number of the operator or responsible person to call if the machine is inoperative; a notice shall be displayed stating that no material shall be left outside of the machine; 
g.  Shall provide a trash receptacle or receptacles, as needed, in the immediate vicinity of the machine or machines. The receptacle or receptacles shall be a minimum of thirty-two gallons and made of durable waterproof and rustproof material with an attractive exterior. The site shall be maintained in a clean, litter-free condition on a daily basis; 
h.  Operating hours shall be at least the operating hours of the host use; 
i.  Shall be illuminated to ensure comfortable and safe operation if operating hours are between dusk and dawn. 
2.  Small collection facility. A small collection facility, as defined in Section 17.04.030 of this title, may be permitted in indicated districts only with approval of a conditional use permit and subject to the following provisions. 
a.  Shall be established in conjunction with an existing commercial use or community service facility which is in compliance with the zoning, building and fire codes of the city of Rohnert Park; 
b.  Shall be no larger than five hundred square feet and occupy no more than five parking spaces not including space that will be periodically needed for removal of materials or exchange of containers (see limitation "p" below); 
c.  Shall be set back at least ten feet from any street line and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation; 
d.  Shall accept only glass, metals, plastic containers, papers and reusable items. Used motor oil may be accepted with approval of the Rohnert Park fire marshal and in accordance with all state and local regulations; 
e.  Shall use no power-driven processing equipment except for reverse vending machines; 
f.  Shall use containers that are constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rust-proof material, covered when site is not attended, secured from unauthorized entry or removal of material, and shall be of a capacity sufficient to accommodate materials collected and collection schedule; 
g.  Shall store all recyclable material in containers or in the mobile unit vehicle, and shall not leave materials outside of containers when attendant is not present; 
h.  Shall provide adequate trash receptacles in the immediate vicinity of the collection facility. The receptacles shall be a minimum of thirty-two gallons and made of durable waterproof and rust-proof material with an attractive exterior. The site shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials; mobile facilities, at which truck or containers are removed at the end of each collection day, shall be swept at the end of each collection day; 
i.  Shall not exceed noise levels of sixty dBa as measured at the property line of residentially zoned or occupied property, otherwise shall not exceed seventy dBa; 
j.  Attended facilities located within one hundred feet of a property zoned or occupied for residential use shall operate only during the hours between 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.; 
k.  Containers for the twenty-four hour donation of materials shall be at least thirty feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use unless there is a recognized service corridor and acoustical shielding between the containers and the residential use; 
l.  Containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of materials which may be deposited; the facility shall be clearly marked to identify the name and telephone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation, and display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling enclosure or containers; 
m.  The facility shall not impair the landscaping required by local ordinances or by any permit issued pursuant thereto; 
n.  No additional parking spaces will be required for customers of a small collection facility located at the established parking lot of a host use. One space will be provided for the attendant, if needed; 
o.  Mobile recycling units shall have an area clearly marked to prohibit other vehicular parking during hours when the mobile unit is scheduled to be present; 
p.  Occupation of parking spaces by the facility and by the attendant may not reduce available parking spaces below the minimum number required for the primary host use unless all of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The facility is located in a convenience zone or a potential convenience zone as designated by the California Department of Conservation; 
(2)  A parking study shows that existing parking capacity is not already fully utilized during the time the recycling facility will be on the site; 
(3)  The permit will be reconsidered at the end of twelve months. 
A reduction in available parking spaces in an established parking facility may then be allowed as follows: 
For a commercial host use: 
Number of Available 
Parking Spaces 	Maximum 
Reduction 
0-25 	0 
26-35 	2 
36-49 	3 
50-99 	4 
100+ 	5 
 
For a community facility host use: A maximum five spaces reduction will be allowed when not in conflict with parking needs of the host use. 
q.  If the permit expires without renewal, the collection facility shall be removed from the site on the day following permit expiration. 
3.  Large collection facility. A large collection facility, as defined in Section 17.04.030 of this title, may be permitted in indicated districts only with approval of a conditional use permit and subject to the following provisions. 
a.  Facility does not abut a property zoned or planned for residential use; 
b.  Facility shall be screened from the public right-of-way by operating in an enclosed landscaping; 
c.  Setbacks and landscape requirements shall be those designated for the zoning district in which the facility is located; 
d.  All exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers that are covered, secured, and maintained in good condition. Storage containers for flammable material shall be constructed of non-flammable material. Used oil may be accepted with approval of the Rohnert Park fire marshal and in accordance with state and local regulations. Oil storage must be in containers approved by the Rohnert Park fire marshal. No storage, excluding truck trailers and overseas containers, will be visible above the height of the fencing; 
e.  Adequate trash receptacles shall be provided in the immediate vicinity of the collection facility. The receptacles shall be a minimum of thirty-two gallons and made of durable waterproof and rust-proof material with an attractive exterior. The site shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials; and, site shall be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis; 
f.  Space shall be provided on site for six vehicles or the anticipated peak customer load, whichever is higher, to circulate and to deposit recyclable materials, except where the planning commission determines that allowing overflow traffic above six vehicles is compatible with surrounding businesses and public safety; 
g.  One parking space shall be provided for each commercial vehicle operated by the recycling facility. Parking requirements shall be as provided for in the zone, except that parking requirements for employees may be reduced when it can be shown that parking spaces are not necessary such as when employees are transported in a company vehicle to a work facility; 
h.  Noise levels shall not exceed sixty dBa as measured at the property line of residentially zoned or developed property, or otherwise shall not exceed seventy dBa; 
i.  If the facility is located within five hundred feet of property zoned, planned or occupied for residential use, it shall not be in operation between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; 
j.  Any containers provided for after-hours donation of recyclable materials will be at least fifty feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use, shall be of sturdy, rust-proof construction, shall have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected, and shall be secured from unauthorized entry or removal materials; 
k.  Containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material that may be deposited, the name and phone number of the facility operator, and the hours of operation; facility shall display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside recycling containers; 
l.  Power-driven processing, including aluminum foil and can compacting, baling, plastic shredding, or other light processing activities necessary for efficient temporary storage and shipment of material, may be permitted if approved by the planning commission; 
m.  Landscaping and irrigation plan shall be approved by the planning and community development director. 
4.  Light processing facility. A light processing facility, as defined in Section 17.04.030 of this title, may be permitted in indicated districts only with approval of a conditional use permit and subject to the following provisions. 
a.  Facility does not abut a property zoned, developed, or planned for residential use; 
b.  Processors shall operate in a wholly enclosed building except for incidental storage, or: 
(1)  Within an area enclosed on all sides by a solid fence not less than eight feet in height and landscaped on all street frontages; 
(2)  Located at least one hundred fifty feet from property zoned or planned for residential use; 
c.  Power-driven processing shall be permitted, provided all noise level requirements are met; 
d.  A light processing facility shall be no larger than forty-five thousand square feet and shall have no more than an average of two outbound truck shipments of material per day and may not shred, compact or bale ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers; 
e.  Used motor oil may be accepted with approval of the Rohnert Park fire marshal and in accordance with state and local regulations; 
f.  Landscaping and irrigation plan shall be approved by the planning and community development director. 
g.  All exterior storage of material shall be in study containers or enclosures that are covered, secured, and maintained in good condition. Storage containers for flammable material shall be constructed of nonflammable material. Oil storage must be in containers approved by the Rohnert Park fire marshal. No storage, excluding truck trailers and overseas containers, will be visible above the height of the fencing; 
h.  Site shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials, and shall be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis and will be secured from unauthorized entry and removal of materials when attendants are not present; 
i.  Space shall be provided on site for the anticipated peak load of customers to circulate, park and deposit recyclable materials. If the facility is open to the public, space shall be provided for a minimum of ten customers or the peak load, which ever is higher, except where the planning commission determines that allowing overflow traffic is compatible with surrounding businesses and public safety; 
j.  One parking space shall be provided for each commercial vehicle operated by the processing center. Parking requirements shall otherwise be as mandated by the zone in which the facility is located; 
k.  Noise levels shall not exceed sixty dBa as measured at the property line of residentially zoned, developed or occupied property, or otherwise shall not exceed seventy dBa; 
l.  If the facility is located within five hundred feet of property zoned, developed, or planned for residential use, it shall not be in operation between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. The facility will be administered by on-site personnel during the hours the facility is open; 
m.  Any containers provided for after-hours donations of recyclable materials will be at least fifty feet from any property zoned, developed, or planned for residential use; shall be of sturdy, rust-proof construction; shall have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected; and shall be secured from unauthorized entry or removal of materials; 
n.  Containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material that may be deposited, the name and number of the facility operator, and the hours of operation; facility shall display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling containers; 
o.  No dust, fumes, smoke, vibration or odor above ambient level may be detectable on neighboring properties. 
W.  RESIDENTIAL CONVERSION TO NON-RESIDENTIAL USES. 
The conversion of a residential use to a non-residential use shall be allowed upon the issuance of a zoning compliance approval. The proposed use shall be consistent with the underlying zoning district and general plan land use designation(s) for the site, or the designation(s) for the site must be amended to permit the intended the use. In reviewing an application for a conversion the planning and community development director shall consider the potential impacts of the conversion, on surrounding properties and may impose any conditions necessary to mitigate those impacts. 
Further, the city council may only approve an amendment to the zoning map or zoning regulations if adequate and available sites remain (refer to the Quantified Housing Objectives in the city's housing element of the general plan) to mitigate the loss of residential density on the subject property to accommodate the city's "Fair Share" regional housing needs used by the State Department of Housing and Development in determining compliance with Housing Element Law pursuant to Government Code Section 65863(b). 
X.  ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (a.k.a. ADU, in-law, secondary, or granny units). 
1.  An ADU shall be allowed with a certificate of zoning compliance on any residential lot subject to the following provisions. 
2.  The following standards shall apply to detached ADUs and additions to primary dwelling units: 
The ADU shall be architecturally compatible with the main unit, and the development of the ADU will maintain the appearance of a single-family residence. The ADU shall comply with the city's adopted design guidelines for residential development. 
a.  The increased floor area of an attached ADU shall not exceed fifty percent of the existing living area, with a maximum increase in floor area of one thousand two hundred square feet. The total area of floor-space for a detached ADU shall not exceed one thousand two hundred square feet. 
b.  There shall be no subdivision of land separating the units, and neither unit may be sold independently of the other. 
c.  No passageway shall be required in conjunction with the construction of an ADU. 
d.  One additional standard size off-street parking space shall be provided for detached ADUs in addition to the off-street parking requirements required for the primary residence. 
i.  The required additional parking space may be uncovered and may be provided as tandem parking on an existing driveway. 
ii.  Parking is allowed in rear and side setback areas. No parking is allowed in front setback areas. 
iii.  When a garage or covered parking structure is demolished in conjunction with the construction of an ADU, the replacement parking spaces may be located in any configuration on the same lot as the ADU, including but not limited to covered spaces, uncovered spaces, or tandem spaces. 
e.  Notwithstanding paragraph 6 of this section, No additional parking shall be required for an ADU in any of the following instances: 
i.  The ADU is located within one-half mile of a bus stop or train station. 
ii.  The ADU is located within an architecturally and historically significant historic district. 
iii.  The ADU is part of the existing primary residence or an existing accessory structure. 
iv.  When on-street parking permits are required but not offered to the occupant of the ADU. 
v.  When there is a car-share vehicle located within one block of the ADU. 
vi.  The ADU is constructed within an existing structure. 
f.  Detached ADUs shall meet the height and setback requirements for accessory structures as stipulated in the applicable zoning district. See Section 17.10.060.C, Accessory Building as an Accessory Dwelling Unit. ADUs that are part of the main dwelling structure shall meet the height and setback requirements for main dwellings. See Section 17.10.020, Development Standards Table, for development standards relating to main dwellings. 
g.  The total lot coverage, including the ADU, shall not exceed fifty percent. 
h.  Either the ADU or the main unit shall be permitted to face the rear of the other structure, and the ADU shall be permitted closer than ten feet but no less than five feet from the main building where it can be shown that the site design will be improved. An ADU located above the first floor of an accessory structure (e.g., above a garage) shall be designed so as to minimize privacy impacts on neighboring properties, through the use of opaque glass or clerestory windows where such windows face neighboring properties. 
3.  No setback shall be required for an existing garage that is converted to an ADU, and a setback of no more than five feet from the side and rear lot lines shall be required for an ADU that is constructed above a garage. 
4.  There shall be adequate water and sewer service available to serve the ADU, as determined by the city engineer. 
5.  The application for an ADU shall be considered ministerial without discretionary review or a hearing within 120 days after receiving the application. 
6.  Before obtaining an occupancy permit for an ADU, the property owner shall file with the county recorder a declaration of restrictions (i.e., deed restriction) relative to the ADU stating that: 
a.  The ADU shall not be sold separately and shall be maintained in accordance with the ADU requirements of the RPMC. 
b.  The ADU is restricted to the approved size, unless modified by future city approvals. 
c.  The zoning compliance for the ADU shall be in effect only so long as the accessory or primary unit is occupied by the owner of record as their principal residence. Should the ADU no longer be in compliance with this requirement, the ADU shall be altered so as to prevent its use as an ADU (i.e., removal of cooking facilities). 
d.  The above declarations are binding upon any successor in ownership of the property. 
7.  Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 through 5 of this section, the application for an ADU that is contained within the existing space of a single-family residence or existing accessory structure, has independent exterior access from the existing residence, and the side and rear setbacks are sufficient for fire safety, the city shall ministerially approve a building permit to create one ADU per single-family lot. 
8.  Fire sprinklers are only required in ADUs where they would also be required under the RPMC for the primary or main unit. 
9.  An ADU shall be deemed to be an accessory use or an accessory building and shall not be considered to exceed the allowable density for the lot upon which it is located, and shall be deemed to be a residential use that is consistent with the existing general plan and zoning designations for that lot. The ADU shall not be considered in the application of any local ordinance, policy, or program to limit residential growth. 
10.  ADUs shall not be considered new residential uses for the purpose of calculating connection fees or capacity charges for utilities, including water and sewer service. 
a.  For an ADU described in paragraph 7, the applicant shall not be required to install a new or separate utility connection directly between the ADU and the utility or impose a related connection fee or capacity charge. 
b.  For an ADU that is not described in paragraph 7, a new or separate utility connection directly between the ADU and the utility may be required. The connection may be subject to a connection or fee or capacity charge proportionate to the burden of the proposed ADU, and shall not exceed the reasonable cost of providing this service. 
Y.  Intentionally omitted. 
Z.  SINGLE ROOM OCCUPANCY. 
1.  Single room occupancy (SRO) living unit facility. An SRO living unit facility may be permitted or permitted with approval of an administrative permit in indicated districts subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Excluding the closet and the bathroom area, a SRO living unit shall be a minimum of one hundred fifty sq. ft. in floor area. The average unit size in a living unit facility shall be no greater than two hundred seventy-five sq. ft. and no individual unit may exceed 400 sq. ft.; 
b.  Each SRO living unit shall be designed to accommodate a maximum of two persons; 
c.  An SRO living unit may contain partial kitchen facilities that are built-in and approved by the building department; 
d.  Individual SRO living units shall not have separate external entryways; 
e.  An SRO living unit shall be provided with a kitchen equipped with a kitchen sink; however, an SRO unit may contain partial kitchen facilities so long as a sink is provided and kitchen facilities are provided on each floor accessible from a public hallway; all complete and partial kitchen facilities shall be built-in and approved by the building department; 
f.  An SRO living unit shall be provided with a separate closet and a bathroom equipped with facilities consisting of a water closet, lavatory, and either a bathtub or shower; 
g.  The SRO living unit facility shall have a management plan approved by the development services director. The management plan shall contain management policies, operations, rental procedures, and maintenance plans, staffing needs and security procedures. An on-site, twenty-four hour manager is required in every living unit project. The rental procedures must allow for both weekly and monthly tenancies and specify deposit requirements for each type of tenancy. A manager's unit shall be a complete dwelling unit and so designated on all plans; 
h.  Laundry facilities shall be provided in a separate room at the ratio of one washer and one dryer for every twenty units or fractional number thereof. The laundry facility shall be located near the interior common space. Washers and dryers shall be coin operated; 
i.  A closet and separate storage space, as approved by the development services director, is required in every SRO living unit facility; 
j.  A cleaning supply storeroom and/or utility closet with at least one laundry tub with hot and cold running water shall be provided on each floor of the living unit building. 
k.  The SRO living unit facility shall provide interior common space at a minimum of four sq. ft. per unit. An SRO living unit facility must provide at least two hundred sq. ft. in area of interior common space, excluding janitorial storage, laundry facilities, and common hallways. 
The planning commission or development services director shall deny an application for a SRO living unit facility hereunder where the information submitted by the applicant and/or presented at the public hearing fails to substantiate that the project will comply with these criteria. 
2.  Single Room Occupancy (SRO) residential hotel. An SRO residential hotel may be permitted or permitted with approval of an administrative permit in indicated districts subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Excluding the closet and the bathroom area, an SRO residential hotel unit shall be at least seventy sq. ft. in floor area; 
b.  An SRO residential hotel unit designed to accommodate a maximum of one person shall not exceed one hundred fifty sq. ft. in floor area, and SRO residential hotel unit designed to accommodate a maximum of two persons shall be between one hundred fifty and two hundred nineteen sq. ft. in floor area; 
c.  An SRO residential hotel unit shall be provided with a kitchen equipped with a kitchen sink; however, an SRO residential hotel unit may contain partial kitchen facilities so long as a sink is provided and kitchen facilities are provided on each floor accessible from a public hallway; all complete and partial kitchen facilities shall be built-in and approved by the Building Department; 
d.  An SRO residential hotel unit shall be provided with a bathroom equipped with facilities consisting of a water closet, lavatory, and either a bathtub or shower; however, an SRO residential hotel unit may contain partial bathroom facilities if common bath facilities are provided as follows: 
i.  Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are not provided, there shall be provided on each floor, for each sex, at least one water closet and lavatory and one bath, accessible from a public hallway. 
ii.  Additional water closets, lavatories and baths shall be provided on each floor for each sex at the rate of one for every additional ten guests or fractional number thereof in excess of ten. 
iii.  Such facilities shall be clearly marked for "men" or "women." 
iv.  Each sink, lavatory and either a bathtub or shower shall be equipped with hot and cold running water necessary for its normal operation. 
e.  Individual SRO residential hotel units may not have separate external entryways; 
f.  The SRO residential hotel shall have a management plan approved by the development services director. The management plan shall contain management policies, operations, rental procedures, and maintenance plans, staffing needs and security procedures. An on-site, twenty-four hour manager is required in every SRO residential hotel. The rental procedures must allow for daily, weekly and monthly tenancies and specify deposit requirements for each type of tenancy. A manager's unit shall be a complete dwelling unit and so designated on all plans. 
g.  Laundry facilities shall be provided in a separate room at the ratio of one washer and one dryer for every twenty units or fractional number thereof. The laundry facility shall be located near the interior common space. Washers and dryers shall be coin operated; 
h.  A closet and separate storage space, as approved by the Development Services Director, is required in every SRO residential hotel; 
i.  A cleaning supply storeroom and/or utility closet with at least one laundry tub with hot and cold running water shall be provided on each floor of the SRO residential hotel. 
j.  The SRO residential hotel shall provide interior common space at a minimum of four (4) sq. ft. per unit. An SRO residential hotel shall provide at least 200 sq. ft. in area of interior common space, excluding janitorial storage, laundry facilities, and common hallways. 
The planning commission or development services director shall deny an application for a SRO residential hotel hereunder where the information submitted by the applicant 
(AA)  SMALL ANIMALS. 
4-H, FFA and other youth organizations' animal husbandry projects are permitted without limitation of parcel size and spacing provided a letter of project authorization is first submitted by the project advisor to the planning and community development director. Furthermore, the applicant obtain a copy of and comply with all conditions stipulated by the city relative to number of animals and setbacks from adjacent property lines. Pot-bellied pigs shall be subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. 
(BB)  SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS. 
1.  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this section is to comply with California Government Code Section 65892.13 which encourages local governmental agencies to adopt zoning standards which enable construction of small wind energy systems for on-site home, farm and small commercial use. 
2.  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words, phrases, and terms shall have the meanings set forth herein. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
"Small wind energy system" means a wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind turbine, a tower and associated control or conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity that does not exceed the allowable rated capacity under the Emerging Renewables Fund of the Renewables Investment Plan administered by the California Energy Commission and which will be used primarily to reduce on-site consumption of utility power. 
"Tower height" means the height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower, excluding the wind turbine. 
3.  Applicability. A conditional use permit is required for all small wind energy systems, in compliance with Section 17.25 Article I of this title. All proposed small wind energy systems shall also require environmental review in accordance with the California Environmental Quality Act. 
4.  Application requirements. A conditional use permit application for a small wind energy system shall include all information and materials required by Section 17.25.012 of this title, and the following: 
a.  Standard drawings and an engineering analysis of the system's tower, showing compliance with the Uniform Building Code (UBC), and certification by a California-licensed professional mechanical, structural, or civil engineer. A "wet stamp" shall not be required on the drawings and analysis if the application demonstrates that the system is designed to meet the most stringent wind requirements (UBC wind exposure D), the requirements for the worst seismic class (UBC Seismic 4), and the weakest soil class, with a soil strength of not more than one thousand pounds per square foot. 
b.  A line drawing of the electrical components of the system in sufficient detail to allow for a determination that the manner of installation conforms to the National Electric Code. 
c.  Information demonstrating that the system will be used primarily to reduce on-site consumption of electricity. 
d.  Evidence that the provider of electric utility service to the site has been informed of the applicant's intent to install an interconnected customer-owned electricity generator, unless the applicant intends, and so states in the application, that system will not be connected to the electricity grid. 
e.  Evidence that the proposed height of the windmill tower does not exceed the height recommended by the manufacturer or distributor of the system. 
5.  Site development criteria. The following development standards shall apply to the development of all new small wind energy systems within the city of Rohnert Park: 
a.  Minimum parcel size. A small wind energy system shall only be located on a parcel that is a minimum one acre in size. 
b.  Spacing and collocation. A small wind energy system shall not be located on a parcel that is: 
(1)  Within a scenic corridor identified by the community design element of the city general plan or a scenic highway corridor designated pursuant to Article 2.5 (commencing with Section 260) of Chapter 2 of Division I of the Streets and Highways Code; 
(2)  Subject to a conservation easement established in compliance with Civil Code Section 815 and following, that does not specifically authorize wind energy conversion systems; or 
(3)  Subject to an open space easement established in compliance with Government Code Section 51070 and following, that does not specifically authorize wind energy conversion systems. 
c.  Setback requirements. A windmill shall not be located closer to a property line than the height of the tower; provided that it also complies with any applicable fire setback requirements. 
d.  Height limit. A small wind energy system tower shall not exceed a maximum height of sixty-five feet on a parcel less than five acres, or a maximum height of eighty feet on a parcel of five acres or more; provided that, in all cases, the system shall comply with all applicable Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) requirements, including subpart B (commencing with Section 77.11) of Part 77 of Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations regarding installations close to airports, and the State Aeronautics Act (Part I (commencing with Section 21001) of Division 9 of the Public Utilities Code). 
e.  Turbine. The turbine proposed for the system shall have been approved by the California Energy Commission (CEC) as qualifying under the Emerging Renewables Fund of the CEC's Renewables Investment Plan, or certified by a national program recognized and approved by the CEC. 
f.  Noise. Except during short-term events including utility outages and severe wind storms, a small wind energy system shall be designed, installed, and operated so that noise generated by the system shall not exceed the sixty decibels (dBa), as measured at the closest neighboring inhabited dwelling, or the maximum noise levels established by Section 17.12.030 of this title for the applicable zoning district, whichever is the strictest requirement. 
6.  Discontinuation of use. All equipment associated with a small wind energy system shall be removed within thirty days of the discontinuation of the use and the site shall be restored to its original pre-construction condition. 
(CC)  SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS. 
Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs used solely by persons resident on the site and their guests, provided swimming pool and accessory mechanical equipment shall not be located in a required front or side yard and shall meet the provisions of Chapter 15.36 of the Rohnert Park Municipal Code. 
(DD)  TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION BUILDINGS AND USES. 
Temporary buildings and uses for construction purposes may be permitted for periods not exceeding one year, and may be extended for up to one year, provided a temporary permit and a building permit shall first be secured and the building official has provided for the subsequent removal thereof. (See Section 17.25, Article IV.) 
(EE)  TEMPORARY USE/EVENT. 
1.  A temporary use or event may be permitted in all indicated districts only as indicated with approval of a conditional use permit, an administrative permit, or a temporary permit, whichever is indicated. 
2.  Applicants shall be required to provide city staff with the following items: 
a.  Written authorization from the property owner that the event may take place during the time period proposed; 
b.  Three copies of a site plan, showing the following: 
(1)  Property lines, sidewalks; 
(2)  Existing and proposed temporary structures, offstreet parking and loading facilities; 
(3)  Points of entry and exit for vehicles and circulation pattern; 
(4)  Location of walls and fences; 
(5)  Lighting standards and devices (must meet the provisions of the Electrical Code); 
(6)  Temporary electrical hookups (must meet the provisions of the Electrical Code); 
(7)  Existing and proposed temporary signs. 
c.  Written proof of liability insurance with the city of Rohnert Park named as an additional insured party; 
d.  Evidence that the city of Rohnert Park will be identified as the point-of-sale for all sales conducted within the city. 
e.  A refundable clean-up deposit as established by resolution, which may be increased based on the scale of the event; 
f.  A security plan for the event; and 
g.  The name and telephone number of a twenty-four hour point of contact. 
3.  The planning commission and planning and community development director may place conditions on the conditional use permit, administrative permit, or temporary permit, respectively, to mitigate any possible impacts identified during review of the application to achieve the general purposes of this section and the specific purposes of the land use district in which the temporary use will be located to: 
a.  Ensure operation and maintenance of the temporary use in a manner compatible with existing uses in the surrounding area; 
b.  Provide adequate access and parking; 
c.  Ensure that lighting and temporary signage meet the provisions of this chapter. 
(FF)  VEHICULAR DEALERSHIPS/RENTAL AGENCIES (including boats, R.V.s, and farm and construction equipment). 
1.  Vehicular dealerships/rental agencies may be permitted in indicated districts only with approval of a conditional use permit and subject to the following conditions. 
2.  Areas designated for employee and customer parking shall not be used for vehicle, boat, or equipment storage or display. 
3.  A minimum ten-foot landscape and decorative curb strip shall be provided along the street frontage perimeter of all vehicles/boat/equipment display areas. Final design treatment shall be subject to review and approval by the planning and community development director. All parking areas not used for vehicle/boat/equipment display shall be subject to applicable screening requirements. 
4.  All lighting shall comply with the provisions of Section 17.12.050 of this title. 
5.  The operator of the dealership shall load and unload or cause the loading and unloading of vehicles/boats only in conformance with the following: 
a.  Loading and unloading of vehicles is limited to the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday, excluding legal holidays. 
b.  Off-loading shall be on-site, or off-site subject to the approval of the city engineer. Loading and unloading shall not block the ingress or egress of any adjacent property or public right-of-way unless approved by the city engineer. 
6.  Vehicles, boats, R.V.s or equipment to be repaired shall be stored on-site. 
7.  The repair and service facility portion of any vehicle, boat, or equipment dealership shall comply with the provisions of Footnote (GG) of this section. No vehicle repair work shall occur on the premises of an automobile rental facility unless the rental agency is otherwise permitted and licensed to repair vehicles. 
8.  An adequate on-site queuing area for service customers shall be provided. The queuing area or lanes shall be large enough to hold at least one and a half vehicles for each service bay in the facility. On-site driveways may be used for queuing, but may not interfere with access to required parking spaces. Regular parking spaces may not double as queuing spaces. 
9.  Noise control: 
a.  There shall be no outdoor loudspeaker (e.g., amplified sound). Interior loudspeakers shall produce not more than forty-five dBa at a boundary abutting a residential parcel under normal operating conditions. 
b.  All noise generating equipment exposed to the exterior shall be muffled with sound absorbing materials to minimize noise impacts on adjacent properties, and shall not be operated before 8:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. if reasonably likely to cause annoyance to abutting properties. 
10.  Gasoline storage tanks shall meet all applicable state and local health regulations, and shall be constructed and maintained under the same conditions and standards that apply to service stations. 
11.  A security plan shall be approved by the department of public safety. 
12.  The city of Rohnert Park shall be indicated as the point-of-sale for sales conducted within the city. 
(GG)  VEHICLE REPAIR/BODY SHOPS. 
1.  Vehicle repair facilities may be permitted in indicated districts only with approval of a conditional use permit. 
2.  The site shall be entirely paved except for buildings and landscaping. 
3.  Entrances to individual service bays shall not face public rights-of-way or abutting residential uses or districts. All structures shall be constructed to achieve a minimum standard transmission coefficient (STC) sound rating of 45-50. 
4.  All repair activities and operations shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building. Outdoor hoists are prohibited. 
5.  Repair facilities performing body and fender work or similar noise-generating activities shall be conducted in fully enclosed structures with walls of concrete block or similar materials and doors in maximum half open position during operating hours. All painting shall occur within a fully enclosed booth. 
6.  The premises shall be kept in a neat and orderly condition at all times and all improvements shall be maintained in a condition of reasonable repair and appearance. No used or discarded automotive parts or equipment or permanently disabled, junked, or wrecked vehicles may be stored outside the main building. 
7.  Exterior parking area shall be used for employee and customer parking only, and not for the repair or finishing work or long term (over seventy-two hours) storage of vehicles. Vehicles to be repaired shall be stored on-site. 
8.  Vehicle sales shall be subject to the same provisions as vehicular dealerships/rental facilities. 
(HH)  CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS. 
1.  Purpose. Condominium ownership of property creates a unique distribution and/or aggregation of property rights and responsibilities among a number of persons, which is not inherent in other types of property ownership. This section provides condominium development standards that are consistent with the City of Rohnert Park General Plan and the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, to insure that a diminution of property rights and responsibilities does not occur. Accordingly the purpose of this chapter is to: 
a.  Establish criteria for the conversion of existing multiple family rental housing to condominiums, community apartments, stock cooperatives, and any similar subdivision; 
b.  Reduce the impact of such conversions on residents in rental housing who may be required to relocate due to the conversion of apartments to condominiums; 
c.  Assure that purchasers of converted housing have been properly informed of the physical condition of the structure being offered for purchase; 
d.  Ensure that converted housing achieves a high degree of appearance, quality, and safety and is consistent with the goals of the city; 
e.  Provide a reasonable balance of ownership and rental housing in the city and a variety of choices of tenure, type, price and location of housing; 
f.  Maintain a supply of rental housing for low and moderate income persons; and 
g.  Ensure that the conversion of rental housing incorporates affordability opportunities for families of low and moderate-income households. 
2.  Application Submittal Requirements and Procedures. Application for conversion of any rental housing to condominiums, community apartments, and stock cooperatives shall only be accepted for review and processing when no rental shortage exists and when such application includes all materials listed below. A rental shortage shall be deemed to exist when the citywide vacancy rate is five percent or less as determined by a qualified professional and using the average of the past four quarters from a vacancy trend report for local rental markets. 
a.  General. All application submittal requirements and procedures as set forth by Title 16 of this code shall be applicable to this section. Application submittal requirements are due at tentative map application in accordance with Title 16. 
b.  Physical Elements Report. A report shall be prepared by a California registered civil or structural engineer or California licensed architect describing the physical elements of all structures and facilities and shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  A report detailing the structural condition of all elements of the property, including foundations, electrical, plumbing, utilities, walls, roofs, ceilings, windows, recreational facilities, sound transmission of each building, mechanical equipment, parking facilities and appliances. The report shall state, to the best knowledge or estimate of the applicant and based on existing documentation (e.g., building permit records), when such element was built; the condition of each element; when such element was replaced; the approximate date upon which such element will require replacement; the cost of replacing such element; and any variation of the physical condition of such element from the current zoning and from the city housing code and city building code in effect on the date that the last building permit was issued for the subject structure. The report shall identify any defective or unsafe elements and set forth the proposed corrective measures to be employed. 
(2)  A report from a licensed structural pest control operator, approved by the city, on each structure and each unit within the structure. 
(3)  A report on soil and geological conditions regarding soil deposits, rock formations, faults, groundwater, and landslides in the vicinity of the project and a statement regarding any known evidence of soil problems relating to the structures. Reference shall be made to any previous soils reports for the site and a copy of each submitted with such report. 
(4)  A statement of necessary repairs and improvements to be made by the subdivider to refurbish and restore the project to achieve a high degree of appearance and safety. 
c.  Development Plan. The plan shall include the following information: 
(1)  Locations, height, gross floor area, and proposed uses for each existing structure to remain and for each proposed new structure. The new and existing elements, features, and structures shall be clearly differentiated on the development plan; 
(2)  The location and size of parking facilities to be used in conjunction with each condominium unit and any applicable guest parking; 
(3)  Location and type of surfacing for all driveways, pedestrian ways, vehicle parking areas, and curb cuts; 
(4)  Location, height, and type of material for existing and proposed walls and fences; 
(5)  Location of all landscaped areas, types of landscaping and statement specifying the method of maintenance to be used; 
(6)  The location and description of recreational facilities and a statement specifying method of maintenance; 
(7)  A lighting plan; 
(8)  Location, type and size of all sewer, water and storm drains, drainage pipes and structures depicted or described to the nearest public drain or watercourse; 
(9)  Location and type of the nearest fire hydrant; 
(10)  Location, type and size of all on-site and adjacent street overhead utility lines; 
(11)  Existing and proposed exterior elevations; 
(12)  Any other information required by the department. 
d.  Organizational Documents. 
(1)  Documents establishing a Homeowner's Association; 
(2)  A summary of proposed management, occupancy and maintenance requirements and responsibilities, of individual owners and the Homeowner's Association; 
(3)  A statement identifying the units to be designated as inclusionary units available to low and moderate-income households as required by subsection (N)(10) of this section, which shall also be contained in a recorded document; 
(4)  A declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions which would be applied on behalf of any and all owners of condominium units within the project. The declaration shall include but not be limited to the conveyance of units; the assignment of parking; an agreement for common area maintenance, such as parking facilities and landscaping, together with an estimate of any initial assessment fees anticipated for such maintenance; description of a provision for maintenance of all vehicular access areas within the project; an indication of appropriate responsibilities for maintenance of all utility lines and services for each unit; and a plan for the equitable sharing of any communal water metering; 
(5)  A maintenance plan which clearly specifies methods and standards for performance of common responsibilities and maintenance for all common areas including, but not limited to, recreational facilities, parking facilities, vehicular access areas, common refuse collection and an indication of appropriate responsibilities for maintenance of all utility lines and services for each unit. If applicable, maintenance of all building exteriors will also be outlined in the maintenance plan. The maintenance plan shall assign responsibilities and provide assurances that the premises will be kept free from trash and debris and include a list of equipment and fees to be assessed for such purposes. The maintenance plan shall include the establishment of a contingency fund for major repairs and extraordinary expenses; 
e.  Demographic Information. Specific information concerning the demographic characteristics of the project, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Square footage and number of rooms in each unit; 
(2)  Rental rate history for each type of unit for the previous five years; 
(3)  Monthly vacancy rate for each month during the preceding five years; 
(4)  Makeup of existing tenant households, including family size, length of residence, age of tenants, and any federal or state rent subsidies received; 
(5)  Documentation prepared by the Sonoma County Public Housing Authority that shows the number of families currently on a waiting list for Section 8 Housing; 
(6)  Proposed sale price of units; 
(7)  Proposed Homeowners' Association fee; 
(8)  Financing available for the purchase of the units; and 
(9)  Names and addresses of all tenants. When the subdivider can demonstrate that such information is not available, the requirements of this subsection may be modified by the planning department. 
f.  Vacancy Rates. The applicant shall submit a recent survey of rental housing located within the city of Rohnert Park that shows the current vacancy rate for the city. The survey shall be performed by a qualified professional as determined by the city and shall utilize a method approved by the city prior to it being conducted. The survey shall include a representative sample of all rental housing of five or more units. 
g.  Notice of Intent to Convert. Signed copies from each tenant of the notice of intent to convert, as specified in subsection (HH)(7) of this section. The subdivider shall submit evidence that a letter of notification was sent to each tenant for whom a signed copy of such notice is not submitted. This requirement shall be deemed satisfied if such notices comply with the legal requirements for service by mail. 
h.  Any other information which, in the opinion of the planning department, will assist in determining whether the proposed project will be consistent with the purposes of this chapter. 
3.  Additional Requirements and Procedures. 
a.  Acceptance of Reports. The final form of the physical elements report and other documents shall be as approved by the city. The reports in their acceptable form shall remain on file with the planning department for review by any interested persons and shall be referenced in the planning commission staff report for each project. 
b.  Submittal of Budget. Prior to final map approval, the subdivider shall provide the city with a copy of the proposed budget for maintenance and operation of common facilities including needed reserves. The budget shall show estimated monthly costs to the owner of each unit, projected over a five year period, or such time as is required by the department of real estate. Such budget shall be prepared or reviewed and analyzed by a professional management firm, experienced with management of con-dominium complexes. The management firm shall submit a statement of professional qualifications. 
c.  Copy to Buyers. The subdivider shall provide each purchaser with a copy of all submittals (in their final, acceptable form) required by under this section prior to such purchaser executing any purchase agreement or other contract to purchase a unit in the project, and such developer shall give the purchaser sufficient time to review such information. Copies of the submittals shall be made available at all times at the sales office and shall be posted at various locations, as approved by the city, at the project site. Copies shall be provided to the Homeowners' Association upon its formation. 
d.  Notice to Tenants and Prospective Tenants. Before tentative map approval, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing. In addition to all other notices required by the Subdivision Map Act and this title, the subdivider shall give notice prior to filing the tentative map to prospective tenants and tenants in the manner provided by Government Code Sections 66452.8 and 66452.9. 
4.  Sales Information Submitted for Affordable Units. As a condition of tentative map approval, the subdivider shall record a requirement against the title of the property that requires the current property owner of each unit to submit the following information to the planning department prior to the close of escrow, to: 
a.  Actual sale price of unit; 
b.  Whether prior tenants purchased units; 
c.  Whether unit were purchased with intent to be used as rentals; and 
d.  That affordable units shall comply with the affordability requirements of the inclusionary housing requirements contained in subsection N of this section. 
5.  Inspection and Fees. The developer shall deposit money into a fund which is administered by the building official. The funds shall be adequate to cover the costs associated with hiring a professional who shall perform an inspection and develop a list of deficient conditions that may exist by reason of noncompliance with this code, and to have the deficient items refurbished and restored in accordance with specific physical standards identified under subsection (HH)(6) of this section. The premises to be inspected include structures, common areas, site improvements, public improvements and other related facilities. In addition, the following requirements shall be met: 
a.  Before submitting the final map, the owner shall request that an inspection of the premises be made by the city for conformance with subsection (HH)(6) of this section. 
b.  A project inspection shall be made by the appropriate city representatives and/or their designees. A deficiency list shall be compiled during the inspection of all corrections required to conform to the requirements of this section and any other applicable code requirements. 
c.  When the final inspection is complete, a copy of the deficiency list shall be transmitted to the subdivider. All deficiencies must be corrected to the satisfaction of the city before filing of the final map or parcel map. When plans for corrective work are required, they shall be as approved by the appropriate city representative listed above before filing of the final map or parcel map. 
d.  The city shall charge the usual fees, if applicable, or an hourly fee (estimated actual hourly cost to the city) for the inspection and processing. The owner shall post a cash deposit in an amount equal to the estimated cost of inspection. The deposit will be applied towards the inspection fee with any refund or balance to be resolved before the approval of the tentative map by the city. Any balance due shall be paid before approval of the final map by the city. 
6.  Specific Physical Standards. As a condition of tentative map approval, the subdivider shall demonstrate conformance with Chapter 17.12, Performance Standards, of the Rohnert Park Municipal Code as well as the following physical standards. 
a.  Building Regulations. The project shall conform to the applicable standards of the California Building Standards Code - Title 24 in effect on the date that the original building permit was issued for the subject structure or structures except as herein provided. 
b.  Health and Safety. 
(1)  Ground Fault Circuit Interrupters. All receptacle outlets serving bathrooms, kitchen counters, garages, carports and other exterior locations shall be ground fault circuit interrupter protected as required by the current edition of the California Electrical Code. 
(2)  Seismic Retrofit. "Soft story" buildings, as defined in the Health and Safety Code, shall be seismically retrofitted per the standards contained therein, or as required by local ordinance. 
c.  Fire Prevention. 
(1)  Smoke Detectors. Each living unit shall be provided with approved smoke detectors in type and quantity conforming to Title 24 of the latest California Building Standards Code. 
(2)  Maintenance of Fire Protection Systems. All fire hydrants, fire alarm systems, portable fire extinguishers, and other fire protective appliances shall be upgraded and maintained and certified as required by current applicable NFPA standards. 
(3)  Fire Sprinkler System. Fire sprinkler systems shall be installed in compliance with current NFPA standards. 
(4)  Fire Walls. Dwelling units shall be protected by a one-hour dwelling unit separation. Attic fire stops shall be installed in accessible attics as required by the current Title 24 California Building Standards Code. 
d.  Sound Transmission. 
(1)  Shock Mounting of Mechanical Equipment. All permanent mechanical equipment such as motors, compressors, pumps, and compactors which are determined to be a source of structural vibration or structure-borne noise shall be shock mounted with inertia blocks or bases and/or vibration isolators. 
(2)  Noise Standards. The structure shall conform to all interior and exterior sound transmission standards of the California Building Standards Code Title 24 and Section 17.12.030 of this title. In such cases where present standards cannot reasonably be met, the planning commission may require the applicant to notify potential buyers of the noise deficiency currently existing within these units. 
e.  Utility Metering. Each dwelling unit shall be separately metered for gas and electricity. A plan for equitable sharing of any communal water metering shall be developed prior to final map approval and included in the covenants, conditions and restrictions. The planning commission may modify this standard where the subdivider can demonstrate that this standard cannot reasonably be met. 
f.  Private Storage Space. Each unit shall have at least two hundred cubic feet of enclosed weather-proofed and lockable private storage space in addition to guest, linen, pantry, and clothes closets customarily provided. Such space may be provided in any location approved by the planning department, but shall not be divided into two or more locations. In such cases where the subdivider can demonstrate that this standard cannot or should not reasonably be met, this standard may be modified by the planning commission. 
g.  Laundry Facilities. A laundry area shall be provided in each unit; or if common laundry areas are provided, such facilities shall consist of not less than one automatic washer and one dryer of equivalent capacity for every five units of three or more bedrooms; every seven two-bedroom units, and every ten one-bedroom units. In such cases where the subdivider can demonstrate that this standard cannot or should not reasonably be met, this standard may be modified by the planning commission. 
h.  Landscape Maintenance. All landscaping shall be restored as necessary and maintained to achieve a high degree of appearance and quality. The landscape standards required under Section 17.14.070 of this title shall apply if a significant amount of new landscaping is required to achieve the above goal. 
i.  Condition of Equipment and Appliances. The developer shall provide a warranty to the buyer of each unit at the close of escrow that any dishwashers, garbage disposals, stoves, refrigerators, hot water tanks and air conditioners that are provided have a useful life of one year. At such time as the Homeowners' Association takes over management of the development, the developer shall provide a warranty to the Association that any pool and pool equipment (filter, pumps, chlorinator) and any appliances and mechanical equipment to be owned in common by the Association have a useful life of one year. 
j.  Refurbishing and Restoration. All main buildings, structures, fences, patio enclosures, carports, accessory buildings, sidewalks, driveways, landscaped areas, and additional elements shall be refurbished and restored as required by the planning department. Design changes shall be subject to site and architectural review in accordance with Section 17.25.030 of this title. 
k.  Long Term Reserves. Prior to approval of the final map, the developer shall provide evidence to the city that a long-term reserve fund for replacement has been established in the name of the Homeowners' Association. Such fund shall equal two times the estimated monthly homeowner's assessment for each dwelling unit. 
7.  Tenant Provisions. 
a.  Notice of Intent. As required by Government Code 66427.1(a), a notice of intent to convert shall be delivered by the subdivider to each tenant at least sixty days prior to filing of the tentative map, in a form compliant with Government Code Section 66452.9. 
b.  Notice of Public Report. As provided in Government Code Section 66427.1(a), each tenant shall receive ten days' written notice that an application for a public report will be or has been submitted to the Department of Real Estate, and that such report will be available on request. 
c.  Notice of Final Map Approval. As provided in Government. Code Section 66427.1(b), each tenant shall receive written notification within ten days of approval of a final map for the proposed conversion. 
d.  Tenant's Right to Purchase. As provided in Government Code Section 66427.1(d), any present tenant shall be given notice of an exclusive right to contract for the purchase of his or her respective unit upon the same terms and conditions that such unit will be initially offered to the general public or terms more favorable to the tenant. The right shall run for a period of not less than ninety days from the date of issuance of the subdivision public report unless the tenant gives prior written notice of his or her intention not to exercise the right. Evidence of receipt by each tenant shall be submitted to the city prior to approval of the final map. 
e.  Vacation of Units. Each tenant not in default under the obligations of the rental agreement or lease for his/her unit shall be given one hundred eighty days' written notice of intention to convert his or her unit prior to termination of tenancy. The subdivider shall notify each tenant immediately prior to the time of final map approval of the anticipated date required to vacate the unit and when the one hundred eighty day period will begin. Evidence of receipt by each tenant shall be submitted prior to approval of the final map. 
f.  Notice to New Tenants. Beginning at a date not less than sixty days prior to the filing of the tentative map, the subdivider or his or her agent shall give notice of such filing in the form outlined in Government Code 66452.8(b) to each person applying after such date for rental of a unit prior to acceptance of any rent or deposit. If the subdivider or his or her agent fails to give notice pursuant to this section, he or she shall pay to each prospective tenant who becomes a tenant and who was entitled to such notice and who does not purchase his or her unit, an amount equal to two times monthly rent for moving expenses. 
g.  Senior Citizens. At the time of final map approval, all tenant households resident at the time a completed tentative map application was accepted by the planning department in which the head of household or spouse is age sixty or older shall be offered a lifetime lease. Annual rent increases shall not exceed seventy-five percent of the latest annual average percentage increase of the Residential Rent Component of the Consumer Price Index, San Francisco-Oakland SMSA. Tenants shall be informed of the change in this index at the time rent increases are imposed. Starting rents shall be the rent at the time of tentative map application. Lease forms shall be submitted to the planning department for review prior to final map approval. 
h.  Low-and-Moderate Income Tenants. At the time of final map approval, all tenant households resident upon acceptance by the city of a completed tentative map application, which meet the income limits of the HUD Section 8 program will be considered low- and moderate-income households and shall be offered at a minimum a three-year lease. Annual rent increases shall not exceed seventy-five percent of the latest annual average percentage increase of the Residential Rent Component of the Consumer Price Index, San Francisco-Oakland SMSA. Tenants shall be informed of the change in this index at the time rent increases are imposed. Starting rents shall be the rent at the time of tentative map application. Lease forms shall be submitted to the planning department for review prior to final map approval. 
8.  Effect of Proposed Conversion on the City's Low- and Moderate-Income Housing Supply. The conversion of rental housing into for-sale housing will change the availability of a level of affordable housing to certain income groups, therefore it is imperative that such conversions be subject to the inclusionary housing requirements of subsection N of this section. 
9.  Findings. In approving an application for a condominium conversion the planning commission shall make each of the following findings: 
a.  All provisions of this article are met; 
b.  The proposed conversion is consistent with the objectives, policies, general land uses and programs specified in the city of Rohnert Park general plan inclusive of the general plan housing element, along with applicable specific plans; 
c.  The proposed conversion will conform to the Rohnert Park Municipal Code in effect at the time of tentative map approval, including, but not limited to, inclusionary housing requirements and parking standards, except as otherwise provided in this article; 
d.  The overall design and physical condition of the condominium conversion achieves a high degree of appearance, quality and safety; 
e.  The proposed project will not result in a shortage of rental housing within the city; 
f.  The proposed conversion will result in an increase in lower-cost home ownership opportunities within the city; 
g.  Vacancies in the project have not been intentionally increased for the purpose of preparing the project for conversion; 
h.  The conversion will not be detrimental to the retention of housing stock serving low and moderate income residents or will not reduce or significantly alter the opportunity within the city for the housing of young and elderly citizens; and 
i.  The project satisfies the requirements of Government Code Section 66427.1—Tenant Notification requirements. 
(II)  RESERVED. 
(JJ)  RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT IN DOWNTOWN DISTRICT AMENITY ZONE (DDAZ). 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the restrictions is to ensure that a minimum amount of active commercial or service uses are building within the DDAZ. This is intended to create a vibrant environment with restaurants, shops, services and other active uses that create downtown foot-traffic and activity. To accomplish the type of environment desired it is necessary to limit the amount and configuration of residential development. 
B.  Standards. Residential development shall only be permitted within the Downtown District Mixed-Use designation as follows: 
1.  A minimum of fifty percent of the total building square footage shall be used for non-residential purposes, unless at least seventy-five percent of the ground floor building square footage is utilized for active retail or service uses, then the percentage of building square footage used for residential purposes may increase. 
2.  Parking structures do not qualify as building square footage for the purposes of the fifty percent calculation. 
3.  The number of residential units shall not exceed the maximum permitted within the zoning district prior to the application of any density bonus provision. 
(KK)  SHORT-TERM RENTAL. 
1.  Short-term rentals as described in Section 17.04.030 (Definitions) are permitted by administrative use permit in all residential districts per Section 17.06.030. 
2.  Permit Required. No person shall establish, operate or maintain a short-term rental without first obtaining a valid administrative use permit (See RPMC § 17.25.050 et seq.) for operation of a short-term rental. 
3.  Short-term rentals are distinct from bed and breakfast inns as described in Section 17.07.020.D. 
4.  Short-term rentals are prohibited in accessory dwelling units and accessory structures. 
5.  Short-term rentals shall be subject to the following conditions: 
a.  No more than one bedroom of a primary dwelling unit shall be rented, let, or leased as a short-term rental. 
b.  The short-term rental shall be rented for no more than fourteen consecutive days. 
c.  The owner/operator of an approved short-term rental shall be required to obtain and maintain a city business license prior to operation of a short-term rental. 
d.  All applications for short-term rentals shall include the property owner's authorization. 
e.  Short-term rentals are subject to the city's transient occupancy tax. The person in whose name the administrative use permit (referenced in subsection (2) of this section) is issued, shall be responsible for compliance with the city's transient occupancy tax regulations as described in Chapter 3.24 (Transient Occupancy Tax). 
f.  No on-site exterior signage of any kind shall be allowed in conjunction with the short-term rental. 
g.  In every advertisement for the short-term rental, the owner/operator shall include the city issued permit number. 
h.  All short-term rentals must provide smoke and carbon monoxide detectors in compliance with the Rohnert Park Building Code for new construction. 
i.  The short-term rental shall comply with all applicable sections of the Rohnert Park Municipal Code. Any violation of this section or of the Rohnert Park Municipal Code will be considered a violation of the administrative use permit. 
j.  The host (owner/operator) shall provide a written manual to guests providing important contact numbers, a copy of this RPMC code section, parking limitations, and other helpful information to minimize conflict within the neighborhood. 
k.  The host (owner/operator) shall maintain a liability insurance policy that covers this use. 
(Ord. 788 § 4, 2007; Ord. 765 § 2 (part), 2006; Ord. 764 § 4 (part), 2006; Ord. 749 § 1, 2005; Ord. 748 § 2, 2005; Ord. 742 § 2, 2005; Ord. 695 § 3, 2003) 
(Ord. No. 826, § 1, 10-26-2010; Ord. No. 844, § 2(Exh. A), 3-13-2012; Ord. No. 854, § 2(Exh. A), 7-9-2013; Ord. No. 877, § 3(Exh. A), 4-8-2014; Ord. No. 887 , § 4(Exh. A), 5-26-2015; Ord. No. 897 , (Exh.B), 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 905 , §§ 5, 6, 3-28-2017; Ord. No. 906 , § 7, 4-11-2017; Ord. No. 908 , § 7, 8-8-2017; Ord. No. 918 , § 4, 2-27-2018)  
Chapter 17.10 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 901 , § 4, adopted Nov. 22, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 17.10, §§ 17.10.010—17.10.080, and enacted a new Ch. 17.10 as set out herein. The former Ch. 17.10 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 695 § 3, adopted in 2003; and Ord. No. 844, § 2(Exh. A), adopted Mar. 13, 2012. 
 
17.10.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the development standards for the zoning districts within the city of Rohnert Park. The development standards table gives the required site area and dimensional requirements for lots within each district, including maximum building heights, minimum building setbacks, minimum open space requirements, floor area ratios, and maximum lot coverages. Following the table are additional standards, dimensional requirements and exceptions. ( Ord. No. 901 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-22-2016)  
17.10.020 - Development standards table. 
The following table and text are adopted as the city's basic development standards for the zoning districts within the city of Rohnert Park. To use the chart, find the appropriate zoning district on the left-hand side of the table. Read across the row for the zone in question and the development standards for that zone will appear in the corresponding columns. If a number appears in parentheses in the table, a further qualifier, requirement, or exception is listed by that number in the following listing of footnotes. 
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR ZONING DISTRICTS 
Zoning District 	Minimum Lot Size (Sq. Ft.) (1) 	Minimum Lot Width (Feet) (1)(2) 	Minimum Lot Depth (Feet) (1) 	Maximum Residential Density (Units/Acre) 	Maximum Building Height (Feet) 	Minimum Front Yard Setback (Feet) (5) 	Minimum Side Yard Setback (Feet) 	Minimum Rear Yard Setback (Feet) 	Minimum Open Space Per Unit (Sq. Ft.) 	Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) Factor 	Maximum Lot Coverage (Percent) 
					Primary (3) 	Accessory (4) 		Interior 	Corner 				
	40,000 	100 	150 	1.0 	35 	12 	50 	10 	20 	50 	N.A. 	N.A. 	30 
R-E 	17,000 	100 	150 	2.0 	35 	12 	25 	10 	20 	25 	N.A. 	N.A. 	40 
R-L 	5,000 (6) 	50 	100 	6.0 	35 	12 	20 	5 	10 	20 (13) 	N.A. 	0.4 (18) 	50 
R-M 	3,700 	40 	80 	12.0 	35 	12 	20 	5 (10) 	10 	20 (13) 	500 (14) 	0.55 (18) 	40 
R-H 	10,000 	60 	100 	24.0 	45 	12 	20 	5 (10)(11) 	10 	20 (13) 	400 (14) 	1.15 (18) 	40 
DTR-H 	10,000 	60 	100 	30.0 	60 	15 	20 	5 (10)(11) 	10 (20) 	20 (13) 	400 (14) 	1.15 (18) 	40 
C-O 	10,000 	60 	100 	N.A. 	45 	N.A. 	15 	10 (11) 	15 	10 	N.A. 	1.0 	50 
C-N 	10,000 	50 	100 	N.A. 	35 	N.A. 	15 	10 (12) 	15 	10 	N.A. 	0.4 	60 
C-R 	20,000 	50 	100 	N.A. 	65 	N.A. 	15 	10 (12) 	15 	10 	N.A. 	0.4 (15) 	60 
I-L 	20,000 	100 	100 	N.A. 	45 	N.A. 	15 	10 	15 	10 	N.A. 	0.5 (16) 	60 
M-U 	10,000 	60 (9) 	100 (9) 	24 (7) 	45 	12 	10 (9) 	10 (9) 	10 (9) 	10 (9) 	200 	1.5 (17) 	80 
DTM-U 	10,000 	60 (9) 	100 (9) 	0 /35 (7)(19) 	60 	12 	10 (9) 	10 (9) 	10 (9) 	10 (9) 	200 	1.5 (17) 	80 
PI 	10,000 	N.A. 	N.A. 	N.A. 	45 	N.A. 	15 	10 	15 	10 	N.A. 	0.5 	50 
OS- 	N.A. 	N.A. 	N.A. 	1.0 (8) 	35 	N.A. 	N.A. 	20 	25 	N.A. 	N.A. 	N.A. 	N.A. 
OS-EC 	N.A. 	N.A. 	N.A. 	N.A. 	35 	N.A. 	N.A. 	20 	25 	N.A. 	N.A. 	N.A. 	N.A. 
 
(1)  The lot minimums listed do not apply to the condominium parcelization of a project where land is being divided for individual building envelopes. Further, for lots within subdivisions approved prior to January 2003, the minimum lot size shall be that shown on the approved subdivision map. 
(2)  The minimum width of a residential corner lot shall be ten percent greater than the minimum lot width for a given district. 
(3)  Towers, spires, cupolas, chimneys, elevator penthouses, water tanks, monuments, and similar structures and necessary mechanical appurtenances covering not more than twenty percent of the top floor roof area may exceed by eight feet the maximum permitted height in the underlying zoning district by conditional use permit. 
(4)  See Section 17.10.060 for additional requirements for accessory structures. 
(5)  Front porches may project up to five feet into the front yard setback. Front yard and street side setbacks shall be reserved for landscaping only, excluding driveways for ingress and egress and front porch projections. For lots within subdivisions approved prior to January 2003, front yard setbacks shall be as shown on the approved subdivision map. 
(6)  A minimum lot size of four thousand five hundred square feet may be allowed in the R-L District for projects that utilize design features such as clustering and common open space areas. 
(7)  Maximum density within the M-U District shall be dependent on the dimensional requirements of the property (e.g. setbacks, FAR, parking). 
(8)  Applies only to the developable portion of any property within the OS-ARC District. 
(9)  In the M-U District, front, rear, and/or side yard setbacks may be reduced or eliminated if approved by the planning commission and if structures remain outside of an easement and comply with city approved design guidelines. 
(10)  The interior side yard setback may be eliminated for attached dwelling units in the R-M and R-H Districts, provided the applicable building code requirements can be met. 
(11)  In the R-H and C-O Districts, interior side yards shall be increased by one foot for every foot of building over thirty-five feet. 
(12)  The interior side yard setback may be eliminated for attached commercial units in the C-N and C-R Districts, provided the applicable building code requirements can be met. 
(13)  The rear yard setbacks may be reduced to ten feet for one-story building additions that are no wider than fifty percent of the buildable width of the lot. 
(14)  This shall include private open space of a minimum area of one hundred square feet when on ground level and/or sixty square feet if equal to or greater than six feet above ground. 
(15)  F.A.R. of 1.5 is allowed for hotel and motel projects in the C-R District. 
(16)  F.A.R. of 1.0 is allowed for industrial projects that are approved by the planning commission and meet criteria set forth in city approved design guidelines. 
(17)  F.A.R. of 1.5 is the maximum for non-residential projects; an F.A.R. of 2.0 is allowed for mixed residential/residential projects. 
(18)  The maximum sizes for housing units shall be as provided for in Section 17.10.070 of this chapter. 
(19)  Residential units are only permitted in the DTM-U if 50% or more of the total building square footage is non-residential or if 75% or more of the ground floor is designed for an active retail or service use (e.g. restaurant, shop, beauty salon, etc.) 
(20)  The corner sideyard setback may be reduced to five feet for buildings that address the street with units accessible from the public sidewalk. 
Yard Diagram 
  
( Ord. No. 901 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-22-2016)  
17.10.030 - Legally established yard setbacks. 
On any property line where there is a legally established side or rear yard building setback line less than that required by the standards established by this ordinance, that setback may be continued when expanding a structure for a use permitted by the zoning district in which the property is located, provided maximum lot coverage is not exceeded and all other required setbacks apply. This provision does not apply to expansions into front yard setbacks. 
( Ord. No. 901 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-22-2016)  
17.10.040 - Projections into yards. 
Projections into required yard setbacks shall be permitted as follows, provided that no projection shall extend into a public utility easement: 
A.  Projecting features such as balconies, sills, chimneys, fireplaces, bay windows, covered porches, awnings, cornices, eaves, and ornamental features may extend into a required side yard or a space between structures that is five feet or more in width not more than two feet and may extend into a required front or rear yard not more than four feet. 
B.  Open, unenclosed, uncovered balconies, landings, platforms, patios, decks, porches, stairways, terraces, and vehicular access drives and parking and loading areas, no part of which is more than four feet above the grade of the ground, may extend into a required rear or side yard to within three feet of the property line or the required space between buildings. 
C.  Attached patio covers may feature supporting members that encroach to within ten feet of a rear property line and to within five feet of a side property line, with eaves allowed to extend an additional two feet into these setbacks. 
Yard Projections 
  
( Ord. No. 901 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-22-2016)  
17.10.050 - Required separations between structures. 
A.  The minimum separation between main structures or between main structures connected by a breezeway shall be ten feet, with an additional one foot of separation required for every foot that a structure exceeds a height of thirty-five feet. 
B.  The minimum distance between any main structure and any detached accessory structure shall be five feet. Any structure that is set back five feet or less from a main structure shall be considered an attached structure for setback purposes and must comply with all dimensional requirements that pertain to the main structure. 
Separations between Buildings/Accessory Building Setbacks 
  
( Ord. No. 901 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-22-2016)  
17.10.060 - Accessory structures. 
A.  Detached/Attached. Detached accessory structures (i.e. structures separated from the main structure by five feet or more) shall be located behind the front elevation of the main structure and shall cover no more than ten percent of the rear yard area (unless an accessory dwelling unit), with total lot coverage for all structures on-site not to exceed that listed in Section 17.10.020 for the applicable zoning district. In the event an accessory building is attached to the main building or less than five feet from the main structure, it shall be considered structurally a part of the main building and shall comply in all respects with the development standards applicable to the main building. 
B.  Setbacks for Accessory Structures. The minimum side and rear yard setback for carports is five feet and for all other accessory structures the setback is three feet. 
C.  Accessory Building as an Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU). If the accessory building is an ADU, a ten-foot rear yard setback and five-foot side yard setbacks must be provided. In the case of a corner lot adjacent to a reversed frontage lot, accessory buildings shall not project beyond the front yard required or existing on the adjacent reversed frontage lot. 
D.  Building Permits Requirements. Building permits are not required for detached accessory structures that are one hundred twenty-eight square feet or less in size, that are no greater than twelve feet in height, that are not habitable, and that do not require utilities. Accessory structures shall not include kitchens, unless part of an approved accessory dwelling unit. 
( Ord. No. 901 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-22-2016; Ord. No. 906 , § 8, 4-11-2017)  
17.10.070 - Maximum size of housing units. 
A.  The maximum square footage of housing units (including garages and accessory structures) shall be determined by the following formulas for the respective zoning districts. (Note: These maximums do not apply to units allowed through a density bonus arrangement.): 
R-L (Low Density Residential): 	600 sq. ft. + F.A.R. Factor (0.40) x Net Lot Area 
R-M (Medium Density Residential): 	400 sq. ft. + F.A.R. Factor (0.40 for detached; 0.55 for attached) x Net Lot Area 
R-H (High Density Residential) 	F.A.R. Factor (1.15) x Net Lot Area 
DTR-H (Downtown High Density Residential) 	Not applicable 
 
B.  Floor Area Ratio Increase. The planning commission may allow an increase in the floor area ratio factor (FAR) for a residential property within an R-L or R-M district, subject to the granting of a use permit, in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.25.050, Administrative Permit, if the following findings can be made: 
1.  The maximum lot coverage for the property would not exceed that permitted for the zoning district; 
2.  The required setbacks and height limitations of the zoning district can be met for all structures; 
3.  A usable outdoor area (at least one minimum dimension of fifteen feet) for residents would be maintained on the lot; 
4.  The issuance of the use permit would not infringe on the privacy or light and air easements of adjacent properties; 
5.  The total FAR for the lot would not exceed 0.55. 
C.  Addition of Bedrooms to R-L District Parcels. For the addition or creation of a sixth bedroom on a parcel in the R-L District, an administrative permit shall be required in accordance with Section 17.25.050 of this title. 
1.  For the addition or creation of any bedroom in excess of six bedrooms, an administrative permit shall also be required. 
2.  Any approval under this subsection shall include the requirement that for each additional bedroom, one additional off-street non-tandem parking space to be located in the front yard or street side yard shall be required. In no case shall said additional space(s) cause more than forty percent of a lot's front yard to be devoted to parking. 
3.  The addition or creation of any bedroom and additional off-street parking space(s) required by this subsection shall otherwise comply with all applicable provisions of this title. 
4.  Under this subsection, "bedroom" shall mean any habitable space in a dwelling unit other than a kitchen or living room that is intended for or capable of being used for sleeping with a door that closes the room off from other common space such as living and kitchen areas that is at least seventy square feet in area, exclusive of closets and other appurtenant space, and meets building code standards for egress, light and ventilation. A room identified as a den, library, loft, dining room, study, office, or other extra room that satisfies this definition will be considered a bedroom for the purposes of applying this requirement. For the purposes of this subsection, the creation or existence of a bedroom within a permitted accessory dwelling unit shall not count towards the six bedroom calculation set forth in this subsection. 
( Ord. No. 901 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-22-2016; Ord. No. 920 , § 4, 3-13-2018)  
17.10.080 - Reasonable accommodation. 
A.  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide reasonable accommodations in the city's zoning and land use regulations, policies, and practices when needed to provide an individual with a disability an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. 
This section provides a procedure to request reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities seeking equal access to housing under the Federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (the Acts) in the application of zoning laws and other land use regulations, policies and procedures. 
B.  Reasonable Accommodation. A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any person with a disability, their representative or any entity, when the application of a zoning law or other land use regulation, policy or practice acts as a barrier to fair housing opportunities. A person with a qualifying disability under the Acts. Generally, a person with a disability is a person who has a physical or mental impairment that limits or substantially limits one or more major live activities, anyone who is regarded as having such impairment or anyone who has a record of such impairment. The proceeding definition of a person with a disability and this section are intended to apply to those persons who are defined as disabled under the Acts as they may be amended from time to time. 
A request for reasonable accommodation may include a modification or exception to the rules, standards and practices for the siting, development and use of housing or housing- related facilities that would eliminate regulatory barriers and provide a person with a disability equal opportunity to housing of their choice. Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be made in the manner prescribed by Section 17.10.080.C, Process. 
C.  Process. 
(1)  Applicant. A request for a reasonable accommodation may be made by any person with a disability, his or her representative, or a developer or provider of housing for individuals with a disability. 
(2)  Application. An application for a reasonable accommodation shall be made on an application form provided by the planning division. If an individual needs assistance in making the request for reasonable accommodation, the city will provide assistance to ensure that the process is accessible. 
(3)  Review With Other Land Use Applications or Discretionary Permits. If the project for which the request for reasonable accommodation is made requires another discretionary permit or approval (including but not limited to; conditional use permit, design review, general plan amendment, zone change, etc.), the applicant may file the request for reasonable accommodation together with the application for the other discretionary permit or approval. The processing procedures of the discretionary permit shall govern the joint processing of both the reasonable accommodation and the discretionary permit. 
(4)  Required Submittals. An application for a reasonable accommodation shall include the following: 
a.  Documentation that the applicant is: (i) a person with a disability; (ii) applying on behalf of one or more persons with a disability; or (iii) a developer or provider of housing for one or more persons with a disability. 
b.  The name and address of the individual(s) requesting the reasonable accommodation. 
c.  The name and address of the property owner(s). 
d.  The address of the property for which accommodation is requested. 
e.  The current use of the property. 
f.  A description of the reasonable accommodation requested by the applicant and why the reasonable accommodation is necessary to make the specific property accessible to the individual. 
g.  Where applicable, documentation that the requested accommodation is designed and constructed pursuant to Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations to allow access, circulation and full use of the building and facilities by persons with disabilities. 
(5)  The planning director may request additional information from the applicant if the application does not provide sufficient information for the city to make the findings required in subsection E. 
D.  Review Authority. 
(1)  Development Services Director. Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be reviewed by the development services director (director), or his designee if the request for reasonable accommodation is not filed concurrently with another discretionary permit or approval. 
(2)  Other Review Authority. Requests for reasonable accommodation submitted for concurrent review with another discretionary land use application shall be reviewed by the authority reviewing the discretionary land use application. 
E.  Review Procedure. 
(1)  Director Review. The director, or his designee, shall make a written determination within 45 days and either grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation in accordance with Section 17.10.080.F., Findings and Decision. 
(2)  Other Reviewing Authority. The written determination on whether to grant or deny the request for reasonable accommodation shall be made by the authority responsible for reviewing the discretionary land use application in compliance with the applicable review procedure for the discretionary review. The written determination to grant or deny the request for reasonable accommodation shall be made in accordance with Section 17.10.080.F, Findings and Decision. 
F.  Findings and Decision. 
(1)  Findings. The written decision to grant or deny a request for reasonable accommodation will be consistent with the Acts and shall be based on the following findings, all of which are required for approval: 
a.  The housing that is the subject of the request will be used by an individual with a disability under the Acts. 
b.  The request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to make specific housing available to an individual with a disability under the Acts. 
c.  The requested reasonable accommodation would not impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city as "undue financial or administrative burden" is defined in the Acts. 
d.  The requested reasonable accommodation would not result in a fundamental alteration in the nature of a city program or law, including but not limited to land use and zoning, as "fundamental alteration" is defined in the Acts. 
e.  The requested reasonable accommodation will not, under the specific facts of the case, result in a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or substantial physical damage to the property of others. 
(2)  Conditions of Approval. In granting a request for reasonable accommodation, the reviewing authority may impose any conditions of approval deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the reasonable accommodation would comply with the findings required by subsection F(1) above. In making the findings in subsection F(1) above, the reviewing authority may approve alternative reasonable accommodations which provide an equivalent level of benefit to the applicant. 
G.  Appeal of Determination. A determination by the reviewing authority to grant or deny a request for reasonable accommodation may be appealed to the planning commission. However, if the reviewing authority was the planning commission, a decision to grant or deny a request for a reasonable accommodation may be appealed to the city council. 
( Ord. No. 901 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-22-2016)  
Chapter 17.12 - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 
 
17.12.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish performance standards that are intended to ensure that uses and activities are conducted in a manner that protects the public health and safety and do not produce adverse impacts on surrounding properties or the community at large. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.12.020 - Applicability. 
The standards contained in this chapter shall apply to uses and activities in all zoning districts within the city of Rohnert Park. Applicants for proposed projects may be required to provide evidence that all of the applicable standards may be satisfied by the project, prior to its approval. If necessary, the city may retain a professional expert or designated regulatory agency to assist in assessing the possible impacts of a use or activity, with any costs incurred to be paid by the applicant or business owner. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.12.030 - Noise standards. 
A.  No uses or activities shall create noise levels which exceed the following standards: 
NOISE STANDARDS 
Zoning District 	Maximum Noise Level in dBa (levels not to be exceeded more than 5 minutes in any hour) 	Maximum Noise Level in dBa (levels not to be exceeded more than 5 minutes in any hour) 
	Measured at Property Line or District Boundary 	Measured at any Boundary of a Residential District 	Between 7PM and 7AM measured at any boundary of a residential zone (3) 
Residential 	60 (1) 	N.A. 	50 or ambient noise level 
Commercial 	70 	60 	50 or ambient noise level 
Industrial (4) 	70 (2) 	60 	50 or ambient noise level 
Mixed Use 	65 (1) 	60 	50 or ambient noise level 
Public/Institutional 	65 	60 	50 or ambient noise level 
Open Space 	65 	60 	50 or ambient noise level 
 
(1)  The maximum interior noise level for residential uses shall be forty-five dBa with all openings closed. 
(2)  For commercial and industrial properties, the measurement shall be at the property line of the use or activity. 
(3)  Restricted hours may be modified through conditions of an approved conditional, administrative, or temporary use permit. 
(4)  For stadium property see Rohnert Park Municipal Code Chapter 9.44. 
B.  The noise standards above shall be modified as follows to account for the effects of time and duration on noise levels: 
1.  Noise that is produced for no more than a cumulative period of five minutes in any hour may exceed the above standards by five dBa except between the hours of 7:00 PM and 7:00 AM. 
2.  Noise that is produced for no more than a cumulative period of one minute in any hour may exceed the above standard by ten dBa except between the hours of 7:00 PM and 7:00 AM. 
3.  Mechanical and electrical equipment shall provide adequate shielding and baffling so that noise levels from such equipment will not exceed the above noise levels when measured at the property line. 
C.  Noise shall be measured with a sound level meter that meets the standards of the American National Standards Institute. Noise levels shall be measured in decibels (dBa) on a sound level meter using the A-weighted filter network. Calibration checks of the instrument shall be made at the time any noise measurement is made. Excluded from these standards are occasional sounds generated by the movement of public safety vehicles and railroad equipment. 
D.  New development within existing or projected sixty-five dBa noise corridors shown in the general plan shall undergo a technical acoustical analysis by a professional acoustical engineer, which shall serve as the basis for designing mitigation measures. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.12.040 - Odor, particulate matter and air contaminant standards. 
No continuous frequent or repetitive odors are permitted which are perceptible on or beyond adjacent property lines. An odor detected no more than a total of fifteen minutes in any one-day shall not be deemed to be continuous, frequent or repetitive for this regulation. No dust or particulate matter shall be emitted that is detectable at boundary lines or property by a reasonable person without instruments. Exhaust air ducts shall be located or directed away from abutting residentially-zoned properties. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.12.050 - Lighting and glare standards. 
All lighting, reflective surfaces or any other sources of illumination shall be utilized in a manner that produces no glare on public streets or on any other parcel. Lights shall be of the minimum illumination necessary for a given application and shall be directed downward and shielded at lot lines so as not to be directly visible from an adjoining residential district. For regulations regarding the illumination of signage, please refer to the sign ordinance. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.12.060 - Creek protection zones. 
For areas identified in the Rohnert Park general plan as creek protection zones (see Figure 6.2-2 in the general plan), creek protection zones shall be maintained for a minimum of fifty feet measured from the tops of the banks and a strip of land extending laterally outward from the top of each bank. For all other creek areas, a creek protection zone of twenty feet shall be maintained. Where significant habitat areas or high potential wetlands exist, this setback shall be extended to protect the resource, as required by the planning commission or city council at time of project approval, or by the planning and community development director. Development shall not occur within the creek protection zones, except for greenway enhancement (e.g., trails and bikeways). City engineering department approval shall be required for the following activities within creek protection zones: 
A.  Construction, alteration, or removal of any structure; 
B.  Excavation, filling, or grading; 
C.  Removal or planting of vegetation (except for removal of invasive plant species); 
D.  Alteration of any embankment. 
In addition, any applicable design criteria of the Sonoma County water agency shall be followed. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.12.070 - Design standards. 
Projects shall be subject to site plan and development review per Section 17.25.030 of this title. Particular emphasis shall be placed on any adopted city design guidelines. Projects shall conform to specific design standards included in area and specific plans as applicable. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.12.080 - Fire hazard standards. 
The storage, use, transportation or production of products that, either in the raw or finished state, constitute a fire hazard as defined by the director of the department of public safety shall be subject to the fire codes and approval of the city of Rohnert Park department of public safety. Department of public safety personnel may, without prior notice, visit and observe operations on the site and any directives issued by said personnel shall be satisfied in a timely manner. All hazardous materials must comply with the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.12.090 - Liquid or solid waste standards. 
The use, handling, storage and transportation of waste materials, including hazardous wastes, shall comply with the provisions of the California Hazardous Materials Regulations and any other applicable laws. Discharge at any point into a public or private sewage disposal system, stream, or the ground, of any material that could contaminate any water supply, or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous or offensive elements is prohibited. No exceptions are allowed unless in accordance with regulations, licenses or approvals of the various local and state agencies having jurisdiction over such activities. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.12.100 - Sidewalk and street tree standards. 
Sidewalks, curbs and gutters shall be provided on all public streets, as required by the city engineer. Street trees shall be provided in accordance with the regulations of Section 17.14.070 of this title and/or as stipulated by a master tree planting palette. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.12.110 - Construction standards. 
A.  During the construction of a project, the construction site shall be secured by temporary fencing. 
B.  All portions of the construction site shall be watered as necessary to reduce emissions of dust and other particulate matter and all stockpiles shall be covered. Public streets shall be kept dirt free to the satisfaction of the city engineer. 
C.  All construction and transport equipment shall be muffled in accordance with state and federal laws and regulations, and the noise standards of this chapter. Construction and transport equipment shall be operated so as to minimize exhaust emissions. 
D.  Construction hours shall be as stipulated in Section 9.44.120 of this code, or as otherwise approved by the city engineer. 
E.  All water run-off from construction sites shall be controlled. During construction trucks and equipment should be running only when necessary. 
F.  At the end of construction, local road surfaces shall be returned to pre-construction condition by the developer. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.12.120 - Screening of activities and mechanical equipment. 
All exterior mechanical equipment, except window air conditioning units, shall be screened from public view, including adjacent properties. Equipment to be screened includes but is not limited to, heating and/or air conditioning units, water tanks, valves, back flow protection devices, solar and photovoltaic panels, and transformers. Screening materials may be solid concrete, wood or other opaque material or a combination of fence/wall and landscaping and shall effectively screen mechanical equipment so that it is not readily visible from the public right-of-way, as approved by the planning and community development director (See Chapter 17.14 of this title). See Section 17.08.040 of this title for regulations regarding the screening of communication facilities. 
Activities requiring outdoor storage must be screened from view per Chapter 17.14 of this title. Machinery or equipment which, because of size and function, cannot be installed for practical purposes within an enclosed building shall also be screened. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.12.130 - Trash enclosures. 
A.  Trash enclosures shall be required for multiple family, commercial and industrial uses. 
B.  The following regulations shall apply regarding materials, construction and design. 
1.  The walls of the trash enclosure structure shall be constructed of solid masonry material with a decorative exterior surface finish compatible to the main structure(s). The trash enclosure walls shall be a minimum six feet in height and the minimum dimensions shall be adequate for the size and number of dumpster units and recycling bins. 
2.  The trash enclosure structure shall have solid heavy gauge metal gates. 
3.  The trash enclosure shall feature a floor and approach that is paved with a durable all-weather surface approved by the city engineer. 
4.  Trash receptacles shall be covered or a cover structure shall be constructed above the enclosure so as to protect its contents from the elements. 
5.  The trash enclosure for residential developments should be designed to allow walk-in access by residents without requiring the main enclosure gates to be opened. 
6.  Signage identifying the types of recyclable materials accepted for collection at the trash enclosure shall be conspicuously posted within the enclosure. 
7.  The trash enclosure shall be designed so that adverse impacts such as noise, odor, vectors, or glare are minimized through the use of adequate separation, fencing, landscaping, or other means. 
C.  If visible from public view, the perimeter of the trash enclosure structure shall be planted with landscaping, including a combination of shrubs and/or climbing evergreen vines. 
D.  No trash enclosure shall be located in any required streetside setback area. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.12.140 - Property maintenance standards. 
All properties in the city of Rohnert Park shall, at all times, be maintained by their respective owners in good order. This shall include litter management and the repair and maintenance of all structures, fences, signs, walks, driveways, lawns, landscaping, painting, etc., as may be necessary to maintain good order. Enforcement of this provision shall be per Chapter 1.24 of this code. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.12.150 - Underground utilities. 
A.  Underground utility service is required for all new development. All utility service laterals and equipment, including, but not limited to, electric, communication, and cable television lines, installed in and for the purpose of supplying service to any new construction or use shall be installed underground on the property to be served and from the property to be served to the point of connection with the utility's distribution facilities, in accordance with utility rules as approved by the Public Utilities Commission of the State, except for equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and risers from concealed ducts (see Section 17.12.120 of this title.) 
B.  The property owner shall be responsible for complying with the requirements of this section and shall make the necessary arrangements with the utility companies involved for the installation of such facilities. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
Chapter 17.14 - FENCE, WALL, AND LANDSCAPE STANDARDS 
 
17.14.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish requirements pertaining to the height, location and construction of fences, walls, and other barriers on or between properties within the city of Rohnert Park and to establish landscape standards. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.14.020 - Fence, wall, and hedge height restrictions. 
A.  Fences, walls and hedges shall not exceed the maximum heights shown in the following table. Each is followed by a number in parentheses that corresponds to one of the footnotes below the table. See also Section 17.14.040 regarding clear vision triangle restrictions. Fences and walls greater than six feet in height shall require the approval of the building department. Masonry walls of any height shall also require a building permit. 
MAXIMUM HEIGHT FOR FENCES, 
WALLS AND HEDGES 
Location 	Residential 	Commercial/ Industrial 
Front Yard 	3' (1) 	3' (1) 
Rear Yard 	6' (2) (3) (6) 	6' (4) 
Side Yard 	6' (2) (3) (6) 	6' (4) 
Corner Side Yard 	6' (2) (5) 	6' (4) 
 
1.  Front yard fencing. No fence, wall, hedge or screen planting shall exceed a maximum height of three feet in the required front yard setback. All such fences shall be located outside the public right-of-way unless an encroachment permit is issued by the city engineer. 
2.  Residential fence height extensions. In residential districts, where there is agreement between adjacent property owners, the fence height of the common fence may be increased to eight feet, provided that the top two feet of such is constructed of open lattice or other non-opaque construction that is of the same material as the remainder of the fence. Residential fences that border a day care operation may be eight feet in height and of a solid construction, as approved by the planning and community development director and building official. 
3.  Buffer fencing. When the side or rear yard of a residential lot abuts a commercial, industrial, or multi-family residential property, a six foot masonry wall is required and may extend up to eight feet in height. This does not apply to the repair of an existing residential fence that abuts a commercial, industrial or multi-family property. A masonry sound wall built adjacent to an arterial street or school site may also be eight feet in height, subject to a documented sound study. 
4.  Outdoor storage fencing. In commercial and industrial districts, a minimum eight foot high opaque fence or wall, as approved by the planning and community development director shall screen areas used for outdoor storage. 
5.  Corner lot fencing. Exterior fences on corner lots may be placed within the required exterior side yard but shall be no less than three feet from the back of the sidewalk and shall be positioned out of the public right-of-way. Where a fire hydrant is present, any fence or wall shall maintain a minimum three foot clearance from said fence or wall. In cases where the fence is to be built in conjunction with a retaining wall, and the wall face is exposed to the street, the fence shall be set back a minimum of three feet from the retaining wall. 
6.  Golf course fencing. Rear and/or side yard fencing up to six feet in height may be installed on lots adjacent to the golf course, provided such fencing is a minimum of six inches behind the property line. Protective netting shall be allowed to a height of twenty feet and shall be of a visually nonobtrusive color and design. 
Fence Locations 
  
G.  Fence height shall be measured from the grade level of the property line. In the event the ground elevation is not the same on both sides of a fence or wall, the height thereof may be measured from the higher ground elevation. 
Fence Height Measurements 
  
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.14.030 - Fence and wall materials and design. 
A.  Barbed wire, razor ribbon and other similar wire attachments shall be prohibited on top of any fence. Electrified fencing shall also be prohibited. Exceptions may be granted by the planning commission based on the security needs of a given property within a commercial or industrial district, provided the applicant can provide documentation supporting the need for such fencing. 
B.  Walls between residential and commercial, industrial, or multi-family residential properties shall be of a masonry construction that is architecturally treated on each side. The design of such walls shall be approved by the planning and community development director, the planning commission, or the city council at the time of project review. All masonry walls require a building permit. 
C.  Walls surrounding operations involving outdoor storage shall be of an opaque construction, with the design of such walls to be approved by the planning and community development director or by the planning commission or city council at the time of project review. 
D.  The design and construction of a fence or wall in a commercial or industrial district shall remain consistent throughout a site, unless otherwise approved by the planning and community development director or by the planning commission or city council at the time of project review. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.14.040 - Clear vision triangle. 
Fences, walls, hedges, and other structures or vegetation shall not exceed a height of three feet within a clear vision triangle and the lower portion of tree crowns shall not be less than eight feet within a clear vision triangle. Clear vision triangles shall be delineated as follows: 
A.  Uncontrolled intersections: A triangular area bounded by the curb lines (tangents) and a diagonal line joining points on the tangents which are located thirty-five foot back from what would be the point of these curb lines' intersection. 
B.  Controlled intersections: A triangle having twenty-five foot tangents at the curblines. 
C.  Driveways: A triangle having twenty-five foot tangents at the outside line of the driveway and the curbline. 
Clear Vision Triangle 
  
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.14.050 - Gated communities. 
Gated communities are strongly discouraged. Fences or walls surrounding a community shall require a conditional use permit from the planning commission and shall meet the height limitations of this section. Such fences or walls shall be constructed of a decorative material approved by the planning commission. Gates crossing access points shall be subject to the approval of the department of public safety and shall not be permitted within the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.14.060 - Retaining walls. 
All retaining walls that are adjacent to public streets shall be placed outside the public right-of-way. On commercial and industrial properties, such walls shall be constructed of decorative masonry block or an equivalent material approved by the planning and community development director. All masonry walls shall require a building permit. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.14.070 - General landscape standards. 
All landscaping and irrigation systems shall be designed, installed and maintained in accord with the standards and requirements of this section, which shall apply to all commercial, industrial, and residential projects requiring site plan and architectural review approval. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the planning and community development director or his/her designee shall: 
A.  Verify that landscaping and irrigation has been installed in accordance with the approved plans with respect to size, number and species of plants and adequate water coverage. Security in an amount and form acceptable to the city attorney may be posted for the uncompleted work with the approval of the planning and community development director. 
B.  For commercial, industrial, or multi-family projects, require a maintenance agreement with a performance bond (period of one year after issuance of certificate of occupancy) to insure plant establishment and maintenance. Bond shall cover cost of replacing all plant material but may exclude material and labor costs relating to irrigation and hardscape. 
C.  Ensure that provisions are included for the permanent maintenance of all planting areas. As used in this section, "maintained" includes watering, weeding, pruning, insect and pest control, and replacement of plant materials and irrigation equipment as needed to preserve the health and appearance of plant materials. Should the planning and community development director determine that landscaping is not being maintained as defined by this subsection and/or the maintenance agreement, the city reserves the right, at the owner's expense, to either undertake itself, or contract for, any and all work necessary to restore landscaping. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.14.080 - Required landscape plans. 
A.  Landscape plans should be prepared by a licensed landscape architect. All landscape plans shall be drawn to scale and be consistent with architectural and civil engineering site plans. 
B.  All applications for site plan and architectural review approval shall provide a preliminary landscape plan. This plan shall, at a minimum, illustrate the extent and nature of proposed plantings as well as a proposed plant pallet. 
C.  Final landscape and irrigation plans shall be submitted concurrently with architectural, structural, and civil engineering plans when a building permit is requested. No building permit shall be issued for any project governed by the requirements of this section, until final landscape and irrigation plans have been reviewed and approved by the planning and community development director. 
1.  Final landscape plans shall identify specific plant materials to be used, providing both common and botanical names, sizes and quantities. 
2.  Irrigation plans. Irrigation plans, encouraging drip irrigation systems whenever possible, shall be submitted with development plans and shall contain all construction details for an automatic system including but not limited to, the following: 
a.  Location, type and size of lines; 
b.  Location, type and gallon output of heads; 
c.  Location and sizes of valves; 
d.  Location and type of controller; 
e.  Installation details; 
f.  Location and type of backflow prevention device; and 
g.  Available water pressure and water meter outlet size. 
D.  Landscape plans shall demonstrate a recognizable pattern or theme for the overall development by choice and location of materials. To accomplish this, landscape plans shall conform to the following: 
1.  Plant materials shall be selected for: drought tolerance; adaptability and relationship to the local environment; color, form and pattern; ability to provide shade; soil retention; fire resistance, etc. The use of native landscaping types shall be encouraged. The overall landscape plan shall be integrated with all elements of the project, such as buildings, parking lots and streets, to achieve desirable microclimate and minimize energy demand. Plant materials and landscape design shall be consistent with the Sonoma Water Agency's water conservation guidelines. 
2.  Plant materials shall be sized and spaced to achieve immediate effect and shall normally not be less than a fifteen gallon container for trees, five gallon container for specimen shrubs, and a one gallon container for mass planting. Turf areas shall be from sod and ground cover from either one gallon containers or flats. Larger plant materials may be required on a case-by-case basis in order to achieve a more immediate landscape benefit. 
3.  Root barriers shall be provided for all trees that are within five feet of the public right-of-way. 
4.  Where shrubs or low-level vegetation are used, vegetative matter at maturity shall cover at least seventy-five percent of actual planted area. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.14.090 - Creek landscape standards. 
Treatment of natural and man made creeks and drainageways shall conform to Section 17.12.060 of this title. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.14.100 - Parking lot landscaping standards. 
The landscaping of parking lots shall be as provided for in Section 17.16.100 of this title. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
Chapter 17.15 - TREE PRESERVATION AND PROTECTION 
 
17.15.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The city council of the city of Rohnert Park establishes that these policies, regulations and standards are necessary to ensure that the city will continue to realize the benefits provided by its urban forest and adopts this chapter in the interest of public health and safety and with the intention to: 
A.  Foster a vibrant, attractive, and healthy mixed-age and mixed-species urban forest; 
B.  Establish and maintain existing and future tree cover on private lands in the city; and 
C.  Maintain city trees in a healthy, attractive, and non-hazardous condition through good arboricultural practices. 
(Ord. 769 § 3 (part), 2007)  
17.15.020 - Applicability. 
The contents of this chapter shall apply to all trees as defined in Chapter 17.04 (Definitions) which are located on private lands except those trees which are exempted in Section 17.15.030(B) (Exemptions). 
(Ord. 769 § 3 (part), 2007)  
17.15.030 - Requirements. 
A.  Application. No person shall alter, remove, or relocate any tree on private property that is not exempted by this chapter, unless the community development director or his/her designee has issued a tree removal permit in accordance with Section 17.15.040 (Permit processing). 
B.  Exemptions. The following trees shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter: 
1.  A street tree, as defined in the Rohnert Park Municipal Code, Title 12 (Streets and Sidewalks), Section 12.24.020(H), in which case alteration, removal, or relocation shall be governed by Chapter 12.24 (Public Tree Care); 
2.  Any proposed tree alteration, removal, or relocation which is part of a larger project. In such cases, the alteration, removal, or relocation shall be processed along with the primary entitlement request which was submitted for the project; 
3.  Tree pruning on private property which will be performed in conformance with the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) standards and in which no more than one third of the tree canopy will be removed; 
4.  Trees which have been determined to be an imminent threat to the public's health, safety, or general welfare as determined by either the director of public safety, director of public works, city's arborist, or director of community development; 
5.  Any of the following trees: Acacia spp. (Acacia), Ailanthus spp. (Tree of Heaven), Eucalyptus spp., Ligustrum spp. (Privet), Liquidambar styraciflua (Liquidambar), Pinus radiata (Monterey Pine), or Populus lombardii (Lombardi poplar); 
6.  Any tree which, in the opinion of the city arborist, is growing in an inappropriate location and should be removed to preserve a structure or other real property; 
7.  Any tree which is located on a residential lot which is fully developed with a detached, single-family residence; 
8.  Orchard trees which have been planted or held for cash crop or commercial purpose. 
(Ord. 769 § 3 (part), 2007)  
17.15.040 - Permit processing. 
A.  Application Content. For any tree that is not exempt pursuant to Section 17.15.030(B) (Exemptions), the following items shall be included with a tree removal permit: 
1.  A site plan drawn to scale showing the location of the tree to be altered, removed or relocated, adjacent structures and utilities, and any other pertinent information; 
2.  A brief description of the tree(s), including number, type, diameter, and height, and reason for alteration, removal, or relocation; 
3.  A letter or report describing the health and condition of the tree prepared and signed by a licensed and certified arborist; and 
4.  Photographs of the tree(s) to be altered, removed, or relocated. 
B.  Review Procedure. 
1.  Referrals. All applications shall be referred to the city arborist for review and comment prior to any action or decision. 
2.  Processing. The tree removal permit shall be processed pursuant to Article V of Chapter 17.25 (Administrative Permit) of this code. 
3.  Findings. The tree removal permit application shall be approved or conditionally approved if, on the basis of the application and supporting materials, each of the following findings can be made: 
a.  The request is consistent with the general plan's goals, objectives and policies; 
b.  The request is consistent with the regulations and standards of the Rohnert Park Municipal Code; 
c.  The request is necessary in order to protect the public's health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. 769 § 3 (part), 2007)  
17.15.050 - Tree replacement. 
A.  Required. Any non-exempt tree which has been approved for alteration, removal, or relocation shall be replaced in accordance with the formula set forth in Section 17.15.050(B) (Replacement Formula) unless other arrangements have been made in writing between the applicant and the city's department of community development. 
B.  Replacement Formula. Tree replacement shall be based on the value of the tree as defined in Section 17.04.030 (Definitions of words and terms). 
C.  Type of Replacement. The applicant shall replace the altered, removed, or relocated tree(s) by either depositing an in-lieu fee, as described above, with the city's recreation department or by planting an equivalent number of new tree(s). The planting of any new tree(s) must be approved by the city arborist. 
D.  Location of Replacement Trees. If deemed feasible and appropriate by the city arborist, replacement trees shall be replanted on the site of the original tree removal. Otherwise, replacement trees may be located on any parcel within Rohnert Park city limits, depending on the feasibility and appropriateness of the site as determined by the city arborist. 
(Ord. 769 § 3 (part), 2007)  
17.15.060 - Tree protection during construction. 
For the purpose of safeguarding trees during construction activities, the following conditions shall apply to all trees that have not otherwise been approved for alteration, removal, or relocation: 
A.  Prior to commencement of construction activities, the property owner, developer, and/or contractor shall hire a licensed and certified arborist to inventory all trees on the building site by size, health, species and location. 
B.  The property owner, developer, and/or contractor shall erect protective barriers around all trees to be safeguarded on the construction site. The barriers shall be in place prior to the start of construction activities, shall be at least five feet in height, and shall be placed directly beneath the dripline of the tree. Upon the completion of all construction activities, the barriers may be removed pending written authorization as provided by the community development department. 
C.  There shall be no storage of equipment, materials or chemicals, rinsing or dumping of paints, solvents, or cementitious products, or vehicle parking within the dripline of any tree to be preserved. 
D.  No trenching shall be permitted within the dripline of any tree to be preserved unless authorized and conducted under the supervision of a licensed and certified arborist. 
(Ord. 769 § 3 (part), 2007)  
17.15.070 - Security deposits. 
In the interest of maintaining the purpose and intent of this chapter, the city shall collect a security deposit from the property owner, developer, and/or contractor for any project which includes as a condition of project approval the protection and preservation of on- or off-site trees. The security deposit shall be used to replace trees which were intended to be protected, but failed to survive for the minimum period of twenty-four months as measured from the date that the department of community development authorizes removal of the tree protection barrier. 
A.  Deposit Amount. The property owner, developer, and/or contractor shall submit a security deposit equal to thirty percent of the value, as defined in Section 17.04.030 (Definitions of words and terms), of each tree for the first twenty-five thousand dollars in tree value. For tree values in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars, applicant shall submit an additional security deposit equal to twenty percent of such value. The total security deposit for any project shall not exceed thirty thousand dollars. A separate account shall be established by the finance department for this purpose. 
B.  Use of Security Deposits. In the event that a protected tree does not survive or is otherwise harmed as a result of site development within twenty-four months measured from the date of project occupancy, the city of Rohnert Park shall use the security deposit funds to purchase replacement trees for on- or off-site use. Tree replacement shall be determined in accordance with Section 17.15.050(B) (Replacement Formula). 
C.  Security Deposit Exemptions. The following projects are exempt from paying security deposits: 
1.  Any project which was sponsored by the city of Rohnert Park. 
2.  A remodel, repair, or addition to a single-family residence on a developed lot. 
D.  Security Deposit Refund. Any unused portion of a security deposit shall be refunded to the entity or person who originally posted the security and returned within sixty days of the expiration of the twenty-four months, as referenced in subsection B of this section. 
(Ord. 769 § 3 (part), 2007)  
17.15.080 - Enforcement. 
A.  Penalty. A violation of any of the provisions or failure to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1.16 of the city's Municipal Code. Nothing in this section shall preclude or limit the city from seeking any manner of judicial relief for violations of this chapter, including, but not limited to, seeking recovery of the value of any tree that is altered, relocated, removed or otherwise damaged in violation of this chapter. The value of any tree altered, relocated, removed or otherwise damaged shall be consistent with Section 17.15.050(B) (Replacement Formula). 
(Ord. 769 § 3 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.16 - OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS 
 
17.16.010 - Purpose. 
The off-street parking regulations contained in this chapter are intended to achieve the following objectives: 
A.  To ensure that off-street parking facilities are provided for new land uses and for enlargements of existing uses in proportion to each use's need for such facilities; 
B.  To establish standards for uses that are consistent with the parking needs of each use and with the feasibility of providing required parking areas on specific sites; and 
C.  To ensure that off-street parking facilities are designed in a manner that will ensure their efficiency and will protect surrounding land uses from adverse impacts related to improperly designed parking arrangements. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.16.020 - Basic requirements for off-street parking. 
A.  At the time of initial occupancy of a site, construction of a structure, alteration or enlargement of a site or structure, or moving of a structure from one lot to another, off-street parking facilities shall be provided in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this chapter and as prescribed in the California Administrative Code, Title 24, Part 2. 
B.  The number of additional parking spaces required for an alteration or enlargement of an existing use or structure, or for a change of occupancy, shall be provided before the alteration, enlargement, or change of occupancy receives final approval for occupancy. 
C.  The number of off-street parking spaces required for combined uses on one property and/or within one project shall be equal to the sum of the required spaces prescribed for each use, except as provided for in Section 17.16.040 of this chapter. 
D.  Off-street parking facilities required by this chapter for any use shall not be considered as providing parking spaces for any other use, except where a shared parking arrangement applies pursuant to Section 17.16.080 of this chapter. 
E.  Any off-street parking specifically required for a given use shall be provided to users without charge, unless otherwise approved by the city. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.16.030 - Specific requirements. 
Parking spaces shall be provided for land uses and activities in accord with the following tables. If, in the application of the requirements of this table to a given land use or activity a fractional number is obtained, one parking space shall be required for a fraction of one-half or more, and no space or berth shall be required for a fraction of less than one-half. 
A.  Residential Uses. 
Land Use 	Required Off-Street Parking (Spaces)
Convalescent Home 	1 per 3 patient beds 
Day Care, Residential 	1 per assistant (driveway acceptable) 
Mobile Home Park 	1.5 spaces per unit, one of which must be covered 
Multi-Family Residential 	1 space per studio or 1 bedroom unit; 2 spaces per 2 bedroom unit; 2.5 spaces per 3 bedroom unit; plus 1 additional space per bedroom for units = 4 bedrooms and 1 guest parking space for every 4 units. 
Off-Campus Student Housing 	.75 spaces per bedroom unit or occupant, whichever is greater 
Residential Care Facility 	1 per 500 square feet of gross floor area 
Senior Housing 	1 covered space per unit, plus 1 space per 4 units for guest parking 
Single-Family Residential (Attached) 	2 spaces per unit, one of which must be covered, plus 1 space per 4 units for guest parking 
Single-Family Residential (Detached) 	2 spaces per unit in a garage (See Section 17.10.070.C for off-street parking requirements when adding or creating additional bedrooms) 
 
  
B.  Public and Semipublic Uses. 
Land Use 	Required Off-Street Parking (Spaces) 
Clubs and Lodges 	1 per 100 square feet of gross floor area 
Cultural Institution (e.g., Museum, Library) 	1 per 300 square feet of gross floor area 
Day Care, Commercial 	1 per employee on the largest shift plus 1 per 10 children 
Hospitals 	1 per bed, plus 1 space per doctor or other employee on the largest shift 
Maintenance and Service Facilities 	1 per 400 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
Offices (Governmental) 	1 per 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
Public Safety Facilities (Police/Fire Stations) 	1 per employee on the largest shift, plus 1/250 square feet of office area for public use 
Religious/Public Assembly 	1 per 4 fixed seats, and/or 1 per 75 sq. ft. of seating area if there are no fixed seats 
Schools 	
 • Elementary/Junior High 	1 per employee plus 1 per 8 students 
 • High School 	1 per employee plus 1 per 6 students 
 • Colleges/Universities 	1 per employee plus 1 per 4 students 
 
C.  Commercial/Retail/Office Uses. 
Land Use 	Required Off-Street Parking (Spaces) 
Ambulance Services 	1 per ambulance, plus 1 per employee on the largest shift 
Animal Sales and Services 	
 • Animal Boarding 	1 per 400 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
 •  Animal Grooming 	1 per 400 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
Land Use 	Required Off-Street Parking (Spaces) 
 • Animal Hospitals (Veterinary Clinic) 	1 per 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
Artists' Studios 	1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
Banks and Savings and Loans 	1 per 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area, plus queuing space of 3 cars per teller/ATM 
Broadcasting/Film Studio 	1 per 250 square feet of gross floor area 
Building Materials/Hardware Stores 	1 per 300 sq. ft. of sales floor area; plus 1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of outdoor storage and/or interior warehouse area. 
Business/Professional Schools 	1 per employee plus 1 per 4 students 
Crematoriums, Columbariums, and Mortuaries 	1 per 4 seats and/or; 1 per 75 sq. ft. of seating area if no fixed seats 
Commercial Recreation and Entertainment 	
 • Arenas/Stadiums 	1 per 4 fixed seats, and/or 1 per 75 sq. ft. of seating area if no fixed seats 
 •  Batting Cages 	2 per cage 
 •  Billiards/Pool Parlor 	2 per table 
 •  Bowling Alleys 	2 per lane 
 •  Electronic Game Centers 	1 per 2 machines 
 •  Golf Driving Range 	1 per tee 
 •  Gymnasium 	1 per 100 sq. ft. of floor area 
 •  Miniature Golf 	3 per hole 
 •  Skating Rinks 	1 per 100 square feet of recreational space, plus 1 per 4 seats for spectators 
 •  Stables (Commercial) 	1 per animal boarded/used on operation 
 •  Swimming Pools 	1 per 100 sq. ft. of pool area 
 •  Tennis and Racquetball Courts 	2 per court 
 •  Theaters 	1 per 4 fixed seats, and/or 1 per 75 sq. ft. of seating area if there are no fixed seats 
Eating and Drinking Establishments 	
 •  General Restaurant 	1 per 2.5 seats 
 •  Cocktail Lounge/Bar 	1 per 2.5 seats 
 •  Fast Food 	1 per 50 sq. ft. of gross floor area for public seating, plus queuing for 6 cars if a drive-through window is used 
 •  Outdoor Seating 	1 additional space per 2.5 seats 
 •  Take-out Only/No Seating 	1 per employee on the largest shift plus one additional space per 50 square feet of customer waiting area 
Equipment Sales and Rentals 	1 per 4,000 sq. ft. of outdoor display area 
Furniture and Appliance Stores, Households Equipment, and Furniture Repair and Warehouse Sale 	1 per 400 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
Gas Station/Service Station 	2 per service bay plus 1 per employee on the largest shift; with no less than 4 parking spaces provided. Service stations with food marts shall require a minimum of six (6) spaces. If combined with a towing service, in addition to the above requirements, one (1) additional space per towing vehicle shall be provided at the rear of the site 
Hardware Store/Home Improvement Store 	1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 space per 1,000 square feet of outdoor storage and/or interior warehouse area 
Health Club/Fitness Center 	1 per 100 square feet of gross floor area 
Laboratory 	1 per 250 square feet of gross floor area 
Laundromat 	1 per 3 machines 
Live/Work Arrangement 	See applicable residential parking standard 
Nightclub 	1 per 50 square feet of net floor area 
Nurseries 	1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of outside display and/or interior warehouse area, plus 1 per 300 sq. ft. of sales floor area 
Offices 	
 •  Business and Professional 	1 per 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
 •  Medical, Dental, Optical, Chiropractic 	1 per 225 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
Music, Dance, Martial Arts Studio or Similar Facility 	1 per employee plus 1 per 4 students 
Mini-Storage 	1 per 100 rental units plus 1 per caretaker 
Personal Services (Barber Shop, Beauty Shop, Massage) 	3 spaces per chair or table 
Printing and Blueprinting 	1 per 200 square feet of gross floor area 
Recycling Facility 	
 •  Large Collection 	6 spaces per facility minimum plus 1 per vehicle associated with the operation 
 •  Processing Facility 	10 spaces per facility minimum plus 1 per vehicle associated with the operation 
Research and Development 	1 per 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
Retail Sales Not Listed Under Another Use Classification 	1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area 
Shopping Center 	1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area 
Vehicle-Related Uses 	
 •  Rentals 	1 per 4,000 sq. ft. of outdoor area plus 1 per rental vehicle 
 •  Repair/Installation 	4 per service bay or 1 per 225 sq. ft., of gross floor area 
 •  Sales 	1 per 4,000 sq. ft. of outdoor display area 
 •  Washing—Fully Automated 	7 spaces outside washing area 
 •  Washing—Coin Operated 	3 spaces per bay 
Visitor Accommodations 	
 •  Bed and Breakfast Inns 	1 per guest room; plus 2 spaces 
 •  Hotels, Motels, and Timeshare Facilities 	1 per guest room; plus 1 per employee on the largest shift and one per 50 sq. ft. of banquet or conference seating area 
 
  
D.  Industrial Uses. 
Land Use 	Required Off-Street Parking 
Contractor's Storage Yard 	1 per 5,000 square feet of lot area 
Dry Cleaning Plant/Laundry 	1 per 400 square feet of gross floor area 
Household Services/Contractor (i.e., Plumbing, Heating) 	1 per 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
Lumber Yard 	1 per 5,000 square feet of lot area 
Manufacturing/Processing 	1 per 400 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
Outdoor Storage 	1 per 5,000 square feet of storage area 
Trucking Terminal 	1 per 5,000 square feet of lot area 
Vehicle Towing Service 	1 per tow truck plus 1 per 250 square feet of office area 
Warehousing, Distribution, Storage (Interior) 	1 per 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
 
  
E.  Properties within the Central Rohnert Park, Priority Development Area (see Figure 4.1 Priority Development Area Subareas and District in the document to identify appropriate subarea) 
Subarea 	Parking Ratios by Land Use 
	Multi-family Residential 	Retail or Service 	Office or Public 	Industrial 
Station Center 	Studio or 1 BR: 1 space/unit, 2BR: 1.5 space/unit, 3+ BR: 2 spaces/unit, Guest Space: 0.2 spaces/unit 	2.5 space/1,000 gsf 	3 spaces/1,000 gsf 	n/a 
City Center 				
Triangle Business 		3.3 spaces/1,000 gsf 	4 spaces/1,000 gsf 	2.5 spaces/1,000 gsf 
Central Commercial 				
Creekside Neighborhood 				
 
(Ord. 804 § 4, 2008; Ord. 695 § 3, 2003) 
(Ord. No. 844, § 2(Exh. A), 3-13-2012; Ord. No. 897 , (Exh. B), 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 920 , § 5, 3-13-2018)  
17.16.035 - Unspecified uses. 
Where a given use is not specified in the above table, the planning and community development director shall determine the equivalent use and the number of parking spaces required. In order to make this determination, the planning and community development director may require the submission of survey data from the applicant or direct a parking study to be conducted at the applicant's expense. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.16.040 - Parking exemptions. 
A.  A reduction of up to twenty-five percent of the spaces required for a combination of uses may be allowed where findings are made indicating that the uses share a common parking area and the demand for parking occurs over different time periods, thereby making the full requirement unnecessary. 
B.  Parking space reductions of up to ten percent may be permitted by the planning manager or designee, if a rideshare, transit incentive program, or other transportation system management program is provided. Further parking space reductions up to a maximum of twenty-five percent may be permitted if approved by the planning commission through issuance of a conditional use permit. 
C.  Garage Conversions. The planning manager may grant exemptions to the off-street covered parking requirements for a single-family residential property subject to the granting of an administrative permit, in accord with the provisions of Section 17.25 Article V if the following findings can be made: 
1.  The principal use of the lot is an existing single-family residence without an accessory dwelling unit; 
2.  The garage conversion shall require that the resulting eliminated off-street covered parking be replaced with one non-tandem parking space per lot, other than those existing in the driveway; 
3.  Such replacement space may be located in the required front yard or street side yard if the planning manager finds that in so doing there is neither an appreciable impairment of pedestrian safety nor any reduction in the attractiveness of the neighborhood. In no case shall the replacement space cause more than fifty percent of the lot's front yard to be devoted to parking; 
4.  Such replacement space shall not be rented; 
5.  Such replacement space shall be paved with an approved, all-weather surface; 
6.  The provision and maintenance of such replacement space shall be the continuing obligation of the property owner; 
7.  No more than one additional room, exclusive of closets and similar appurtenant spaces, shall be created by a garage conversion, and a garage that is subject to the garage conversion under this subsection shall not be converted into an accessory dwelling unit; 
8.  The garage door shall remain in place and look functional; and 
9.  The lot must be a minimum width of fifty feet and there must be room for at least one on-street parking space on the curb in front of the lot. 
D.  If an existing parking lot does not provide adequate parking spaces for the disabled and cannot otherwise be reconfigured to achieve the city's required inventory of parking spaces, the planning and community development director may approve a reduction in the number of parking spaces by up to a maximum of three parking spaces or a total of ten percent, whichever is less, in order to accommodate required disabled parking. 
(Ord. 767 § 2, 2006; Ord. 735 § 2, 2005; Ord. 695 § 3, 2003) 
( Ord. No. 906 , § 9, 4-11-2017; Ord. No. 920 , § 7, 3-13-2018)  
17.16.050 - Space dimensions. 
A.  Except as otherwise specified in subsections B, C, D, and E below, required dimensions for parking stalls within commercial, industrial and multi-family residential parking lots are indicated in the table on the next page and depicted in the parking diagram on the next page. 
Minimum Parking Dimensions for Standard-Sized Parking Spaces For Commercial, Industrial and Multi-Family Residential Parking Lots (in feet) 
Parking Angle 
(PA) 	Minimum Stall Dimensions 	Minimum Aisle Widths (A) 
	Width (W) 	Depth (D) 	Length (L) 	One-Way 	Two-Way 
Parallel 	9.0 	- 	22.0 	12.0 	24.0 
30 Degrees 	9.0 	17.5 	18.0 	12.0 	- 
45 Degrees 	9.0 	20.0 	12.7 	14.0 	- 
60 Degrees 	9.0 	21.0 	10.4 	15.0 	20.0 
90 Degrees 	9.0 	19.0 	9.0 	26.0 	26.0 
90 Degrees 	9.5 	19.0 	9.5 	25.0 	25.0 
90 Degrees 	10.0 	19.0 	10.0 	24.0 	24.0 
 
Parking Diagram 
  
B.  Required single-family residential parking. 
1.  The size of all stalls and required clearance shall also comply with the California Administrative Code, Title 24, Part 2. 
2.  Stalls not located within a garage shall be a minimum of eight feet in width and eighteen feet in length. Stalls must be paved with a solid surface such as concrete, asphalt, or pavers. 
3.  Stalls located within a garage shall be a minimum of ten feet in width and twenty feet in length, with a vertical clearance of seventy-six inches. 
C.  Compact spaces. In office and industrial developments up to twenty-five percent of the required parking may be made up of compact spaces. In commercial retail uses up to ten percent of the required parking may be made up of compact spaces. Compact spaces shall be a minimum of eight feet in width and sixteen feet in length ninety degree configuration and shall be clearly marked and located throughout the site so as to not be clustered in one area. For parking located in a garage, see subsection E below. 
D.  For shopping center uses, the majority of the required parking spaces shall be situated within easy access of the entrances of the buildings they are intended to serve. 
E.  Each parking space adjoining and parallel to a wall, column, or other obstruction greater than six inches in height shall be increased by three feet on the obstructed door side. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003; Ord. No. 920 , § 6, 3-13-2018)  
17.16.060 - Parking spaces for the handicapped. 
All parking facilities shall comply with the requirements of the California Administrative Code (Title 24, Part 2, Chapter 2-71) and with the sign requirements of the California Vehicle Code, Section 22507.8. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.16.070 - Shared parking. 
A shared parking arrangement may be allowed that allows parking on a nearby site to help meet the parking need of that user, provided the following requirements can be satisfied (see also Section 17.16.040): 
A.  The total number of parking spaces provided off-site would allow for a surplus that may be allocated to the on-site user; and 
B.  The off-site parking spaces are no farther than three hundred feet from the use(s) they are intended to serve; and 
C.  A written agreement between the landowner(s) and the city, in a form satisfactory to the city attorney, shall be approved by the planning and community development director. This agreement shall be in the form capable of and subject to being recorded to constitute a covenant running with the land and shall include: 
1.  A guarantee among the landowner(s) for continued access to and use of the shared parking facilities; and 
2.  A provision stating that the city, acting through the planning and community development director, may for due cause and upon notice and hearing, unilaterally modify, amend, or terminate the agreement at any time. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.16.080 - Design standards for residential garages and carports. 
A.  The exterior design of a garage must be architecturally compatible with the main building. 
B.  Carports shall be designed and located so that they are not readily visible from a street and shall be architecturally compatible with the main building. See Section 17.10.060 for development standards. 
C.  Tandem parking arrangements for required parking spaces may be allowed in the Mixed Use Residential (M-U) District as approved by the planning and community development director with a finding that the tandem spaces result in a more efficient site plan or are necessary to accommodate affordable housing. 
D.  All parking areas shall be of a durable surface approved by the city engineer. 
E.  Residential front yard paving shall not exceed fifty percent of the total front yard area. 
F.  Vehicles shall not be parked on any sidewalk, parkway, driveway, or planting area. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.16.090 - Design standards for parking lots and structures. 
A.  A parking area may not be used for the vehicle sales, renting, leasing, storage, repair work, dismantling, or outdoor open sales displays. Exceptions may be granted for special outdoor events as provided for in Chapter 17.06 of this title. 
B.  Surface water shall be discharged to natural or engineered off-site drainage facilities and may not drain off or across public or private sidewalks, pedestrian walkways, or areas not designed as drainage facilities. 
C.  Markings. 
1.  Each parking space shall be marked with solid six-inch wide stripes painted white. 
2.  One-way and two-way access points into parking facilities shall be identified by directional arrows. 
3.  Compact spaces shall be clearly identified by the word "compact" painted on the paved surface of the space in white block letters. 
4.  Where the exit may not be clearly recognizable, directional signage must be provided. 
5.  All parking area surface markings shall be maintained in a manner so as to be readily visible at all times. Such markings shall be arranged to provide for orderly and safe loading, unloading, parking and storage of vehicles. 
D.  Walkways shall be provided within parking lots to connect parking areas with the uses they are intended to serve, as well as with the public right-of-way. Walkways shall also connect with adjacent uses where appropriate. These walkways shall be designated by colored pavement, striping, or other method as approved by the planning and community development director. 
E.  All weather surfacing is required for all off-street vehicle parking, loading, storage, sales, rental or service areas that are open to the public. Other areas (e.g., rear yard storage areas for an operation's vehicles) may have alternate all-weather surfacing as permitted by the city engineer. 
F.  Vehicles shall not be allowed to park on any sidewalk, parkway, driveway, or planting area. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.16.100 - Parking lot landscaping. 
A.  Parking lots for non-residential uses shall have perimeter planting areas with a minimum ten feet width adjacent to a residential district and five feet adjacent to other districts. 
B.  A parking lot in any district having parking adjoining a street shall have a frontage planting area reflecting the required yard setbacks from the street. Parking areas shall be screened from adjacent streets with berming and/or landscaping to achieve an average height of three feet above the adjacent grade of the parking area. 
C.  The end of each row of parking stalls shall be separated from driveways by a landscaped planter with a preferred width of five feet. 
D.  Parking lot trees shall be provided at a minimum ratio of one tree for every four parking spaces. No more than six consecutive parking spaces should be allowed in any row of parking without a tree well or tree well finger from a landscape strip. 
E.  Where standard spaces are adjacent and perpendicular to landscaping or a walkway, the planting area or walkway may be increased by two feet in depth and the length of the adjacent parking stall decreased by two feet to allow for a two-foot overhang. Where autos will overhang into both sides of an interior landscaped strip or well, the minimum curb-to-curb interior planter dimension shall be six feet. Compact spaces are not eligible for this provision. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.16.110 - Parking access from street. 
A.  All spaces in a parking facility shall be accessible without re-entering a public right-of-way; however an alley may be used as maneuvering space for access to off-street parking. 
B.  Where an area used for off-street parking does not abut a public street, there shall be provided a paved access drive not less than twenty feet in width for two-way traffic, connecting the off-street parking area with a public street. 
C.  Parking lot entrance and exit locations and widths are subject to the approval of the city engineer. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.16.120 - Lighting. 
Outdoor parking area lighting shall comply with the provisions of Section 17.12.050 of this title. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.16.130 - Shopping cart storage. 
Commercial uses that utilize shopping carts shall designate areas for on-site shopping cart storage. Storage areas in the parking lot shall not decrease the required number of vehicle parking spaces, remove required landscaping, or impede the flow of pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic. Shopping cart storage areas adjacent to buildings shall be screened by a wall, with the design to be approved by the planning and community development director or by the planning commission or city council at the time of project review. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.16.140 - Bicycle parking. 
A.  Bicycle parking spaces shall be provided in all districts as required by this section. Bicycle parking facilities shall be provided for any new building, addition or enlargement of an existing building, or for any change in the occupancy of any existing building that results in the need for additional auto parking facilities consistent with the parking standards required by Chapter 17.16. 
B.  Bike spaces required. Bicycle parking facilities shall be provided in accordance with the following schedule, with fractional requirements for bike parking over one-half to be rounded up: 
1.  Office uses: One bicycle parking space for every ten off-street vehicle parking spaces required, but no less than two spaces shall be provided. 
2.  Commercial, retail, wholesale, and industrial uses: One bicycle parking space for every fifteen off-street vehicle parking spaces required, but no less than two spaces shall be provided. 
3.  Restaurant: One bicycle parking space for every twenty-five off-street vehicle parking spaces required, but no less than two spaces shall be provided. 
4.  Fast food restaurant: Five bicycle parking spaces per establishment. 
5.  Multi-family residential: One bicycle parking space for every four dwelling units. 
C.  Location and design of facilities. 
1.  Each bicycle parking space shall be no less than six feet long by two feet wide and shall have a bicycle rack or other device constructed so as to enable the user to secure by locking the frame and one wheel of each bicycle parked therein. 
2.  Bicycle racks shall not be placed close enough to a wall or other obstruction so as to make use difficult. There must be a sufficient space (at least twenty-four inches) beside each parked bike that allows access; adjacent bicycles may share this access. 
3.  An aisle or other space shall be provided for bicycles to enter and leave the facility. This aisle shall have a width of at least six feet to the front or rear of a bike parked in the facility. 
4.  Racks must be easily useable with both U-locks and cable locks. Racks should support the bikes in a stable upright position so that a bike, if bumped, will not fall or roll down. Racks that support a bike primarily by a wheel such as standard wire racks are damaging to wheels and thus are not acceptable. 
5.  Bicycle parking facilities shall be securely anchored to the lot surface so they cannot be easily removed and shall be of sufficient strength to resist vandalism and theft. 
6.  Bicycle parking spaces shall be located near the entrances to major tenants but shall be out of the traffic lanes and shall not impede walkways. 
7.  Bicycle parking facilities shall be incorporated whenever possible into the building design and street furniture so as to be harmonious with their environment in both design and color. 
8.  Bicycle parking shall be located in highly visible, well lighted areas to minimize theft and vandalism. 
9.  Bicycle parking facilities within auto parking areas shall be separated by a physical barrier (e.g., curbs, wheel stops, poles or similar features) to protect bicycles from damage by cars. 
D.  Variations to requirements. Where the provisions of bicycle parking is physically not feasible the requirements may be waived or reduced to a feasible level by the planning and community development director. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
Chapter 17.17 - OFF-STREET LOADING STANDARDS 
 
17.17.010 - Purpose. 
The off-street loading regulations contained in this chapter are intended to achieve the following objectives: 
A.  To ensure that off-street loading facilities are provided for new land uses and for enlargements of existing uses in proportion to each use's need for such facilities; 
B.  To establish standards for uses that are consistent with the loading needs of each use and with the feasibility of providing required loading areas on specific sites; and 
C.  To ensure that off-street parking facilities are designed in a manner that will ensure their efficiency and alleviate the potential circulation problems that result from inadequate loading facilities. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.17.020 - Basic standards. 
A.  At the time of initial occupancy of a site, construction of a structure, or alteration or enlargement of a site or structure, off-street loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this chapter. 
B.  The number of additional loading spaces required for an alteration or enlargement of an existing use or structure, or for a change of occupancy, shall be provided before the alteration, enlargement, or change of occupancy receives final approval for occupancy. 
C.  Off-street loading facilities required by this chapter for any use shall not be considered as providing loading spaces for any other use. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.17.030 - Specific standards. 
Loading spaces shall be provided for land uses and activities in accord with the following tables. If, in the application of the requirements of this table to a given land use or activity a fractional number is obtained, one loading space shall be required for a fraction of more than one-half, and no space or berth shall be required for a fraction of one-half or less. 
Land Use 	Area (sq. ft.) 	Required Off-Street Loading 
Hotel, Motel, Office 	50,000 or less 	0 berth 
	For each additional 50,000 sq. ft. 	1 berth 
Retail, Commercial Service 	7,500 or less 	0 berth 
	7,501 to 40,000 	1 berth 
	40,001 to 100,000 	2 berths 
	100,001 to 160,000 	3 berths 
	160,001 to 240,000 	4 berths 
	240,001 to 320,000 	5 berths 
	For each additional 90,000 sq. ft. 	1 berth 
Industrial 	7,500 or less 	0 berths 
	7,501 to 40,000 	1 berths 
	40,001 to 100,000 	2 berths 
	100,001 to 160,000 	3 berths 
	160,001 to 240,000 	4 berths 
	240,001 to 320,000 	5 berths 
	For each additional 90,000 sq. ft. 	1 berth 
 
For multi-family developments, sufficient room shall be made available for the unloading and loading of moving trucks, and this shall be shown on the site plan for project. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.17.040 - Loading space dimensions. 
Loading spaces shall be at least twelve feet wide, forty-five feet long, and fourteen feet high, exclusive of drives or aisles. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.17.050 - Loading space access. 
Loading areas shall be designed so that a vehicle can enter and exit the site in a forward motion. Sufficient room for turning and maneuvering vehicles shall be provided on the site. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
Chapter 17.19 - GROWTH MANAGEMENT PROGRAM 
 
17.19.010 - Intent. 
It is the intent of this chapter to: 
A.  Encourage a cohesive pattern of urbanization that balances competing interests, including the need for additional housing and related development, and the expressed community desire to preserve open space, maintain community character, and ensure that adequate public facilities and resources, such as water and wastewater, are available to serve new and existing development; 
B.  Ensure all new development provides the necessary infrastructure and public facilities required to support the development; 
C.  Provide the framework to phase and pace growth so as to minimize its environmental, social, and fiscal impacts, and ensure concurrency between growth, infrastructure and services; 
D.  Provide for the accommodation of the city's fair-share housing allocations to meet the needs of all segments of the community; 
E.  Establish a growth management program for the city of Rohnert Park that is consistent with the general plan, including the urban growth boundary measure approved by the voters in November, 2000. 
(Ord. 755 § 2, 2006; Ord. 711 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.19.015 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to assure that the rate of population growth will not exceed the average annual growth rates established in the general plan, and as outlined below, so new residential development and mixed-use developments with a residential component occur concurrently with necessary infrastructure and public service improvements. By monitoring and managing the city's residential development, this chapter furthers the following general plan goals: 
A.  Maintain a compact urban form, with defined urban growth boundary and urban development intensities in land designated for urban uses. 
B.  Promote a balanced land use program and increase the ability of people to live and work in the city. 
C.  Require preparation of specific plans for strategic new growth areas with complex land use programs. 
D.  Maintain land use patterns that maximize residents' accessibility to parks, open space, and neighborhood shopping centers. 
E.  Maintain a balance of land uses and a variety of housing types over time. 
F.  Continue to maintain efficient land use patterns and ensure that infill development maintains the scale and character of established neighborhoods. 
G.  Undertake efforts to facilitate provision of housing affordable to low- and very-low income households by exempting such housing from any numerical growth limitations included in this chapter. 
H.  Ensure that growth is paced to achieve general plan buildout over a twenty-year period, representing an annual average growth rate of one percent. 
I.  Promote contiguous urban development and maintain a compact form over successive stages of the city's development. 
J.  Ensure all new development provides the necessary public facilities to support the development. 
K.  Minimize the impacts, physical, visual and fiscal, of growth and annexation on existing homes and businesses. 
L.  Maintain high levels of mobility along all major street segments and at major intersections. 
M.  Build new roads and improve existing roadways, where necessary, in conjunction with new development. 
N.  Develop additional parkland in the city to meet the standards of required park acreage for new residents pursuant to an ordinance providing for dedication of park land and payment of in lieu fees. 
O.  Ensure that adequate wastewater facilities and services are available to meet the needs of existing and new development. 
P.  Provide sufficient quantities of water for Rohnert Park residents and businesses, while ensuring that safe groundwater yield is not exceeded. 
(Ord. 711 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.19.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words, phrases, and terms shall have the meanings set forth herein. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
A.  "Final discretionary approval" means the last action by the city that calls for the exercise of judgment in deciding whether to approve and/or how to carry out (e.g., project phasing) a residential project or a mixed-use project with a residential component. Examples include, but are not limited to approvals of conditional use permits, tentative maps, development agreements, annexations, rezonings, and architectural/site design reviews. 
Multiple Discretionary Approvals. For purposes of determining the date of final discretionary approval for a project with multiple discretionary approvals, the action establishing a certain number of residential units shall be considered the date of final discretionary approval. For subdivision developments, this action would be tentative map approval by the planning commission. For non-subdivision development, this action will usually be architectural/site design review. 
Project Appeals. If a project approval is appealed and the approval is upheld, the original approval date (e.g., date of planning commission approval) is the final discretionary approval. If a project is denied, but approved on appeal, the approval date is the final discretionary approval (e.g., date of city council action). 
B.  "Final map" means the same as used in Chapter 16.14 of this code. 
C.  "Model home" means a residential unit used as an interim office/showroom/sales center for a residential development and not as a dwelling. The number of model homes allowed for any phase of a residential development shall not exceed six units. 
D.  "Residential building permit implementation" means construction of the dwelling unit that a building permit pertains to and is deemed to take place one year after the permit is issued. 
E.  "Trigger cap" means the threshold at which a cap on residential development will be established. Its purpose is to maintain an average population growth rate of one percent per year. 
F.  "Urban development" means development requiring one or more basic municipal services including, but not limited to, water service, sewer, improved storm drainage systems, fire hydrants, and other physical public facilities and services; provided, however, that open space uses, parks, agricultural uses, community fields, and golf courses beyond the urban growth boundary that are provided for municipal or public services, shall not be defined as "urban development." 
G.  "Urban growth boundary (UGB)" means the line within which all urban development is to be contained within a specified time period (e.g., twenty years). It represents the ultimate edge of urban uses for the city of Rohnert Park. 
(Ord. 711 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.19.030 - Annual policy review. 
Not later than May 31 of each year, the city council shall conduct an annual review of the growth management program. 
A.  The purpose of the review shall be to: 
1.  Determine the consistency of the growth management program with the goal of one percent average annual population growth rate, a balanced land use program, accommodation of the city's fair-share housing allocations, development patterns and growth area priorities, infrastructure availability, and land use programs as well as with the goals, plans, and policies of the general plan and state housing, planning, and zoning law; 
2.  Review the phasing and pace of residential development (see Section 17.19.040 of this chapter). If, as a result of this review the trigger cap is implemented, as provided in subsection 17.19.050(B) of this chapter, the city council may adopt a resolution establishing priority residential development areas (as described in Section 17.19.060 of this chapter) and allocating residential units in accordance with the standards established in Section 17.19.060 of this chapter. 
3.  Ensure that the development in each specific plan area is coordinated with the growth management program. 
B.  The review shall include a report from the planning and community development director to the city council listing: 
1.  The number of units included in final discretionary approvals granted for each of the five previous calendar years by lands within the July 2000 city limits and by specific plan area as identified in the general plan; 
2.  The number of units included in final map filings for each of the five previous calendar years by lands within the July 2000 city limits and by specific plan area as identified in the general plan; 
3.  The number of building permits approved for each of the five previous calendar years by lands within the July 2000 city limits and by specific plan area as identified in the general plan; 
4.  Projected housing units by year per approved and pending development agreements; 
5.  Applications pending for new residential units or mixed-use development with a residential component, with a time schedule for final discretionary approvals, final map filings, and residential building permit issuance; 
6.  The following types of projects shall be listed separately and shall not be included in the housing counts in the calculation of the trigger cap: 
(a)  Single-family dwellings on legal lots of record within the July 2000 city limits that are not within an approved subdivision; 
(b)  Housing that is affordable to low- and very-low income households, and housing that is affordable to moderate-income households under the city's inclusionary housing requirements; 
(c)  Second dwelling units; 
(d)  Conversions of mobile homes or apartments to condominium ownership where no new units are created or spaces are proposed; 
(e)  Rehabilitation, remodel or replacement of existing housing; and 
(f)  Model homes, until certificate of occupancy is issued. 
(g)  Residential infill projects or portions thereof that can establish to the satisfaction of the city engineer that: 
(1)  Adequate public resources, such as water and wastewater, are available, 
(2)  No amendment to any then existing water supply assessment or general plan adopted by the city is required, and 
(3)  Which consist of any one of the following: 
(i)  Listed in the quantified objectives of the city's housing element; 
(ii)  Adaptive reuse projects (i.e. the redevelopment of an existing property from a non-residential use to a residential use); 
(iii)  Transit oriented development; 
(iv)  Live/Work projects; 
(v)  Residential projects developed on commercial properties that have mixed-use components or are under five acres in size or one hundred units or less; 
(vi)  Smaller residential projects (e.g., under five acres in size or one hundred units); or 
(vii)  Special Needs units (e.g., single-family units designed for disabled residents). 
(Ord. 755 § 3, 2006; Ord. 711 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.19.040 - Phasing and pace of development—Facts and assumptions. 
The phasing and pace of development shall be managed, as outlined below, to maintain an average approximate population growth of one percent. The implementation of the trigger cap is based upon the following facts and assumptions: 
A.  1.  Residential building permit implementation for new residential units shall be used to make the calculations required by Section 17.19.050 of this chapter to determine if a cap has been triggered and for setting the cap, if triggered. For purposes of this chapter, "Residential building permit implementation" shall occur one year after the issuance of the building permit for a given residential dwelling unit. 
2.  An applicant for a final discretionary approval shall submit a phasing plan that identifies the years in which residential building permits are expected to be implemented for the development. 
3.  For final discretionary approvals occurring in years that no residential development cap is in place, a condition shall be imposed on the final discretionary approval that the first residential building permit shall be obtained within three years of the date of the final discretionary approval, and that any subsequent residential building permits shall be applied for in accordance with the phasing plan approved pursuant to subsection (A)(2) of this section. If a residential building permit application is not filed in accordance with the time periods set forth in this section, the issuance of residential building permits for the development shall be subject to subsection 17.19.060(A) of this chapter, if a residential development cap is in place. 
4.  For final discretionary approvals occurring in years that a residential development cap is in place, a condition shall be imposed on the final discretionary approval that a residential building permit shall not be approved unless adequate allotments exist under the residential development cap to allow the filing of the residential building permit application subject to Section 17.19.060 of this chapter. 
B.  Dwelling units that are to be phased per an approved development agreement shall be considered in calculations required by Section 17.19.050 of this chapter in accordance with the phasing terms of the development agreement. Development agreements are encouraged. 
C.  The goal of an average annual growth rate of one percent is based on the State Department of Finance's estimated 1999 population of forty one thousand and the buildout estimate of fifty thousand four hundred (Note: The persons per household is calculated as follows: 50,400 pop.—41,000 pop. = 9,400 pop./20 years = 470 pop. per year/225 units per year equals 2.08 persons per household.). 
D.  Since the buildout estimates do not include on-campus Sonoma State University (SSU) units and the city does not have control over development by the state, existing and new SSU units shall not be used in the calculations required by Section 17.19.050 of this chapter should SSU be annexed to the city. 
E.  Estimated 1999 population includes population within the Canon Manor area. Therefore, residential units in Canon Manor existing on the effective date of this chapter shall not be included in the calculations required by Section 17.19.050 of this chapter should Canon Manor be annexed to the city. Further, where future development is anticipated to replace residential units existing within the proposed specific plan areas on the date of annexation, those units shall not be included in the calculations required by Section 17.19.050 of this chapter should the areas be annexed to the city. 
F.  Other housing units exempt from the trigger cap calculation: 
1.  Low and very-low income housing, and housing that is affordable to moderate-income households under the city's inclusionary housing requirements; 
2.  Replacement housing on single-family lots and new housing on lots in subdivisions within the existing city limits at the time of adoption of this chapter for which the final map was recorded prior to adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter; 
3.  Second dwelling units; 
4.  Model homes, as defined by subsection 17.19.020(C) of this chapter, until such time as a certificate of occupancy is issued. 
5.  Residential infill projects or portions thereof that are: 
(a)  Listed in the quantified objectives of the city's housing element; 
(b)  Adaptive reuse projects (i.e. the redevelopment of an existing property from a non-residential use to a residential use); 
(c)  Transit oriented development; 
(d)  Live/Work projects; 
(e)  Residential projects developed on commercial properties that have mixed-use components or are under five acres in size or one hundred units or less; 
(f)  Smaller residential projects (e.g., under five acres in size or one hundred units); or 
(g)  Special Needs units (e.g., single-family units designed for disabled residents). 
G.  Congregate care/assisted-living facilities shall be considered an institutional use and the beds shall not be included in the calculations required by Section 17.19.050 of this chapter. Independent living units for seniors (i.e., those that contain individual kitchens) shall be included in the Section 17.19.050 calculations; however, every two and one-half units shall be counted as one unit. 
H.  The average household size and estimated population and unit growth shall be reviewed based on Census 2000 and following any future U.S. Census or special census. Changes may be made as necessary to accommodate the data provided in Census 2000 and any future census. 
I.  The calendar year 2001 is the beginning of the growth management program. 
J.  To account for no growth outside of the city's 2000 city limits for the first several years after the effective date of this chapter, growth within the first four years shall be limited to nine hundred housing units, an average of two hundred twenty-five units per year. The review of the development pace for the preceding three-year period begins in the fifth year by looking at years two, three, and four. 
(Ord. 755 § 4, 2006; Ord. 711 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.19.050 - Formula for applying trigger cap. 
A.  Beginning in the calendar year 2005, if the annual report demonstrates both that the combined number of residential building permits implemented in any two successive (i.e., prior) calendar years exceeds five hundred sixty housing units (five hundred sixty represents one hundred twenty-five percent of the two-year average growth of four hundred fifty housing units), and the development pace for the preceding three-year period has exceeded an average of two hundred twenty-five units per year, then a cap on residential development (i.e., residential units) in the following calendar year shall be established. The residential development cap, if triggered, shall be based on the following formula: (Number of years beginning in Year 2001 x 225 units) less the number of units included in residential building permits implemented equals the residential development cap. The following examples are based on potential market driven development scenarios. 
Scenarios 	I 	II 	III 	IV 
_____
Year 1 (2001)* 	16 	16 	16 	16 
Year 2 ** 	180 	220 	180 	180 
Year 3 	400 	250 	50 	0 
Year 4 	250 	390 	200 	704 
_____
	846 	876 	446 	900 
_____
				
Year 5 (criteria met) 	1&2 	1&2 		1&2 
*** 	cap trig. 	cap trig. 	no cap 	cap trig. 
**** 	279 	249 		225 
5 years x 225 = 1,125 				
				
_____
Year 6 (criteria met) 	2 only 	1&2 		1&2 
	no cap 	cap in-place 		cap in-place 
***** 		225 		225 
6 years x 225 = 1,350 				
Year 7 		no cap 		no cap 
_____
 
* 	A 16 unit apartment complex has already been approved this year. 
** 	City hopes to approve housing in the City Center and possibly along Commerce Blvd. in Year one or two. 
*** 	Trigger Criteria (both criteria must be met to trigger cap): 
1=development approvals exceed 560 in any two successive (i.e., prior) years. 
2=development pace over the preceding 3-year period has exceeded an average of 225 units per year (675). 
**** 	When the cap is triggered, the cap is set by calculating the number of years (past years + trigger year) times 225 units per year and subtracting the number of units that have been approved to date (e.g., Scenario 1, Year 5 = 5 X 225 =1,125; 1,125—846 = 279). 
 
B.  During the annual review, the trigger cap may be adjusted up or down a maximum of ten percent by the city council (i.e., between two hundred two and two hundred forty seven) to accommodate changes in land use program assumptions (for example, vacancy rate factors and household size). 
(Ord. 711 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.19.060 - Establishing priority development areas and application of residential development cap. 
A.  Establishing Priority Development Areas. The city council may, by resolution, establish priority development areas, after calculating the trigger cap and determining the need for a residential development cap based on policies in the land use and growth management element of the general plan. 
B.  Residential Development Cap. If established, the residential development cap shall be allocated at the time of residential building permit application except as provided for in subsection 17.19.040(A)(3). Examination of an application for allotment under the residential development cap shall consider the following factors, with the first four factors to be given the highest priority: 
1.  Project Design. The extent to which the project is adapted to its natural setting, promotes mixed use and pedestrian-oriented development and otherwise fosters smart growth principles, contributes to a cityscape that provides visual interest, and results in a development with a distinctive character. Emphasizes linkages and accessibility to existing and proposed public and private open space, bicycle/pedestrian paths, commercial centers, and transit opportunities. 
2.  Maintenance of City Services and Facilities (including, but not limited to, wastewater, stormwater drainage, water supply, parks, and roadways). The extent to which the project provides for a funding mechanism to ensure continued provision of city services without creating a burden on existing residents, including the provision and funding of required public safety facilities and the ongoing provision of public safety services. 
3.  Sustainability/Green Building. The extent to which the development incorporates green building techniques and standards, maximizes energy efficiency, minimizes greenhouse gas emissions, and provides for the use of reclaimed water and the reduction of water consumption and discharge. 
4.  Affordable Housing. The extent to which the development accommodates the city's regional fair share housing allocations as described in the housing element of the general plan, particularly for very low- and low-income households and for preferred types of affordable housing (e.g., are "for sale" units needed more than "rental" units during a given time period, or are second units desired to meet a portion of the existing affordable housing need?) 
5.  Art and Cultural Components. The extent to which the development contributes and funds aesthetic benefits for the community, both on- and off-site. 
6.  Traffic Improvements. The extent to which the developer provides priority local and regional roadway improvements. 
7.  Development Agreement. The extent to which the project has an approved development agreement with the city. 
In the event that more than one application for final discretionary approval is submitted that has equal merit based on the above criteria, the residential cap shall be allocated on a calendar year basis on a first-come, first-served basis. 
In the case of a residential development cap of seventy-five or more, the city shall not approve final discretionary permits for more than one-third of the cap to any single applicant or single residential development unless the city council finds that such approval is consistent with the resolution adopted pursuant to subsection (A) of this section. For purposes of this section, a single residential development means one or more contiguous units on contiguous lands owned by any person, persons, legal entity or entities or any combination thereof which have a common ownership interest of more than fifty percent in each such entity. 
(Ord. 755 § 5, 2006; Ord. 711 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.19.070 - City standards. 
The city council shall adopt general performance standards for streets, water, wastewater, storm water, solid waste, parks, and public safety. Specific performance standards for citywide facilities shall be adopted as part of the capital improvement program (CIP). 
(Ord. 711 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
Chapter 17.21 - DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT PROCEDURE 
 
17.21.010 - Authority and purpose. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority contained in Section 65864 et. seq. of the California Government Code. The purposes of these provisions are to prescribe the procedure for consideration of development agreements, encourage private participation in comprehensive planning, and reduce the economic costs of development. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.21.020 - Application. 
Application for a development agreement shall be made by a person, or the authorized agent of a person, having a legal or equitable interest in the affected property. Application shall be made on a form prescribed by the planning and community development director and shall be filed with such department. The application shall be accompanied by a fee prescribed by the city council, and a project description, which shall include the following: 
A.  A legal description of the affected property, a listing of property owners, and the proposed parties to the agreement; 
B.  A description of the development project, indicating the permitted uses of the property, floor-area ratio or density, building height and size, phasing of development, provisions for the reservation and dedication of land for public purposes and such additional information as may be required to allow the applicable criterion and factors to be applied to the proposal. Such information may include, but is not limited to, site and building plans, elevations, relationships to adjacent properties, and operational data. Where appropriate, the description may distinguish between elements of the project that are proposed to be fixed under the agreement and those that may vary; 
C.  An identification of any planned unit development permit or other special zoning approval that has already been obtained for the development project; 
D.  The special conditions, if any, to be imposed; 
E.  The timing of the development project; 
F.  Public facilities financing plan; 
G.  A statement of the relationship to the specific plan and to the general plan; and 
H.  Other items specific to the project proposal, as determined by the city attorney or planning and community development director. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.21.030 - Procedure. 
A.  An application for a development agreement shall be considered by the planning commission, which shall hold a public hearing on the application. Notice of the hearing shall be given as provided in Sections 65090 and 65091 of the California Government Code in addition to any other notice required by law for other actions to be considered concurrently with the development agreement. The planning commission shall determine whether the proposal is consistent with the city's general plan and any applicable specific plan, and may recommend approval or disapproval of the application, or recommend its approval subject to changes in the development agreement or conditions of approval, giving consideration to the factors set forth in Section 17.21.040. 
B.  After a recommendation has been rendered by the planning commission, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the application. Notice of the hearing and the intention to consider adoption of a development agreement shall be given as provided in Sections 65090 and 65091 of the California Government Code in addition to any other notice required by law for other actions to be considered concurrently with the development agreement. The council shall review the recommendation of the commission and determine whether the proposal is consistent with the city's general plan and any applicable specific plan, and may approve or disapprove the proposed development agreement, or approve it subject to changes therein or conditions of approval, giving consideration to the factors set forth in Section 17.21.040. If the council approves the development agreement or approves it subject to changes or conditions, it shall do so by ordinance. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.21.040 - Factors for consideration. 
In reviewing an application for a development agreement, the planning commission and city council shall give consideration to other pending applications and approved projects; the traffic, parking, public service, visual, and other impacts of the proposed development project upon abutting properties and the surrounding area; ability of the applicant to fulfill public facilities financing plan obligations; the relationship of the project to the city's growth management program; the provisions included, if any, for reservation, dedication, or improvement of land for public purposes or accessible to the public; the type and magnitude of the project's economic effects to the city of Rohnert Park, and of its contribution if any toward meeting the city's housing needs; and to any other comparable, relevant factor. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.21.050 - Periodic reviews. 
A.  Periodic review. Each development agreement shall be reviewed at least once every twelve months, and the review period shall be specified in the agreement. Application for periodic review shall be made on a form prescribed by the planning and community development director and shall be filed with such department. A fee prescribed by the city council shall accompany the application. Failure to file for such review within thirty days of a written notice sent by the planning and community development director of the requirement to file within the time limits specified in the agreement shall render the agreement null and void. The applicant or successor in interest shall be required to demonstrate good faith compliance with the terms of the agreement. If the planning and community development director finds that such compliance has been deficient, he or she shall forward this finding and his or her recommendation to the city council for consideration in accordance with subsection B of this section. 
B.  Termination. At any time the city council may, at a public hearing, consider whether there are grounds for termination of any development agreement. Notice of the hearing shall be given by posting notices thereof within three hundred feet of the property involved. Notice of the hearing shall also be given by mail or delivery to the holder of the development agreement, to all parties who have commented on the initial application, and to other interested parties as deemed appropriate. All such notices shall be given not less than ten days prior to the date set for the hearing. At the hearing, the applicant or successor in interest shall be required to demonstrate good faith compliance with the terms of the agreement. If as a result of such review, the council finds and determines, on the basis of substantial evidence, that the applicant or successor thereto has not complied in good faith with the terms or conditions of the agreement, the council may terminate or modify the agreement in whole or in part. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.21.060 - Adherence to development agreement, and amendment or cancellation by mutual consent. 
A development agreement shall not be transferred or assigned to a new person without the written consent of the city. A successor in interest shall provide proof of ability to fulfill the applicant's obligations pursuant to the development agreement. In any case, the burdens of such agreement shall also bind, and its benefits shall also inure to, all successors in interest. A development agreement may be amended, or canceled in whole or in part, by the mutual consent of the parties to the agreement or their successors in interest. Such amendments and cancellations shall be processed in the same manner as an original application and shall be subject to the same procedural requirements. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.21.070 - Recording. 
No later than ten calendar days after the city enters into a development agreement, the city clerk shall record with the county recorder a copy of the agreement, which shall describe the land subject thereto. If the agreement is amended, canceled, or revoked pursuant to Sections 17.21.070 and 17.21.080, the city clerk shall record notice of such action with the recorder. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
Chapter 17.23 - MOBILE HOME PARK CONVERSIONS 
 
17.23.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that any proposed conversion of an existing mobile home park to any other use is preceded by adequate notice, that the social and fiscal impacts of the proposed conversion are adequately defined prior to consideration of a proposed conversion and that relocation and other assistance is provided park residents, consistent with the provisions of this chapter and Sections 65863.7 and 66427.4 of the California Government Code. Conversions of mobile home parks may conflict with the policies of the city of Rohnert Park to provide a variety of tenure, type, price, and location of housing and to maintain the supply of mobile home housing for low- and moderate-income persons and families. This chapter is enacted to ensure that approval of proposed conversions and cessation of use is consistent with policies and objectives of the city of Rohnert Park, particularly the following: 
A.  To make adequate provision for the housing needs of all economic segments of the community; 
B.  To provide a reasonable balance between mobile homes and other types of housing; 
C.  To inform prospective participants in a conversion project regarding the physical conditions of the structures and land offered for purchase; 
D.  To reduce and avoid the displacement of long-term residents, particularly senior citizens, the handicapped, low-income households, and families with school-age children who may be required to move from the community due to a shortage of replacement mobile home housing or other affordable housing alternatives. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.23.015 - Interpretation. 
A.  A variety of State of California laws address subjects relating to mobile homes, mobile home parks, the valuation of mobile homes, and the purchase of mobile home parks by non-profit resident organizations. In adopting this chapter, the city council recognizes that these laws—for example, the Mobile Home Parks Act (Part 2.1 of Division 13 of the Health and Safety Code); the Subdivision Map Act (Part of Division 2 of the Government Code); the Subdivided Lands Act (Part 2 of Division 4 of the Business and Professions Code)—preempt local legislation on the subject matter areas addressed by these state laws. Nothing in this chapter shall, in any way, be construed, interpreted or implemented in a way that conflicts with state law. 
B.  The Constitutions of the State of California and the United States provide the owner of private property with certain procedural and substantive rights of due process. It is the intention of the city council in adopting this chapter to respect, to the fullest extent of the law, those procedural and substantive rights of due process. Nothing in this chapter shall, in any, be construed, interpreted or implemented in a way that deprives a private property owner of procedural and substantive due process under the Constitutions of the State of California and the United States. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.23.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined in this part and shall be construed as herein set forth unless it shall be apparent from their context that a different meaning is intended. 
"Comparable housing" means housing that is comparable in floor area and number of bedrooms to the mobile home to which comparison is being made, which housing meets the minimum standards of the State Uniform Housing Code. 
"Comparable mobile home park" means any other mobile home park substantially equivalent in terms of park conditions, amenities and other relevant factors. 
"Conversion project" means changing the use of a mobile home park for a purpose other than the rental, or the holding out for rent, of two or more mobile home sites to accommodate mobile homes used for human habitation. A conversion shall include, but not be limited to, a change of any existing mobile home park or any portion thereof to condominium, stock cooperative, planned unit development, or any form of ownership wherein spaces within the mobile home park are to be sold, or the cessation of use of all or a portion of the park as a mobile home park, whether immediately or on a gradual basis, or the closure of a park. "Conversion" shall not include the purchase of the park by its existing residents. 
"Property owner" means the owner or subdivider with a controlling proprietary interest in the proposed mobile home park conversion project. 
"Designated resident organization" means any association of mobile home owners and/or mobile home residents within a mobile home park which has, not later than fifteen days after issuance of a notice of intent to convert, provided the owner or manager of the mobile home park written notice of the following: 
1.  The name and address of the organization. 
2.  The name and address of the representative of the organization to whom all notices under this chapter shall be given. 
3.  A statement that the organization is interested in purchasing the mobile home park. 
"Disabled mobile home owner" means a mobile home owner who is the primary wage earner of a household, or a single person, with any medically determinable physical or mental impairment limiting his or her mobility, substantially affecting his or her ability to obtain employment, or requiring special care facilities in the mobile home. "Physical or mental impairment" is an impairment that results from anatomical, physiological or psychological abnormalities which are demonstrable by medically acceptable clinical or laboratory diagnostic techniques. 
"Mobile home" means a structure designed for human habitation or for being moved on a street or highway with a permit pursuant to Section 35790 of the Vehicle Code. Mobile home includes a manufactured home, as defined in Section 18007 of the Health and Safety Code, and a mobile home as defined in Section 18008 of the Health and Safety Code, but does not include a recreational vehicle, as defined in Civil Code Section 799.24, or a commercial coach, as defined herein and in Section 18001.8 of the Health and Safety Code. 
"Mobile home lot" means a portion of a mobile home park designated or used for the occupancy of one mobile home. 
"Mobile home owner" means a person who has the right to the use of a mobile home lot within a mobile home park on which to locate, maintain, and occupy a mobile home, lot improvements and accessory structures for human habitation, including the use of the services and facilities of the park. 
"Mobile home park" means an area of land where two or more mobile home lots are rented or leased, or held out for rent or lease, to accommodate mobile homes used for human habitation. 
"Mobile home resident" means a person, including a mobile home owner, who occupies a mobile home. 
"Organizational documents" means the declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions, articles of incorporation, bylaws, and any contracts for the maintenance, management or operation of all or any part of a mobile home park conversion to ownership project. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.23.030 - General requirements for all conversion projects. 
A.  Use permit required. A conversion project shall be permitted, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit, if the use to which the mobile home park will be converted is allowed in the zoning district. 
B.  Notice of intent to convert. At least sixty days prior to the date of filing an application for a use permit for a conversion project, the property owner shall notify, in writing by certified mail, each mobile home owner and the designated resident organization of the proposed project of his/her intention to convert. Said notice of intention to convert shall contain a statement that (1) the property owner proposes a Conversion Project; (2) the property owner will file an application for a conditional use permit with the city of Rohnert Park; (3) a Designated Resident Organization has the rights set forth in subsection 17.23.030 C; and, if applicable, (4) the property owner shall file an application for a final public report with the California Department of Real Estate. 
After the date of the notice of intention to convert, the property owner shall, provide a copy of the notice to each person applying for rental of a mobile home lot in the proposed project, prior to payment of any rent or deposit. Said notice shall be posted at all entrances of the mobile home park and in a conspicuous location in the office and/or clubhouse that is visible to all residents (e.g., on an existing bulletin board used for activity notices). 
C.  Right of negotiated purchase. A designated resident organization shall have the right to negotiate for purchase of a mobile home park for which a conversion project is proposed, if written notice of the exercise of this right is provided to the property owner within forty-five days of the date of issuance of the notice of intention to convert. 
D.  Negotiation for purchase. If a written notice has been provided to the property owner pursuant to paragraph subsection C above, the following procedure shall be followed: 
1.  The city shall not accept an application for a conditional use permit for the conversion project for ninety days from the date the designated resident organization provided written notice to the property owner in order that good faith negotiations can be encouraged and such steps may be taken as are reasonably likely to result in preservation of the mobile home park and the housing opportunities therein. 
2.  Within fifteen days of receipt of notice provided pursuant to subsection C, the property owner, or the property owner's designated agent, shall meet with the designated resident organization that has provided such notice in order to explore the possibility of acquisition of the park by such organization. 
3.  If at the end of the ninety-day period a negotiated purchase is not agreed upon, the city shall accept an application for a use permit for the conversion project. 
E.  Supplemental information required. In addition to submittal requirements otherwise required for a conditional use permit application, the following information must be submitted for every conversion project: 
1.  A declaration that, after the date of filing such application, each person applying for rental of a mobile home or mobile home lot in the proposed project prior to payment of any rent or deposit, shall receive, pursuant to Section 17.23.030, subsection B, written notification of intention to convert. 
2.  A statement detailing the current ownership of all improvements and underlying land; the name and address of each present resident and mobile home owner within the mobile home park on three sets of gummed labels for the mailing of public hearing notice. 
3.  A timetable for conversion of the mobile home park use. 
4.  A report on the impact of the conversion project on the mobile home park residents and a relocation and purchase assistance plan addressing the availability of replacement housing for existing tenants of the mobile home park consistent with Sections 17.23.040 and 17.23.050, respectively, and Section 65863.7 of the California Government Code. 
5.  A boundary map and survey showing the location of all existing easements, structures, mature and/or scenic trees, and other improvements upon the property. 
6.  If applicable, the proposed organizational documents and true copies of any and all documents submitted to the California Department of Real Estate for the proposed conversion project subject to the following provisions: 
a.  The property owner shall file with the planning and community development director a true copy of any amended, revised or additional documents submitted to the Department of Real Estate ten days prior to the public hearing before the planning commission on a conditional use permit for a conversion project. 
b.  The property owner shall file with the planning and community development director a true copy of the final public report within ten days of issuance by the Department of Real Estate. 
7.  Such other documents or information as the planning and community development director may require to further the purposes of this chapter. Copies of the supplemental application shall be made available upon request at the on-site office of the mobile home park, during regular business hours, to mobile home owners and mobile home residents. 
F.  Applicant's notice of hearing to park residents. Within twenty days of receipt of a use permit application or at least thirty days prior to a hearing on a use permit application for a conversion project, whichever is later, the planning and community development director shall inform the applicant in writing of the requirements of Civil Code Section 798.56 and this chapter regarding the notification of the mobile home park residents and homeowners concerning the public hearing on the proposed conversion. 
G.  Complete application. No use permit application for a conversion project shall be deemed complete and processing for consideration shall not commence until satisfactory evidence that the applicant provided each resident and mobile home owner within the proposed project, pursuant this section, written notice of intention to convert. In addition, satisfactory evidence of the posting of said notice at all entrances to the mobile home park and in a conspicuous location shall be submitted. 
H.  Special noticing requirements. In addition to the notice otherwise given for a public hearing to consider an application for a use permit, the following notices shall be mailed or posted: 
1.  The planning and community development director shall provide the following notice: 
a.  At least ten days before the date set for hearing, a notice of the time, place, and purpose of any public hearing on an application for a conversion project shall be sent to each resident and mobile home owner of the proposed project. 
b.  A copy of the staff report on an application for a conditional use permit for a conversion project shall be mailed to each mobile home owner at least five days before the date set for hearing thereon. 
The failure of the planning and community development director to mail any notice or report, or the failure of any mobile home owner to receive the same, shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter, nor prevent the planning commission from proceeding with any hearing at the time and place set therefor. 
2.  In addition to the above noticing requirements and at least ten days prior to the date of the public hearing, the property owner shall cause to be prepared and installed at all park entrances a thirty-two sq. ft. sign describing the proposed project and giving the date, time and location of the public hearing. The sign material, color, type style, and installation shall be approved by the planning and community development director. 
3.  Within five days of receipt of a final public report on the proposed project from the California Department of Real Estate, if applicable, the property owner shall notify each of the mobile home owners in the proposed conversion project of the issuance of said report. The notice shall indicate that copies of said report are available on request. 
I.  Educational forum. At the time an application for use permit is filed for a mobile home park conversion of use and prior to the public hearing on the application, the planning and community development director shall hold an educational forum for the mobile home owners and mobile home park residents to explain the application process and the requirements for, and components of, a conversion impact report and relocation and purchase assistance plan. Simplified educational materials regarding the ordinance shall be prepared, as appropriate, for distribution to the residents and mobile home owners. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.23.040 - Conversion impact report. 
A.  Impact report. At any time an application for a use permit is filed for a conversion project, or at least one year before the closure of a mobile home park or the cessation of use of the land as a mobile home park, the property owner shall file a conversion impact report with the planning and community development director. The report shall address the availability of adequate replacement housing in mobile home parks and relocation costs. The impact report also shall be given to residents of the affected mobile home park at least fifteen days before any public hearing scheduled on the use permit or impact report. 
B.  Contents of the impact report. At a minimum the conversion impact report shall include the following, as well as any other information deemed necessary and appropriate by the planning director: 
1.  A detailed description of the mobile home spaces within the mobile home park, including but not limited to: 
a.  The total number of mobile home spaces in the park and the number of spaces occupied; the monthly space vacancy over the preceding two years of each mobile home lot proposed to be converted; 
b.  The square footage of each mobile home lot and the length of time each space has been occupied by the present resident(s) thereof; 
c.  The age, size, and type of mobile home occupying each space; 
d.  The current or last monthly rent charged for each space, including any utilities or other costs paid by the present resident(s) thereof, and the rental rate for the preceding two years. 
2.  Identification of all residents sixty-two years and over, all residents with minor children, and all permanently disabled residents. The number of very-low, low, and moderate income residents shall also be provided. 
3.  A list of all comparable mobile home parks within the city of Rohnert Park and Sonoma County with vacancies. This list shall include the age of the mobile home park and the mobile homes therein, a schedule of rents for each park listed including the duration that leases are offered at the reported rent, and the criteria of the management of each park for acceptance of new tenants and used mobile homes. Information pertaining to rent control, the availability of medical and dental services, shopping facilities, and all nearby social and religious services and facilities shall also be included. Any written commitments from mobile home park owners willing to accept displaced mobile home owners shall be provided with the listing of known available mobile home lots. 
4.  A detailed analysis of the economic impact of the relocation on the tenants including comparisons of current rents paid and rents to be paid at comparable mobile home parks within the city of Rohnert Park or Sonoma County, estimates from two moving companies as to the per mile costs of moving mobile homes of various sizes including, but not limited to, tear down and set up of homes, and the moving of personal property, and any direct or indirect costs associated with a relocation to another mobile home park. 
5.  A list of the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of one or more housing specialists, with an explanation of the services the specialists will perform at the applicant's expense for the residents to be displaced. These services shall include but not be limited to assistance in locating a suitable replacement mobile home park, coordination of moving the mobile home and personal property, and any other tasks necessary to facilitate the relocation to another comparable mobile home park. 
6.  The report shall also contain the property owner's best estimate of the number of spaces in the park being closed that may be accommodated in other locations and the number of spaces for which no reasonable alternative location exists. 
C.  Hearing on the impact report. Within forty-five days of a use permit application for conversion or closure project being determined complete, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the report and its contents. Notice of the public hearing shall be in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.25 Article XI of this title and Section 17.23.030, subsection H, above. 
D.  Mitigation measures. At the public hearing, the planning commission shall hear and consider all matters brought before it for consideration, including matters to mitigate the impact of the conversion of use, closure or cessation of use. The cost of mitigation measures selected by the planning commission shall not exceed the reasonable costs of relocation as further described in Section 17.23.050. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.23.050 - Relocation and purchase assistance plan. 
A.  Relocation and purchase assistance plan. At any time an application for a use permit is filed for a conversion project, the property owner shall file a relocation and purchase assistance plan with the planning and community development director. The plan shall include a program of relocation and purchase assistance for displaced residents and mobile home owners who resided in the park prior to the filing of a use permit for a conversion project. The plan also shall be filed with and given to residents of the affected mobile home park at least fifteen days before any public hearing scheduled on the use permit. 
B.  Contents of the relocation and purchase assistance plan. At a minimum the plan shall include the following, as well as any other information deemed necessary and appropriate by the planning director: 
1.  The names, addresses, telephone numbers, and fee schedules of persons in the area who are qualified MAI appraisers of mobile homes. 
2.  The names, addresses, telephone numbers, and fee schedules of persons in the area who are qualified as mobile home movers. 
3.  The plan shall provide for relocation assistance, for a minimum period of twelve months following the closure of the mobile home park, to very-low, low, and moderate income residents and senior citizens over the age of sixty-two residing in the park. 
4.  The plan shall provide guarantees that all tenants sixty-two years of age or older and all tenants who are medically proven to be permanently disabled shall not have to pay an increase in rent over the amount currently paid for a period of two years following relocation. 
5.  The relocation plan shall provide for the applicant to pay all reasonable moving expenses to a comparable mobile home park within the city of Rohnert Park or Sonoma County (other locations may be included if agreed to by the resident or mobile home owner) to any tenant who relocates from the park after city approval of a use permit authorizing conversion of the park. The reasonable cost of relocation and moving expenses shall include the cost of relocating a displaced homeowner's mobile home, accessories, and possessions, including the costs for disassembly, removal, transportation, and reinstallation of the mobile home and accessories at the new site, and replacement or reconstruction of the blocks, skirting, siding, porches, decks, awnings, storage sheds, cabanas, and earthquake bracing if necessitated by the relocation; indemnification for any damage to personal property of the resident caused by the relocation; reasonable living expenses of displaced park residents from the date of actual displacement to the date of occupancy at the new site; payment of any security deposit required at the new site; and the difference between the rent paid in the existing park and any higher rent at the new site for the first twelve months of the relocated tenancy. When any tenant has given notice of his intent to move prior to the applicant's submittal to the city of a use permit application for a conversion project, eligibility to receive moving expenses shall be forfeited. 
6.  If the city council determines that a particular mobile home cannot be relocated to a comparable mobile home park within the city of Rohnert Park or Sonoma County (and no other identified location is acceptable to the homeowner) and the mobile home owner has elected to sell his or her mobile home, than the city council may, as a part of the reasonable cost of relocation as provided in Government Code Section 65863.7(e) require the applicant to provide for purchasing the mobile home of a displaced home owner. Such value shall be determined after consideration of relevant factors, including the value of the mobile home in its current location including the blocks, skirting, siding, porches, decks, awnings, storage sheds, cabanas, and earthquake bracing, and assuming the continuation of the mobile home park in a safe, sanitary, and well maintained condition, and not considering the effect of the change of use on the value of the mobile home. If a dispute arises as to the value of a mobile home, the applicant and the homeowner shall have appraisals prepared by separate qualified California licensed appraisers with experience, within the last three years, in establishing the value of at least three mobile homes. The appraisals are to be made no more than sixty days prior to their submittal. The city council shall determine the value based on the average of the appraisals submitted by the applicant and the mobile home owner. 
7.  Additional measures to mitigate the adverse impacts of conversion upon mobile home park residents and homeowners may be included in the relocation and purchase assistance plan. These measures may include but not be limited to: 
a.  For those who move to a multiple or a two-family dwelling, provision of a rent subsidy for up to twenty-four months. Rent shall not exceed the fair market rent for equivalent housing in Sonoma County as established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. "Rent subsidy" is the difference between the rent of a multi-family dwelling and the rent of the mobile home space or mobile home on the date of notice to convert. 
b.  Payment of the difference between the old and new mobile home park spaces for up to twenty-four months. 
c.  A program for extended leases or rental agreements for mobile home owners and residents who are handicapped, aged sixty-two or over, of low income, and/or with minor children. The purpose of such extended leases or rental agreements is to provide added time for relocation and purchase assistance for mobile home owners and residents that may have difficulty in securing other housing. "Extended lease or rental agreement" is a lease or rental agreement whose expiration date is extended at least ninety days. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.23.060 - Required findings for conversion. 
In approving a use permit for conversion project, the city council shall find, in addition to the conditional use permit findings, that the proposed conversion meets the following requirements: 
A.  That the proposed use of the property is consistent with the general plan. 
B.  That the residents of the mobile home park have been notified, pursuant to this chapter of the proposed conversion, including information pertaining to the anticipated timing of the proposed conversions. 
C.  That the conversion will not result in the displacement of very low, low, or moderate income mobile home residents or senior citizens over the age of sixty-two who cannot afford rents charged in other mobile home parks within the city of Rohnert Park or Sonoma County, unless otherwise approved by the city council. 
D.  That the age, type, size, and style of mobile homes to be displaced as a result of the conversion will be able to be relocated into other comparable mobile home parks within the city of Rohnert Park or Sonoma County or in a location acceptable to a mobile home owner or resident that will be displaced, or that the applicant has agreed to purchase any mobile home that cannot be relocated as provided for in this chapter. 
E.  That any mobile home residents displaced as a result of the conversion shall be compensated by the applicant for all reasonable costs incurred as a result of their relocation. 
F.  That the relocation and purchase assistance plan mitigates the impacts of the displacement of individuals or households for a reasonable transition period and mitigates the impacts of any long-term displacement. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.23.070 - Conditions of approval. 
The city council shall impose any necessary and appropriate conditions of approval to satisfy and implement the intent, purpose and content of this chapter including, but not limited to, full implementation of the relocation and purchase assistance plan prior to the establishment of a new use or the cessation or closure of the mobile home park use. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.23.080 - Issuance of grading and/or building permits. 
No building permit shall be issued for the development of or on any real property which is being converted from a mobile home park pursuant to this chapter unless and until the applicant has filed with the planning and community development director a verified statement made under penalty of perjury that all conditions of approval have been met or otherwise incorporated into the final project plans including the payment of all required relocation assistance required pursuant to this chapter. Such statement shall identify in itemized form each payee, the amount paid, the date of payment, and the type of relocation or other assistance for which each such payment was made. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.23.100 - Fees for costs incurred. 
The city council may by resolution, adopt reasonable fees and a reasonable fee schedule for costs incurred by the city in implementing the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
Chapter 17.25 - ADMINISTRATIVE AND ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES  
Article I. - Conditional Use Permits 
 
17.25.010 - Purpose. 
The regulations contained in this section are intended to: 
A.  Establish procedures for the approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of conditional use permits when required by this section; and 
B.  Establish findings to permit uses that have unusual site development features or operating characteristics requiring special consideration so that the use may be designed, located, and operated compatibly with uses on adjacent properties and in the surrounding area. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.011 - Applicability. 
The planning commission may grant use permits for such conditional uses in such districts as are prescribed in the regulations of this title which are consistent with the city's general plan, the specific purposes of the zoning district in which the site is located, and the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.012 - Application. 
An application for a conditional use permit shall include the following: 
A.  The application form provided by the city, signed by the property owner or authorized agent of the property owner, the applicant, and any other party involved as a contingent buyer or lessee. 
B.  The required plans and other documentation pertaining to the application, including: 
1.  Site plan to scale indicating the location and configuration of all buildings and proposed uses including setbacks from property lines, parking spaces and circulation, fencing, street improvements, fire hydrants, refuse and waste areas, proposed grading and drainage, and other significant site features. The site plan shall include computations on the number and types of parking spaces provided, amounts of usable open space or interior yard area, and lot area coverage. Commercial and industrial developments shall include floor area ratio (FAR) calculations, net and gross lot area, and shall identify the square footage and location of all easements on the project site. 
2.  A complete project summary including a description of all activities proposed for the site. 
3.  Building floor plan(s) of sufficient clarity and scale to indicate the nature and extent of the proposal and to illustrate in detail that it will conform to the provisions of all relevant laws, codes, ordinances, rules, and regulations. 
4.  Building elevations of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature of the exterior appearance of the proposal and its relationship to its surroundings. 
C.  Depending on the complexity of the application, additional materials such as presentation illustrations, three-dimensional models, or photometric analysis may be required by the planning department. Smaller scale projects may have certain submittal requirements waived at the discretion of the planning and community development director or his/her designee. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.013 - Public hearing/notice. 
A.  The planning commission shall hold a public hearing to consider an application for a conditional use permit. 
B.  The public hearing shall be noticed as set forth in Chapter 17.25 Article XI of this title. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.014 - Findings. 
A.  The planning commission shall approve or conditionally approve a conditional use permit application if, on the basis of the application, supporting materials, and written and oral testimony submitted at the hearing, the planning commission makes each of the following findings: 
1.  That the proposed location of the conditional use is consistent with the objectives of the zoning ordinance and the purposes of the district in which the site is located; 
2.  That the proposed location of the conditional use and the conditions under which it would be operated or maintained will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity, and that the operation and maintenance of the conditional use will be compatible with the surrounding uses; 
3.  The proposed conditional use will comply with each of the applicable provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.015 - Decision/appeal. 
A.  The planning commission shall conduct the public hearing and hear testimony for and against the application. A public hearing may be continued to a time and date certain. 
B.  If an application is disapproved, then no new application for the same, or substantially the same, use shall be filed within one year of the date of the denial of the initial application, unless the application is denied without prejudice. 
C.  The decision of the planning commission shall become final ten calendar days after the decision is rendered, unless appealed to the city council as set forth in Chapter 17.25 Article XII. 
D.  A conditional use permit shall run with the land and shall continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the site or structure. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.016 - Lapse of approval/renewal. 
A.  A conditional use permit shall lapse one year after the date of final approval or at an alternative date specified at the time of approval, unless: 
1.  A building permit has been issued and construction has diligently commenced; or 
2.  A certificate of occupancy has been issued; or 
3.  The use is established; or 
4.  The conditional use permit is renewed in accordance with subsection B below. 
5.  The project is a residential development that does not require the approval of a tentative subdivision map, or otherwise not vested through a development agreement with the city, then the approval shall expire after a twenty-four-month period, unless extended for special circumstances by the city council. 
B.  A conditional use permit approval may be renewed for an additional period of one year, provided that prior to the expiration date, an application for renewal of the conditional use permit is filed with the planning commission. The planning commission shall not deny the renewal request without first holding a public hearing and making findings supporting the reason for denial. If the planning commission denies the renewal request, the applicant shall have ten calendar days to appeal the decision to the city council as set forth in Chapter 17.25 Article XII. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.017 - Continuance; alteration or expansion. 
A conditional use established prior to enactment of this title shall be permitted to continue, provided that it is operated and maintained in accord with the conditions prescribed in the conditional use permit. 
Alteration or expansion of a conditional use shall be treated as a new application, unless the planning and community director finds that the alteration or expansion is minor, does not involve substantial alterations or additions to the original approval, and is consistent with the intent of the original approval. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.018 - Revocation and modification provisions. 
A.  A violation of a condition of approval or a provision of this chapter may cause a conditional use permit to be revoked or modified as set forth in Chapter 17.25 Article XIV of this title. 
B.  A request to amend one or more of the conditions of approval shall be treated as a new conditional use permit application. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
Article II. - Variances 
 
17.25.020 - Purpose. 
The regulations contained in this section are intended to: 
A.  Establish procedures for the approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of variances when required by this section; and 
B.  Establish findings to permit variances in order to prevent or to lessen such practical difficulties and unnecessary physical hardships inconsistent with the objectives of the zoning ordinance as would result from a strict or literal interpretation and enforcement of certain of the regulations prescribed by this title. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.021 - Applicability. 
The planning commission may grant variances to the regulations prescribed by this title, in accordance with the procedure prescribed in this section. Variances shall not be permitted to change zoning classifications or residential densities, or for other matters related to the use of land. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.022 - Application. 
Application for a variance shall include the following: 
A.  The application form provided by the city, which must be signed by the property owner or authorized agent of the property owner, the applicant, and any other party involved as a contingent buyer or lessee. 
B.  The required plans and other documentation pertaining to the application, including: 
1.  Site plan to scale indicating the location and configuration of all buildings and proposed uses including setbacks from property lines, parking spaces and circulation, fencing, street improvements, fire hydrants, refuse and waste areas, proposed grading and drainage, and other significant site features. The site plan shall include computations on the number and types of parking spaces, amounts of usable open space or interior yard area, and lot area coverage. Commercial and industrial developments shall include floor area ratio (FAR) calculations, net and gross lot area, and shall identify the square footage and location of all easements on the project site. 
2.  A complete project summary including a description of all activities proposed for the site. 
3.  Building floor plan(s) of sufficient clarity and scale to indicate the nature and extent of the proposal and to illustrate in detail that it will conform to the provisions of all relevant laws, codes, ordinances, rules, and regulations. 
4.  Building elevations of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature of the exterior appearance of the proposal and its relationship to its surroundings. 
5.  An explanation of the justification for the variance. 
Depending on the complexity of the application, additional materials such as presentation illustrations, three-dimensional models, or photometric analysis may be required by the planning department. Smaller scale projects may have certain submittal requirements waived at the discretion of the planning and community development director or his/her designee. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.023 - Public hearing/notice. 
A.  The planning commission shall hold a public hearing to consider an application for a variance. 
B.  The public hearing shall be noticed as set forth in Chapter 17.25 Article XI of this title. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.024 - Findings. 
The planning commission shall approve or conditionally approve a variance application if, on the basis of the application, supporting materials and oral and written testimony submitted at the hearing, the planning commission makes each of the following findings: 
1.  That strict or literal interpretation and enforcement of the specified regulation would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary physical hardship inconsistent with the objectives of the zoning ordinance. 
2.  That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the property involved or to the intended use of the property that do not apply generally to other properties classified in the same zoning district. 
3.  That the granting of the variance will not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations on other properties classified in the same zoning district; 
4.  That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.025 - Decision/appeal. 
A.  The planning commission shall conduct the public hearing and hear testimony for and against the application. A public hearing may be continued to a time and date certain. 
B.  If an application is disapproved, then no new application for the same, or substantially the same, variance shall be filed within one year of the date of the denial of the initial application, unless the application is denied without prejudice. 
The decision of the planning commission shall become final ten calendar days after the decision is rendered, unless appealed to the city council as set forth in Section 17.25.120. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.026 - Lapse of approval/renewal. 
A.  A variance shall lapse one year after the date of final approval or at an alternative date specified at the time of approval, unless: 
1.  A building permit has been issued and construction has diligently commenced; or 
2.  A certificate of occupancy has been issued; or 
3.  The use is established; or 
4.  The variance is renewed in accordance with subsection B below. 
5.  The project is a residential development that does not require the approval of a tentative subdivision map, or otherwise not vested through a development agreement with the city, then the approval shall expire after a twenty-four-month period, unless extended for special circumstances by the city council. 
B.  A variance approval may be renewed for an additional period of one year, provided that prior to the expiration date, an application for renewal of the variance is filed with the planning commission. The planning commission shall not deny the renewal request without first holding a public hearing and making findings supporting the reason for denial. If the planning commission denies the renewal request, the applicant shall have ten calendar days to appeal the decision to the city council as set forth in Chapter 17.25 Article XII. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.027 - Revocation and modification provisions. 
A.  A violation of a condition of approval or a provision of this section may cause a variance to be revoked or modified as set forth in Chapter 17.25 Article XIV of this title. 
B.  A request to amend one or more of the conditions of approval shall be treated as a new variance application. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
Article III. - Site Plan and Architectural Review 
 
17.25.030 - Purpose. 
The regulations contained in this section are intended to: 
A.  Establish procedures for the approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of designs for new or modified site plans, structures, and signs when required by this chapter; and 
B.  Establish findings to allow for the approval of projects that would be complementary to and harmonious with developments on adjacent properties and in the surrounding area. 
C.  Prohibit ugly, inharmonious, and monotonous designs while encouraging originality in architecture, site design, and landscape design. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.031 - Applicability. 
A.  Planning commission review of site and architectural plans shall be required for the following uses and/or structures: 
1.  Any new site plan or building proposed in a residential district that is greater than one hundred twenty-eight square feet in size, except for single-family homes that are consistent with the architecture and design standards of the surrounding area as determined by the planning and community development director; 
2.  Any new site plan or building proposed in a commercial district that is greater than two hundred fifty square feet in size and which would be visible from the public right-of-way; 
3.  Any new site plan or building proposed in an industrial district that is greater than five hundred square feet in size and which would be visible from the public right-of-way; and 
4.  An existing site plan or building for which exterior remodeling is proposed that would significantly change the configuration of the site or the outward appearance of the building. 
B.  The planning and community development director, or his/her designee, shall review the application to determine the level of review required, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The planning and community development director, or his/her designee, shall review all projects under the criteria presented above to determine conformance with the provisions of this title. 
C.  The planning and community development director or the city council may refer any matter concerning aesthetic site planning or design consideration to the planning commission for review. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.032 - Application. 
Applications for site plan and architectural review shall include the following: 
A.  The application form provided by the city, which must be signed by the property owner or authorized agent of the property owner, the applicant, and any other party involved as a contingent buyer or lessee. 
B.  The required plans and other documentation pertaining to the application, including: 
1.  Site plan to scale indicating the location and configuration of all buildings and proposed uses including setbacks from property lines, parking spaces and circulation, fencing, street improvements, fire hydrants, refuse and waste areas, proposed grading and drainage, and other significant site features. The site plan shall include computations on the number and types of parking spaces, amounts of usable open space or interior yard area, and lot area coverage. Commercial and industrial developments shall include floor area ratio (FAR) calculations, net and gross lot area, and shall identify the square footage and location of all easements on the project site. 
2.  A complete project summary including a description of all activities proposed for the site. 
3.  Building floor plan(s) of sufficient clarity and scale to indicate the nature and extent of the proposal and to illustrate in detail that it will conform to the provisions of all relevant laws, codes, ordinances, rules, and regulations. 
4.  Building elevations of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature of the exterior appearance of the proposal and its relationship to its surroundings. 
C.  Depending on the complexity of the application, additional materials such as presentation illustrations, three-dimensional models, or photometric analysis may be required by the planning department. Smaller scale projects may have certain submittal requirements waived at the discretion of the planning and community development director or his/her designee. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.033 - Factors to consider/conditions. 
A.  Factors that shall be considered in the approval, conditional approval or denial of a site plan and architectural review application include, but are not limited to the following: 
1.  That the development's general appearance is compatible with existing development and enhances the surrounding neighborhood; 
2.  That the development incorporates a variation from adjacent on-site and off-site structures in height, bulk, and area; arrangement on the parcel; openings or breaks in the facade facing the street; and/or the line and pitch of the roof; and 
3.  That the development will be located and oriented in such a manner so as to provide pedestrian, bicycle and vehicle connections with adjacent properties, as appropriate, and avoids indiscriminate location and orientation. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.034 - Decision/appeal. 
A.  If an application is disapproved, then no new application for the same, or substantially the same, project shall be filed within one year of the date of the denial of the initial application, unless the application is denied without prejudice. 
B.  The decision of the planning commission shall become final ten calendar days after the decision is rendered, unless appealed to the city council as set forth in Chapter 17.25 Article XII. 
C.  The decision of the planning and community development director, or his/her designee, shall become final ten calendar days after the decision is rendered, unless appealed to the planning commission as set forth in Chapter 17.25 Article XII. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.035 - Lapse of approval/renewal. 
A.  A site plan and architectural review approval shall lapse one year after the date of final approval or at an alternative date specified at the time of approval, unless: 
1.  A building permit has been issued and construction has diligently commenced; or 
2.  A certificate of occupancy has been issued; or 
3.  The use is established; or 
4.  The site plan and architectural review approval is renewed in accordance with subsection B below. 
5.  The project is a residential development that does not require the approval of a tentative subdivision map, or otherwise not vested through a development agreement with the city, then the approval shall expire after a twenty-four-month period, unless extended for special circumstances by the city council. 
B.  A site plan and architectural review approval may be renewed for an additional period of one year, provided that prior to the expiration date, an application for renewal is filed with the planning commission. The planning commission shall not deny the renewal request without first holding a public hearing and making findings supporting the reason for denial. If the planning commission denies the renewal request, the applicant shall have ten calendar days to appeal the decision to the city council as set forth in Chapter 17.25 Article XII. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
Article IV. - Temporary Conditional Use Permit 
 
17.25.040 - Purpose. 
The regulations contained in this section establish procedures for the approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of temporary conditional use permits when required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.041 - Application. 
In applying for a temporary conditional use permit, the applicant shall submit the following to the planning department: 
A.  The application form provided by the city, which must be signed by the property owner or authorized agent of the property owner, the applicant, and any other party involved as a contingent buyer or lessee; 
B.  Five copies of a site plan showing how the proposed temporary event will be conducted on the site; 
C.  An endorsement of the project applicant's insurance policy, in the amount of one million dollars and in a form acceptable to the city attorney, naming the city of Rohnert Park as an additional insured; and 
D.  A clean-up deposit, if appropriate, to ensure that the site is returned to its prior state. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.042 - Findings/conditions. 
A.  The zoning administrator, or his/her designee, shall approve or conditionally approve a temporary conditional use permit application if, on the basis of the application, supporting materials, and comments received by other departments or agencies, it is found: 
1.  That the proposed location of the use and the conditions under which it would be operated or maintained will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity; and 
2.  The proposed temporary use will comply with each of the applicable provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.043 - Decision/appeal. 
A.  The planning and community development director or his/her designee, shall review the application and shall forward it to other departments and agencies that may have an interest in the proposal. 
B.  If an application is disapproved, then no new application for the same, or substantially the same, use shall be filed within one year of the date of the denial of the initial application, unless the application is denied without prejudice. 
C.  The decision of the planning and community development director shall become final ten calendar days after the decision is rendered, unless appealed to the planning commission as set forth in Chapter 17.25 Article XII. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.044 - Periodic temporary events. 
For temporary uses that will be conducted more than once during a twelve month period, the project proponent may be required to apply for conditional use permit pursuant to Article I of this chapter. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
Article V. - Administrative Permit 
 
17.25.050 - Purpose. 
The regulations contained in this section establish procedures for the approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of administrative permits when required by this section. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.051 - Application. 
A.  Application for an administrative permit shall include the following: 
1.  The application form provided by the city, which must be signed by the property owner or authorized agent of the property owner, the applicant, and any other party involved as a contingent buyer or lessee. 
2.  The required plans and other documentation pertaining to the application. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.052 - Notice. 
The owners of properties contiguous to the project site shall be provided notice of the application a minimum of ten calendar days prior to action being taken on the application. If one or more of the neighboring property owners express opposition to the application, the planning and community development director shall refer the application to the planning commission for review if the concerns cannot be resolved. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.053 - Findings/conditions. 
A.  The planning and community development director or his/her designee shall approve or conditionally approve an administrative permit if, on the basis of the application, supporting materials, and comments received by other departments or agencies, it is found: 
1.  That the proposed location of the use is in accord with the objectives of the zoning ordinance and the purposes of the district in which the site is located; 
2.  That the proposed location of the use and the conditions under which it would be operated or maintained will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity; and 
3.  The proposed use complies with each of the applicable provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.054 - Decision/appeal. 
A.  The planning and community development director shall review the application and shall forward it to other departments and agencies that may have an interest in the proposal. 
B.  The decision of the planning and community development director shall become final ten working days after the decision is rendered, unless appealed to the planning commission as set forth in Chapter 17.25 Article XII. 
C.  If an application is disapproved, then no new application for the same, or substantially the same, use shall be filed within one year of the date of the denial of the initial application, unless the application is denied without prejudice. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.055 - Lapse of approval/renewal. 
A.  An administrative permit shall lapse one year after the date of final approval or at an alternative date specified at the time of approval, unless: 
1.  A building permit has been issued and construction has diligently commenced; or 
2.  A certificate of occupancy has been issued; or 
3.  The use is established; or 
4.  The administrative permit is renewed in accordance with subsection B below. 
B.  An administrative permit approval may be renewed for an additional period of one year, provided that prior to the expiration date, an application for renewal of the administrative permit is filed with the planning department. The planning and community development director or his/her designee may grant the renewal if the original findings of approval remain satisfied. If the planning and community development director denies the renewal request, the applicant shall have ten calendar days to appeal the decision to the planning commission as set forth in Chapter 17.25 Article XII. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.056 - Revocation/modification. 
A.  A violation of a condition of approval or a provision of this section may cause an administrative permit to be revoked or modified as set forth in Chapter 17.25 Article XIV of this title. 
B.  A request to amend one or more of the conditions of approval shall be treated as a new application. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
Article VI. - Certificate of Zoning Compliance 
 
17.25.060 - Purpose. 
The regulations contained in this section are intended to: 
A.  Ensure that each new or expanded use of a structure or site complies with all applicable provisions of this title. 
B.  Maintain a record of each new or expanded use of a structure or site through the issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance for such projects that require same. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.061 - General. 
No person shall construct or operate a use listed in the land use regulations (Chapter 17.06 of this title) as requiring a certificate of zoning compliance without first obtaining same from the zoning administrator. The certificate of zoning compliance is intended to certify that in all respects that the structure or lot and the proposed activity or use to be conducted therein is in full compliance with the provisions of this title, including all applicable zoning district requirements. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.062 - Applicability. 
A certificate of zoning compliance shall be required for the following: 
A.  The completion of a structure for which a building permit has been issued. No separate application or fee shall be required for same; 
B.  The initiation or commencement of any land use not requiring the construction of a structure; or 
C.  A change in the use of a structure or property for which a Certificate of Zoning Compliance was issued or which was exempted under the provisions of this Title, whether or not such use involves a new owner, tenant, or operator. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.063 - Application. 
Application for a certificate of zoning compliance shall include the following: 
1.  The application form provided by the city, which must be signed by the property owner or authorized agent of the property owner, the applicant, and any other party involved as a contingent buyer or lessee. 
2.  The required plans and other documentation pertaining to the application. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
Article VII. - Amendments 
 
17.25.070 - Purpose. 
The regulations contained in this section are intended to establish procedures to consider the rezoning of properties within the city of Rohnert Park and amendments to the regulations within this title. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.071 - Application. 
Applications for a rezoning or amendments to the regulations within this title shall include the following: 
A.  The application form provided by the city. For amendments involving the rezoning of property, this application must be signed by the owner(s) of property included in the proposed amendment, or their representative(s). Amendments to this chapter or map may also be initiated by a resolution of intention of the city council or of the planning commission. 
B.  The required plans and other documentation pertaining to the application. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.072 - Public hearing/notice. 
A.  The planning commission shall hold a public hearing to consider a rezoning application or an application to amend the regulations within this title. 
B.  The public hearing shall be noticed as set forth in Chapter 17.25 Article XI of this title. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.073 - Factors to consider. 
Factors that shall be considered in the approval or denial of a rezoning or amendment application include, but are not limited to the following: 
1.  That the proposed zoning and/or amendment is consistent with the general plan. 
2.  That the proposed zoning and/or amendment will be beneficial to and not detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare. 
3.  That with the proposed zoning and/or amendment adequate and available sites remain (refer to the quantified housing objectives in the city's housing element of the general plan) to mitigate the loss of residential density on the subject property to accommodate the city's "fair share" regional housing needs used by the State Department of Housing and Development in determining compliance with Housing Element Law pursuant to Government Code Section 65863(b). 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.074 - Commission action. 
Following such hearing, the commission shall make a report of its findings and recommendations with respect to the proposed amendment and shall file with the council a copy of such report. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.075 - Council action. 
Upon receipt of such report from the commission, the council shall set the matter for public hearing after giving notice thereof and of the proposed amendment as provided by law. After the conclusion of such hearing the council may adopt the amendments, or any part thereof, set forth. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.076 - Establishment of zoning map. 
The designations, locations, and boundaries of the districts established are delineated upon the map entitled "Zoning Map for the city of Rohnert Park, California", which map and all notations and information thereon are hereby made a part of this chapter by reference. Any land within the incorporated limits of the city, now or in the future, and not designated or indicated on the zoning map shall receive a zoning classification conforming to that designated by the general land use plan of the city. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.077 - Pre-zoning. 
The city may pre-zone unincorporated property adjoining the city. This process shall comply with this section and shall become effective upon annexation. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
Article VIII. - Nonconforming Provisions 
 
17.25.080 - Purpose. 
This section is intended to limit the number and extent of nonconforming uses by regulating their enlargement, their re-establishment after abandonment, and their alteration or restoration after destruction of the structure they occupy. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.081 - Nonconforming uses, lots and structures. 
A.  Any nonconforming use, lot or structure shall be permitted to remain in existence so long as it remains in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
B.  Damage or destruction of a structure. Should a nonconforming structure be damaged or destroyed by any means to an extent of more than sixty percent of the replacement cost of the structure immediately prior to the damages or destruction as determined by the city building official, the nonconforming structure shall not be reconstructed, except in conformity with this title. 
Should a structure in which the use does not conform with the regulations for the district in which it is located, be damaged or destroyed by any means to an extent of more than sixty percent of the replacement cost of the structure immediately prior to the damage as determined by the city building official, the nonconforming use shall not be resumed, except in conformity with this title or a conditional use permit as granted by the planning commission. The application for a conditional use permit shall be made within one year of the date of damage or destruction. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.082 - Restrictions on nonconforming uses, structures and lots. 
A.  If a structure has a nonconforming use, or the structure is nonconforming, the structure shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
1.  Existing conforming structures with non-conforming uses may be externally enlarged or extended, moved, or structurally altered only after the use of the structure is changed to a permitted use for the district in which it is located. 
2.  Any additions, enlargements, major alteration or moving of nonconforming structures shall conform to all regulations of the district in which the structure is located. 
3.  A vacant structure in which the last use was nonconforming may be occupied by the same or similar use if occupied within a period of one hundred eighty calendar days after the structure became vacant. If the structure is not occupied by the same or similar use within the time periods set forth, then the future use of the site must comply with the applicable district located as set forth in this title. 
B.  Uses or structures defined as nonconforming due to inadequate parking and/or landscaping are subject to the following restrictions: 
1.  Structures and uses in this subsection may be enlarged, altered, moved, extended or reconstructed within the following limits: 
a.  Where no major building other than an accessory building is involved, the cost of such change shall not exceed the total current appraised value of the land. 
b.  Where a major building is involved, the cost of such change shall not exceed the total current appraised value of the original buildings. 
C.  Exception. In any district where residences are prohibited, additions or alterations may be made to an existing single or two-family dwelling provided all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  Structural changes can be made only if in conformity with all the regulations of use, height, area, yard, interior yard space, off-street parking, etc., as required in the R-H, Residential-High Density District. 
2.  No additional dwelling units may be provided nor a conversion made that would create a second-dwelling unit, lodging house, care home, or similar use. 
3.  Floor area added shall not exceed fifty percent of the total floor area existing in the dwelling at the time the regulations prohibiting residences became effective on the property in question. 
4.  No such addition shall be permitted if a portion of the existing dwelling is converted to commercial or industrial use subsequent to when the regulations prohibiting residences became effective on the property in question. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.083 - Repairs and maintenance. 
Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent repairs or maintenance necessary to comply with existing codes or ordinances or the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition any building, structure, or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any public official charged with the responsibility of protection public health, safety and welfare. Such repair and maintenance shall be subject to the same limitations set forth in subsection 17.25.082.B. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
Article IX. - Planning Commission 
 
17.25.090 - Planning commission created. 
Subject to the provisions of this section, there is created a planning commission for the city consisting of five members. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.091 - Planning commission appointments—Term of office—Compensation—Vacancies. 
A.  Members of the planning commission shall be appointed by the city council. Each councilperson may nominate one resident of the city of Rohnert Park for appointment to the planning commission. The term of each commission member shall be for four years expiring on December thirty first. 
B.  Each member shall serve at the pleasure of the city council and until his/her successor is appointed and qualified. 
C.  Vacancies shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired portion of the term. 
D.  Members of the commission shall serve without compensation unless otherwise provided for by the city council. 
E.  Members of the commission may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in carrying out business of the planning commission provided such reimbursement is approved by the city council. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003; Ord. No. 921 , § 1, 4-10-2018)  
17.25.092 - Planning commission officer election. 
The planning commission shall elect a chairman and a vice-chairman from the appointed members. The planning commission shall appoint a secretary who need not be a member of the commission. Officers of the commission shall be elected annually. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.093 - Planning commission meetings. 
The planning commission shall hold at least one regular meeting in each month. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.094 - Planning commission rules—Record keeping. 
The planning commission shall, subject to approval by the council, adopt rules for the transactions of business and shall keep a public record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.095 - Planning commission powers and duties. 
The planning commission shall have such powers and duties as may be assigned to it by the city council including that of board of appeals to hear appeals of zoning administrator decisions. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.096 - City council may function as planning commission. 
As an alternative to the establishment of a planning commission, the city council may by resolution designate the city council itself as the planning commission, in which event the city council shall perform all of the functions and duties of the planning commission as set forth in this title. Where separate public hearings are provided for before the planning commission and the city council, as in amendments to this title, these public hearings may be combined in the public hearing before the city council. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
Article X. - Zoning Administrator 
 
17.25.100 - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this section is to establish responsibilities and procedures for the zoning administrator, pursuant to Government Code Sections 65900, 65901, 65902, and 65903. 
B.  The zoning administrator review is an in-house discretionary process intended to provide an avenue for the streamlined review of small planning projects. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.101 - Designation. 
The planning and community development director is designated as the zoning administrator, and he/she may designate in writing an acting zoning administrator who may exercise all the power of the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall provide the city clerk with the name of the zoning administrator and any appointed acting zoning administrator in writing. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.102 - Responsibilities. 
A.  The zoning administrator shall hear and decide all applications for temporary and administrative use permits when required by this title and such other matters that may be specifically assigned by ordinance. 
B.  The zoning administrator shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for zoning administrator approval based upon whether or not it conforms to the general plan, the specific purposes of the base or overlay zoning district in which the project is located, and the provisions of any applicable federal, state, or local ordinances. 
C.  The zoning administrator may refer any matter to the planning commission for hearing, consideration and determination, in lieu of B, above. The planning commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny a referred zoning administrator application based upon whether or not it conforms to the general plan, the specific purposes of the base or overlay zoning district in which the project is located, and the provisions of any applicable federal, state, or local ordinances. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.103 - Determination, notice, hearing, and appeal. 
A.  The zoning administrator shall render a determination within thirty calendar days of the date an application is deemed complete or within such other timeframes that may be set by ordinance for specific applications. 
B.  Public notice of zoning administrator's preliminary determination and information about requesting a formal zoning administrator hearing shall be noticed pursuant to Section 17.25.112 of this title. 
C.  A formal zoning administrator hearing may be requested within the ten calendar day notice period by submittal of a written request to the zoning administrator, including a complete description of the reason for requesting the hearing. 
D.  The fee for zoning administrator hearing shall be set by the city council and paid for by the applicant. 
E.  Upon receipt of a written request and filing fee, the zoning administrator shall schedule a formal hearing to address the concerns raised in the written request for hearing. Public notice of the zoning administrator hearing shall be noticed pursuant to Section 17.25.112 of this title. 
F.  The zoning administrator shall make a determination regarding the application within ten working days after the hearing and provide a determination letter to the applicant as well as the individual or group requesting the hearing. 
G.  The determination of the zoning administrator is appealable to the planning commission pursuant to Chapter 17.25 Article XII of this title. The planning commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny a zoning administrator application that has been appealed based upon whether or not it conforms to the general plan, the specific purposes of the base or overlay zoning district in which the project is located, and the provisions of any applicable federal, state, or local ordinances. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
Article XI. - Notices 
 
17.25.110 - Purpose. 
The regulations contained in this section establish notice requirements for public hearings falling within the provisions of this title unless otherwise prescribed in the individual section. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.111 - Contents of public notice. 
The contents of a public notice must include the following: 
1.  Date, time, and place of the public hearing; 
2.  Identity of the hearing body or hearing officer; 
3.  General explanation of the matter to be considered and where more specific information may be obtained; 
4.  General description in text or by diagram of the location of the real property/parcel or building which is the subject of the hearing; 
5.  If a public hearing, a statement that any interested party or agent may appear and be heard. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.112 - Notice in accordance with Government Code Section 65090. 
A.  When a provision of this chapter requires notice of a public hearing to be given pursuant to Government Code Section 65090, notice shall be published one time pursuant to Government Code Section 6061 in at least one newspaper of general circulation within the city of Rohnert Park and the notice shall be posted at least ten days prior to the hearing in at least three public places within the city of Rohnert Park (e.g., city hall, the public library, and the community center). 
B.  The notice of a public hearing shall include the contents as listed above in Section 17.25.111. 
C.  In addition to the notice required by this title, the city may give notice of the hearing in any other manner it deems necessary or desirable. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.113 - Notice in accordance with Government Code Section 65091. 
A.  When a provision of this chapter requires notice of a public hearing to be given pursuant to Section 65091, notice shall be mailed or delivered at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing in all of the following ways: 
1.  To the owner of the subject property or the owner's duly authorized agent, and to the project applicant; 
2.  To each local agency expected to provide water, sewage, streets, roads, schools, or other essential facilities or services to the project, whose ability to provide those facilities and services may be significantly affected; 
3.  To all owners of real property as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll within three hundred feet of the real property that is the subject of the hearing. If the number of owners to be notified is greater than one thousand, the city of Rohnert Park in lieu of mailed or delivered notice, may provide notice by placing a display advertisement of at least one-eighth of a page in at least one newspaper of general circulation within the city of Rohnert Park at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing. 
4.  To the blind, aged, and disabled communities, whenever a hearing is held regarding a permit for a drive-through facility, or modification of an existing drive-through facility permit in order to facilitate their participation in any hearing on, or appeal of the denial of, a drive-through facility permit. 
B.  If the notice is mailed, it shall also either be: 
1.  Published pursuant to Government Code Section 65090 in at least one newspaper of general circulation within the city of Rohnert Park at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing, 
2.  Posted at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing in at least three public places within the boundaries of the city of Rohnert Park. 
C.  The notice of a public hearing shall include the contents as listed above in Section 17.25.111. 
D.  For projects that are not exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act, the property owner shall cause to be prepared and installed on the project site a thirty-two sq. ft. sign describing the proposed project and giving the date, time and location of the public hearing. The sign material, color, type style, and installation shall be approved by the planning and community development director. The property owner within five working days following the closure of the public hearing shall remove the sign from the site. 
E.  In addition to the notice required by this section, the city of Rohnert Park may require notice of the hearing in any other manner it deems necessary or desirable. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.114 - Request for notification. 
When a provision of this title requires notice of a public hearing to be given pursuant to Sections 17.25.112 or 17.25.113, or Government Code Section 65090 or 65091, the notice shall also be mailed or delivered at least ten days prior to the hearing to any person who has filed a written request for notice with either the city clerk of the city of Rohnert Park or with any other person designated by the city of Rohnert Park to receive these requests. A fee which is reasonably related to the costs of providing this service may be charged and the request must be annually renewed. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.115 - Failure to receive notice. 
The failure of any person or entity to receive notice given pursuant to this chapter shall not constitute grounds for any court to invalidate the actions of a local agency for which the notice was given. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.116 - Notice requirements summary table. 
Type of Hearing/Hearing Body 	Scheduling Responsibility 	Required Notice 
Amendment of Rohnert Park General Plan or Zoning Ordinance 		
Planning Commission 	Planning Director 	17.25.112* 
City Council 	City Clerk 	17.25.112* 
Variance and Use Permit 		
Granting of modification requested by permittee 		
Planning Commission 	Planning Director 	17.25.113 
Action to revoke or modify for cause 		
Planning Commission 	Planning Director 	17.25.113 
Appeal of Planning Commission decision 		
City Council 	City Clerk 	17.25.113 
Site Plan and Architectural Review 		
Planning Commission 	Planning Director 	17.25.112 
Appeal of Planning Commission decision 		
City Council 	City Clerk 	17.25.112 
Planning Director or Zoning Administrator (Incl. administrative interpretations) 		
Appeal of Planning Director/ZA decision 		
Planning Commission 	Planning Director 	17.25.112 
Appeal of Planning Commission decision 		
City Council 	City Clerk 	17.25.112 
 
*  If the proposed ordinance or amendment to the zoning map or regulation affects the permitted uses of real property, then notice shall be by Section 17.24.113. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
Article XII. - Appeals 
 
17.25.120 - Purpose. 
This section establishes a procedure for the appeal of decisions made by the planning commission or zoning administrator with reference to this title. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.121 - Rights of appeal. 
Appeal rights are prescribed in the individual sections of this title authorizing each decision that is subject to appeal. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.122 - Appeal of decisions of the planning commission. 
Decisions made by the planning commission under this title with reference to its implementation, enforcement, and interpretation may be appealed to the city council, as long as the decision is not prescribed as final in the individual section which authorizes the decision. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.123 - Time limits for appeals. 
Appeals of decisions of the planning commission or zoning administrator shall be initiated within ten calendar days from the date of the decision. When the period for an appeal ends on a weekend or city holiday, the last day to file the appeal shall be extended to the next working day. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.124 - Filing appeals. 
A.  Filing. An appeal letter shall be filed with the planning and community development department which shall state specifically why the determination or interpretation is not in accord with the purposes of this zoning ordinance and what the specific reasons are for the assertion that there was an error or abuse of discretion by the planning commission or zoning administrator. 
B.  Effect on Decisions. Decisions that are appealed shall not become effective or final until the appeal is resolved. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.125 - Procedures for appeals. 
A.  Hearing Date. An appeal shall be scheduled for a hearing before the appellate body within sixty days of the city's receipt of an appeal unless both applicant and appellant consent to a later date. 
B.  Notice. A public hearing shall be held if the decision being appealed or reviewed requires a public hearing. Notice of public hearings shall be given in the manner required for the decision being appealed or as set forth in Section 17.25.112 or 17.25.113 pursuant to Section 17.25.116 of this title. 
C.  Hearing. At the hearing, the appellate body shall review the record of the decision and hear testimony of the appellant, the applicant, and any other interested party. The appellate body shall consider only the substantially same application, plans, and related project materials that were the subject of the original decision and only the issue(s) raised by the appeal. The appellate body's review shall be based upon the same standards as those of the lower decision-making body. 
D.  Decision. The appellate body shall affirm, modify or reverse the original decision or may refer it back to the lower decision-making body for reconsideration. When a decision is modified or reversed, the appellate body shall state the basis for modification or reversal. Decisions on appeals shall be rendered within thirty calendar days of the close of the hearing. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.126 - Effective date of decision. 
A.  A decision of the planning commission or zoning administrator is appealable except when the decision has been prescribed as final in the individual section, which authorized the action. If the decision has been prescribed as final, then it becomes final on the date of the decision. 
B.  A decision by the planning commission regarding an appeal shall become final ten calendar days after the date of the decision, unless appealed to the city council. A decision by the zoning administrator shall become final ten days after the date of the decision unless appealed to the planning commission. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.127 - New application. 
Following denial of an appeal, the city shall not consider any matter that is the same or substantially the same within one year, unless the denial is made without prejudice. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
Article XIII. - Enforcement Procedures 
 
17.25.130 - Purpose. 
The regulations contained in this section establish procedures for the enforcement of this title. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.131 - Permits, certificates, and licenses. 
All officials, departments, and employees of the city vested with the authority or duty to issue permits, certificates, or licenses shall comply with the provisions of this title and shall issue no permit, certificate, or license which conflicts with the provisions of this title. Any permit, certificate, or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this title shall be void. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.132 - Duties of code enforcement official. 
The director of public safety and the building official, and/or their designees, shall be the Code Enforcement Officials responsible for the enforcement of this title. 
In the discharge of his or her duties the code enforcement official shall have the right to enter on any site or to enter any structure for the purpose of investigation and inspection subject to the procedure and methods specified by the city in Chapter 1.12 of the Rohnert Park Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.133 - Penalty/injunctive relief. 
A.  Every act prohibited or declared unlawful and every failure to perform an act required by the provisions of this title by any person(s) shall be guilty of an infraction, and each day or portion thereof that such violation is in existence shall be a new and separate offense as set forth in Chapter 1.25. The fourth and any additional violations within any twelve consecutive month period may be charged as a misdemeanor pursuant to Chapter 1.16 of the Rohnert Park Municipal Code. 
B.  Any violation of any provision of this title shall be punished by administrative penalties as prescribed in Chapter 1.25 of the Rohnert Park Municipal Code. 
C.  In addition to any other remedy provided by the Rohnert Park Municipal Code or by state law or any other law, the city may commence action or proceedings for the abatement, removal and enjoinment of any violation of this title in the manner provided by law. 
D.  In addition to the penalties and remedies set forth above, anyone violating a provision(s) of this title, or failing to comply with the mandatory requirements of said title, shall be subject to having any other related permits or licenses revoked by the city of Rohnert Park for said violation. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.134 - Revocation/modification. 
Permits or a variance issued under this title may be revoked or modified in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.25 Article XIV of this title. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.135 - Cumulative remedy. 
The penalties or remedies provided for in this section are cumulative to any other penalty or remedy allowed by the city of Rohnert Park's Municipal Code or any other applicable law. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
Article XIV. - Revocation and Modification Provisions 
 
17.25.140 - Purpose. 
This section establishes the requirements and procedure for the revocation or modification of any permit or variance granted under this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.141 - Grounds for revocation or modification. 
A.  Revocation/modification for cause. A permit or variance may be revoked or modified for cause, including the imposition of new conditions upon a finding of any of the following grounds: 
1.  The permit or variance was issued on the basis of erroneous or misleading information, misrepresentation, or fraud. 
2.  A term of one or more of the conditions of approval of the permit or variance has been violated or relevant other laws or regulations have been violated. 
3.  The use or facility for which the permit was granted is so conducted or maintained so as to be detrimental to the public health, welfare, or safety so as to be deemed a nuisance. 
4.  There has been a discontinuance of the exercise of the entitlement granted by the permit for one hundred eighty calendar days. 
B.  Modification. 
1.  Any person who holds a permit or variance granted under this zoning ordinance may apply for a modification by following the same procedure required for the initial application for the permit. 
2.  No permit or variance may be modified within twelve months of its issuance nor more than once every twelve months unless determined to be necessary by the planning and community development director. No permit may be modified more than two times from its original issuance. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.142 - Initiation of revocation or modification for cause. 
A.  An action to revoke or modify a permit for cause may be initiated by order of the planning commission or city council on its own motion. The order shall set a hearing date for the proposed revocation or modification. 
B.  The revocation or modification hearing shall be held before the planning commission with the right of appeal to the city council. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.143 - Notice and public hearing. 
The contents of the notice and the notice shall be given in the same manner required for a public hearing to consider approval (see Section 17.25.113). If no notice is required for the original permit, none shall be required for the revocation/modification hearing provided that notice shall be mailed to the owner of the use or structure for which the permit was granted at least ten days prior to the hearing. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.144 - Public hearing. 
The person or public body conducting the hearing shall hear testimony of city staff and the owner of the use or structure for which the permit was granted, if present. At a public hearing, the testimony of any other interested person shall also be heard. All written material shall be submitted prior to the hearing unless the person or public body holding the hearing grants permission to submit the written material at later date. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.145 - Findings. 
The person or body conducting the hearing shall revoke or modify the permit for cause upon making one or more of the findings set forth in subsection 17.25.141.A. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.146 - Decision. 
Within thirty working days of the conclusion of the hearing, the person or public body that conducted the hearing shall render a decision and shall mail notice of the decision to the owner of the use or structure for which the permit was revoked and to any other person who has filed a written request for such notice. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.147 - Appeals. 
A.  A decision to revoke or modify a permit shall become final ten days after the date of the decision, unless appealed to the planning commission or city council in accordance with Chapter 17.25 Article XII. 
B.  A decision rendered by the city council is final and not appealable. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
17.25.148 - Cumulative remedy. 
The city's right to revoke or modify a permit or variance granted under the zoning ordinance shall be cumulative to any other remedy allowed by this code or any other applicable law. 
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2003)  
Chapter 17.27 - SIGNS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 876, § 3(Exh. A), adopted Apr. 8, 2014, repealed the former Ch. 17.27, §§ 17.27.010—17.27.100, and enacted a new Ch. 17.27 as set out herein. The former Ch. 17.27 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 765 § 2 (part), 2006. 
 
17.27.010 - Purpose. 
The purposes of these sign standards and regulations include: 
A.  Protect the public safety and welfare by avoiding hazardous distractions or conditions to pedestrian and vehicle traffic through careful placement, orientation, design and maintenance of signage. 
B.  Ensure that signage is clearly stated, appropriately scaled, and in harmony with the character and appearance of the building or use that is being identified. 
C.  Maintain and enhance the city's appearance by regulating the design, character, location, number, type, quality of materials, size, illumination and maintenance of signs. 
D.  Protect residential districts and adjoining nonresidential districts from adverse impacts of excessive numbers or sizes of nearby signs. 
E.  Generally limit commercial signage to on-site locations in order to protect the aesthetic environment from the visual clutter associated with the unrestricted proliferation of signs, while providing channels of communication to the public. 
F.  Limit the number and size of signs to levels that reasonably allow for the identification of institutional or commercial locations and the nature of the use, business or services provided at such location. 
G.  Regulate the number and sizes of signs according to standards consistent with the types of establishments in each zoning district or in different portions of a zoning district. 
H.  Avoid unnecessary and time consuming approval requirements for certain minor or temporary signs that do not require review for compliance with the city's building and electrical codes while limiting the size and number of such signs so as to minimize visual clutter. 
I.  Respect and protect the right of free speech by sign display, while reasonably regulating the structural locational and other aspects of signs not related to communication, generally for the public health, safety, welfare and specifically to serve the public interests in community aesthetics and traffic and pedestrian safety. 
J.  Enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign standards and regulations. 
K.  Regulate signs in a constitutional manner, which is content neutral as to noncommercial signs and viewpoint neutral as to commercial signs. All administrative interpretations and discretion is to be exercised in light of this policy and consistent with the purposes stated in this section. 
(Ord. No. 876, § 3(Exh. B), 4-8-2014)  
17.27.020 - Applicability. 
A.  Regulation. This chapter regulates signs located on private property within all zoning district of the city. This chapter also applies to signs within public rights-of-way, and to property owned by public agencies other than the city and over which the city has zoning and land use regulatory power. Except where otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, all signs located in such areas of the city must be erected and maintained in conformity with this chapter. 
B.  Definitions. Definitions of the specialized terms and phrases used in this chapter are contained in Chapter 17.04 (Definitions) of this Municipal Code. References to "department" means the department of development services, and references to "director" means the development services director or the director's designee. 
(Ord. No. 876, § 3(Exh. B), 4-8-2014)  
17.27.030 - General provisions. 
A.  Sign Permit Required. Except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to place, erect, structurally or electrically alter, change commercial message copy (except for changeable copy signs), move, or display any temporary or permanent sign without first obtaining a sign permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. No additional sign permit or approval is required for cleaning or other normal maintenance of a previously approved sign, unless a structural or electrical change is made. 
B.  Owner's Consent Required. The consent of the property owner, designated agent, or person in control or possession of the property is required before any sign may be erected on any private property within the city. 
C.  Noncommercial Signs. Noncommercial signs are allowed wherever commercial signage is permitted and are subject to the same standards and total maximum allowances per site or building of each sign type specified in this chapter. A sign permit or sign program approval is required for a permanent noncommercial sign only when a permanent commercial sign has not been previously approved. For purposes of this chapter, all noncommercial messages are deemed to be "on-site," regardless of location. 
D.  Substitution of Noncommercial Messages. Subject to the consent of the property owner or person in control or possession of the property, a noncommercial message of any type may be substituted for all or part of the commercial or noncommercial message on any sign allowed under this chapter. No special or additional permit is required to substitute a noncommercial message for any other message on a permitted sign, provided the sign structure is already approved or exempt from the sign permit requirement and no structural or electrical change is made. When a noncommercial message is substituted for any other message, however, the sign is still subject to the same design, locational and structural regulations (e.g., color, materials, size, height, illumination, maintenance, duration of display, etc.) as well as all building and electrical code requirements, as would apply if the sign were used to display a commercial message. In the event of any perceived or actual conflict between the general provisions of this subsection and any other specific provisions in this chapter, the provisions of this subsection will prevail. 
E.  Substitution of Commercial Messages. The substitution of one commercial message for another commercial message is not automatically allowed nor is the free substitution of a commercial message in a place where only a noncommercial message is allowed. In addition, no off-site commercial messages may be substituted for on-site commercial messages. 
F.  Legal Nature of Sign Rights and Duties. All rights, duties and responsibilities related to permanent signs attach to the land on which the sign is erected or displayed and run with the land or personal property. The city may demand compliance with this chapter and with the terms of any sign permit from the sign permit holder, the owner of the sign, the property owner or person in control or possession of the property, or the person erecting the sign. 
(Ord. No. 876, § 3(Exh. B), 4-8-2014)  
17.27.040 - Sign permit and sign program requirements. 
A.  General. Unless specifically exempted in Section 17.27.050 (Exempt Signs), a sign permit or sign program approval must be secured for all signs in accordance with this chapter. Granting a permit or approval in accordance with this chapter in no way eliminates the need to otherwise obtain a building or encroachment permit when required. 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of the sign permit and sign program requirement is to help ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, in particular, the provisions regulating the design, illumination, location, materials, number, size and type of sign. 
C.  Sign Programs. A sign program shall be required for: 
1.  Any new nonresidential project with three or more tenants; 
2.  Building groups that involve three or more live/work uses; 
3.  Any existing nonresidential project consisting of three or more tenants, where more than sixty percent of the existing signs or building exterior are being rehabilitated within a twelve-month period: 
4.  Any single building of more than twenty thousand square feet; and 
5.  Any commercial building or buildings occupying two or more acres. 
D.  Application Process. 
1.  An application for a sign permit or sign program must be made in writing on the form provided by the department and accompanied by the required fee established by city council resolution. 
2.  The application must include descriptive materials sufficient to conduct a proper evaluation including the following items: 
a.  A site plan showing existing improvements and proposed sign locations; 
b.  Detailed elevations showing the proposed signage, including the dimensions and locations; 
c.  A detailed plan of the proposed signage, including dimensions, proposed illumination and method of attachment or mounting; 
d.  Samples and descriptions of the proposed sign copy, colors and materials; 
e.  A completed construction permit application, as needed, in conformance with Title 15 (Buildings and Construction) of this Municipal Code. 
f.  Such additional information requested by the department as may be necessary to make a fully informed decision, process the application and make the required findings. 
3.  The director will initially determine whether the application contains all the information and items required by this chapter and may be deemed complete. 
4.  All notices required by this chapter are deemed given upon the date any such notice is either deposited in the United States mail, the date upon which personal service of such notice is provided or the date that the notice is electronically transmitted (if applicable). 
5.  No application will be accepted if: 
a.  The applicant has installed a sign in violation of the provisions of this chapter and, at the time of submission of the application, each illegal sign has not been legalized, removed or included in the application. 
b.  The application is substantially the same as an application previously denied, unless: (i) twelve months have elapsed since the date of the last application, or (ii) new evidence or proof of changed conditions is furnished in the new application. 
c.  The applicant has not submitted for processing or obtained any applicable permit for the underlying use of the property. 
E.  Standard Sign Permit Review Process. 
1.  After receiving a complete sign permit application, the director must cause the application to be reviewed and render a written decision to approve or deny the application within ten business days. 
2.  Determinations on sign permit applications are to be guided by the standards, criteria and findings set forth in this chapter. 
3.  The director may refer certain sign permit applications to the planning commission for review. Such determination should be made within ten business days of a complete application and acted upon by the planning commission within sixty days or concurrent with any related and required project approval that is presented to the planning commission. The planning commission's approval may be conditional so as to ensure compliance with the purposes and provisions of this chapter. 
4.  An application may be granted either in whole or in part when more than one sign or location is proposed by an applicant. When an application is denied in whole or in part, the determination of the director or planning commission must be in writing and must specify the grounds for such denial. 
F.  Standard Sign Program Review Process. 
1.  After receiving a complete sign program application, the director must schedule consideration of the sign program by the planning commission within sixty days of the complete application or concurrent with any related and required project approval that is presented to the planning commission. 
2.  Determinations on sign program applications are to be guided by the standards, criteria, and findings set forth in this chapter. 
3.  The planning commission's approval may be conditional so as to ensure compliance with the purposes and provisions of this chapter. 
4.  An application may be granted either in whole or in part when more than one sign or location is proposed by an applicant. When an application is denied in whole or in part, the determination of the planning commission must be in writing and must specify the grounds for such denial. 
G.  Findings. A sign permit or sign program that is reviewed in compliance with this chapter may be approved only after the following findings and determinations are made by the appropriate review authority: 
1.  That the proposed location of the use is in accordance with the objectives of the zoning ordinance and the purposes of the district in which the sign is located; 
2.  That the proposed location of the sign and the conditions under which the sign would be operated and maintained will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity. 
H.  Approval Period, Expiration and Time Extensions. A sign permit or sign program approval will expire one year from the date of issuance unless the sign or at least one sign in an approved sign program has been installed in accordance with the conditions of approval. If the sign permit or sign program is for a building or shopping center under construction, the one year approval period will commence on the date of issuance of the first certificate of occupancy for the project. 
1.  Prior to expiration of a sign permit or program, the applicant may apply for an extension of up to one additional year. The extension request will be reviewed by the review authority that acted on the original request. 
2.  The permit or approval will be null and void if the zoning ordinance changes significantly prior to the installation of the sign to a point that given the new regulations in the zoning ordinance such a sign would not be permitted. 
I.  Revocation. The initial reviewing authority may revoke any sign permit or sign approval according to the process outlined in Sections 17.25.140 through 17.25.148 upon refusal of the permit or approval holder to comply with the provisions of this chapter after written notice of noncompliance and at least fifteen days' opportunity to cure. 
(Ord. No. 876, § 3(Exh. B), 4-8-2014)  
17.27.050 - Exempt signs. 
The following signs are allowed without a sign permit or sign approval provided that they otherwise comply with the city's design guidelines and this chapter. A sign which is considered exempt in accordance with this chapter in no way eliminates the need to otherwise obtain a building or encroachment permit when required. 
A.  Address Signs. Street address numbers must be installed in compliance with the California Fire Code or the U.S. Postal Service. 
B.  Commemorative Signs. Such signs may not exceed six square feet in area and are subject to the approval of the director. 
C.  City Informational Signs. The city may erect identification, welcome and/or directional signs at entries and key locations within the community. 
D.  On-Site Directional Signs. Such signs are subject to the following provisions: 
1.  Directional Entry Sign (Small). One on premise parking and directional sign not exceeding one double-faced sign is permitted per site entrance. The sign face may not exceed four square feet in area and the sign height may not exceed five feet. 
2.  Directional Entry Sign (Large). A larger directional sign may be used in place of each directional entry sign (small) if the sign is setback more than one hundred feet from a public way. This sign may be up to ten square feet in area and up to eight feet in height. 
3.  Small Internal Directional Signs. Other directional signs may be used throughout a project site so long as the area of each sign does not exceed one square foot. 
E.  Open/Closed Sign. Each business may have one "open/closed" sign, not exceeding one square foot in area. 
F.  Flags and Flag Poles. Flags of national, state or local governments, or nationally recognized religious, fraternal or public service agencies provided that: 
1.  A single flag that does not exceed one-fourth the height of the flag pole and two or more flags combined that do not exceed one-half the height of the flag pole. 
2.  Properties in residential zoning districts may have one flag pole that does not exceed twelve feet in height. 
3.  Properties in nonresidential zoning districts may have no more than three flags per property and the flag pole may not exceed thirty feet in height. 
4.  If taller than twelve feet in height, the flag pole must be constructed of metal, fiberglass or carbon fiber. Wood flag poles taller than twelve feet are not permitted. 
5.  According to federal flag guidelines, the United States flag should only be displayed from sunrise to sunset unless properly illuminated for nighttime visibility. If illuminated, flag lighting shall be directed and/or shielded to avoid off-site glare. 
6.  Smaller flags displayed during daylight hours for federal holidays (e.g., Veterans Day, Memorial Day, etc.) are permitted without limitation. 
G.  Live/Work. Such signs may not exceed two square feet and must be attached to the wall of the building in which the use is housed and may not be illuminated. For building groups that involve three or more live/work units, an integrated sign program is required in accordance with Section 17.27.040.C (Sign Programs). 
H.  Private Informational Signs. Such signs may not exceed one square feet in area. 
I.  Public Informational Signs. Signs displayed by a federal, state or local governmental agency when required to carry out its responsibility to protect public health, safety and general welfare. Examples include, but are not limited to: public hearing signs, emergency and warning signs necessary for public safety or civil defense, signs locating underground facilities, and traffic signs erected and maintained by an authorized public agency. 
1.  On-Site Signs Required for City Public Hearing Notification. On-site signs for public hearing notification before a city agency must comply with the following: 
a.  Sign Area. Each sign must comply with the following minimum and maximum area requirements, based on the size of the subject parcel. 
Table 17.27-1: Public Hearing Signs 
Lot Area 	Minimum Sign Area 
Less than 6,000 sf, or store front 	6 sf 
6,000 sf to 20,000 sf 	12 sf 
Greater than 20,000 sf 	24 sf 
More than 1 acre 	32 sf 
 
b.  Height Limit. Sign height may not exceed eight feet. 
c.  Location. The sign may be located not less than five feet inside the property line for residential zones, not less than one foot inside the property line for commercial and industrial zones and shall be placed in an area that is most visible to the public. 
d.  Other Restrictions. 
i.  No sign may be illuminated, 
ii.  One sign must be displayed per public street frontage of the subject property, and 
iii.  Removal is required within fifteen days after the noticed public hearing. 
e.  Verification. On or before the required date of posting, the applicant or applicant's representative must submit to the department a signed affidavit of the installation of an on-site public hearing sign. 
J.  Temporary Signs. 
1.  Construction and Subdivision Identification Signs. Such signs are permitted in all zoning districts subject to the following: 
a.  One sign not exceeding thirty-two square feet per site. For each site larger than ten acres, one additional thirty-two square foot sign per ten-acre increment is allowed; 
b.  One sign not exceeding six square feet for each model home and located on the site of each model home in the subdivision; 
c.  One off-site directional sign not exceeding ten square feet. Any off-site directional sign may be required to be large enough to accommodate more than one construction or subdivision project. The location and number of direction signs will be determined by the director. 
2.  Campaign Signs. Such signs are subject to the following: 
a.  Campaign signs are not permitted on any public property or within any public right-of-way. In order to assist the public in locating public property, the city will make available, through the city manager, a map showing publicly owned real property within the city. As to those areas of right-of-way or other small parcels wherein it is difficult to determine the line of demarcation between public and private property, the city sign enforcement authority, as designated by the city manager, will inquire of the nearest adjacent private property owner or owners as to whether they have given permission to the posting of the sign. If the owner or owners reply in the negative it will be conclusively presumed that the sign was posted in violation of this section. If the nearest owner or owners indicate that permission was given to post the sign then the city will ascertain by survey or other accurate method as to whether the sign is posted on public or private property. 
b.  Any campaign sign placed upon privately owned property must receive consent of the owner or occupant thereof. 
c.  All campaign signs must be removed within ten days after the day of the election to which it pertains. The person or organization placing the sign and the owner and the occupant of the premises upon which the sign is placed are each responsible for the removal of such signs. In the event it becomes necessary for employees of the city to remove such signs, the city may hold all or any of the abovementioned parties responsible for the costs incurred by the city in removing such signs. 
3.  Freestanding Signs. In residential zones only, each parcel is permitted two temporary freestanding noncommercial signs (this includes "garage sales" and similar incidental "for sale" signs typical at a residential address). Such signs may not exceed six square feet in area and four feet in height, and may not be illuminated. Such signs are in addition to all other signage allowed under this chapter. 
4.  Real Estate Signs. Such signs may not be illuminated and are subject to the following regulations: 
a.  Residential Signs. One sign not exceeding six square feet in area located on the property being advertised. Riders on such signs are limited to three square feet in area. 
b.  Residential Open House Signs. Signs directing customers to an open house may not exceed two square feet which may contain the words "Open House" together with an arrow indicating the direction to the open house between the hours of eight a.m. and eight p.m. No more than one sign per direction may be placed at any intersection. 
c.  "Open House" Real Estate Sign. One sign not exceeding six square feet may be placed on the property coinciding with the hours of open viewing. The sign may also contain the name of the sales person or firm sponsoring the open house. 
d.  Nonresidential Real Estate Signs. One sign not exceeding twenty square feet per frontage that is located on a nonresidential property being advertised. A maximum of one two-foot by three-foot window sign is allowed for each vacancy. All signs must be non-illuminated. One sign is allowed per frontage. Signs exceeding these limitations may be administratively approved by the director. 
5.  Seasonal Decorations. Decorations and displays related to locally recognized holidays may be installed up to thirty days prior to the holiday and shall be removed no later than ten days after the holiday. 
6.  Special Event Signs. Signs or banners that advertise and publicize special events to be held within Rohnert Park are permitted, including, but not limited to, civic events and special events, grand openings, religious services and athletic sign-ups are permitted in accordance with the following standards or guidelines: 
a.  A maximum of two special event signs not exceeding thirty-two square feet each, located on the property where the event is taking place; 
b.  One banner for special events, for a civic or nonprofit organization may stretch across City Center Drive and/or Lynne Conde Way; 
c.  Banners for seasonal special events, i.e., holiday lights event, may be displayed seasonally between the months of November and February only in the lawn area on the north side of Rohnert Park Expressway between Lynne Conde Way and the SMART tracks. 
d.  Banners for civic events that are sponsored by or affiliated with the city, i.e., Farmer's Market and Performing Art Center performances may be displayed at the northeast corner of Lynne Conde Way and Rohnert Park Expressway. 
e.  Up to three banners for a civic or nonprofit organization not exceeding thirty-two square feet each and no more than one at each location for special events may be placed at the following locations: 
i.  South side of Rohnert Park Expressway at Hinebaugh Creek; 
ii.  West side of Commerce Boulevard, in the vicinity of Arlen Drive on the landscaped strip adjacent to Highway 101; 
iii.  Northeast corner of E. Cotati Avenue at Snyder Lane; and 
iv.  City parcel on Labath Avenue, south of the Westside Public Safety Facility location. 
f.  The term the special event sign may be displayed shall not exceed fourteen consecutive days and more than four times in any calendar year. 
g.  Two hundred dollars shall be deposited with the development services department to assure the special event signs are removed at the conclusion of the event and against which the city may charge the costs of removal if the applicant fails to do so. If the applicant removes the special event signs, the funds deposited with the city shall be refunded to the applicant. 
h.  A list of the location of the special event signs or banners together with the required deposit shall be submitted to the development services department before the installation of the proposed signs or banners. 
i.  The applicant shall submit to the development services department a list of names, addresses and telephone numbers of three responsible adults in the organization to whom the sign permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 876, § 3(Exh. B), 4-8-2014; Ord. No. 912 , § 4, 11-28-2017)  
17.27.060 - Prohibited signs. 
The following signs, as defined by this code, are prohibited and subject to immediate abatement by the city of Rohnert Park's code enforcement officer. 
A.  Abandoned signs. 
B.  Attention attracting signs. 
C.  Flags unless considered exempt under Section 17.27.040 (Exempt Signs), F (Flags and Flag Poles) or specifically permitted as part of a sign program or a site plan and architectural review entitlement. 
D.  Internally illuminated cabinet signs, except where a dark, opaque background is used in conjunction with light, translucent lettering. 
E.  Obscene signs. 
F.  Off-site signs (billboards). 
G.  Portable signs. 
H.  Roof signs except when approved in conjunction with site plan and architectural review for a building. 
I.  Public right-of-way signs that are placed in a street right-of-way without a valid encroachment permit, except as otherwise allowed in this chapter. This includes temporary signs displayed on public property, in the public right-of-way, utility pole, fence, tree or other vegetation. 
J.  Signs located in a vision triangle as described in Section 17.14.040 (Clear Vision Triangle). 
K.  Vehicle signs. This includes any vehicle sign parked within the public right-of-way or in a location on private property that is visible from a public thoroughfare. 
L.  Signs which resemble any official marker erected by the city, state, or any governmental agency, or which, by reason of position, shape, color, or illumination would conflict with the proper functioning of any traffic signal or would be a hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
M.  Signs which produce odor, sound, smoke or fire or other emissions. 
N.  A vehicle or equipment with mast arms or booms in an elevated position with intent to advertise. 
O.  Signs painted on fences, walls and roofs. 
P.  Statuary or representative figures used for advertising purposes. 
(Ord. No. 876, § 3(Exh. B), 4-8-2014)  
17.27.070 - General sign area, height, illumination and location standards. 
A.  Sign Area Measurement. The measurement of sign area will be calculated as follows: 
1.  Area. The area of a sign will be calculated by enclosing the extreme limits of all framing, writing, logo, emblem or other display within a single continuous perimeter composed of squares or rectangles. 
2.  Double-Faced Signs. The area of a double-faced (back-to-back) sign will be calculated as a single sign face if the angle at the apex of the sign does not exceed thirty degrees. 
3.  Three-Dimensional Signs. Where a sign consists of three-dimensional objects, the area will be measured as their maximum projection upon a vertical plane. 
4.  Structure. Supporting framework or bracing that is clearly incidental to the sign display will not be computed as part of the sign area. 
5.  Time/Temperature Signs. The area of any time and/or temperature device incorporated into a sign will not be included in the calculation of total sign area. 
B.  Sign Height Measurement. The height of a sign will be measured as the vertical distance from the lowest point of the base of the sign structure at grad level to the highest point of the sign structure. 
C.  Sign Illumination. 
1.  Externally illuminated signs must utilize focused light fixtures that do not allow light or glare to shine above the horizontal plane of the top of the site or onto any public right-of-way or adjoining properties. 
2.  Internally illuminated cabinet signs must have opaque backgrounds where copy and a logo are the only illuminated features. 
3.  Transformers, raceways and other types of electrical equipment and features must be concealed. 
4.  Signs both visible from and within one hundred feet of a residential district (R-E, R-R, R-L, R-M, R-H), or similar designation within a planned development or specific plan may not be illuminated between ten p.m. and seven a.m. 
5.  No movement or apparent movement or change in intensity of illumination is permitted. Rapidly flashing or stroboscopic lighting is also prohibited. 
D.  Sign Location. 
1.  All signs must be located on the same site as the subject of the sign (i.e., on-site), except as otherwise allowed by this chapter. 
2.  No sign may be located in the public right-of-way, except as otherwise allowed by this chapter such as public information signs. 
3.  Signs must be installed in a location and manner that ensures that: 
a.  They do not block the sight lines of existing signs on adjacent properties; and 
b.  Pedestrian and vehicular safety is maximized. 
(Ord. No. 876, § 3(Exh. B), 4-8-2014)  
17.27.080 - Sign design, materials, construction, and maintenance standards. 
All signs must be designed, constructed and maintained in compliance with the following standards: 
A.  Permanent signs must be designed by a qualified professional, i.e., architect, designer or others whose principal business is the design, manufacture, or sale of signs. 
B.  Sign colors and materials should be compatible with the existing building designs and should contribute to legibility and design integrity. Signs should avoid the use of garish colors or combinations of colors. 
C.  Each permanent sign located upon a site with more than one main building, such as a commercial, office or industrial complex, must be designed to incorporate the materials common or similar to all buildings. 
D.  Where there is more than one sign on a site or building, all permanent signs must have designs that similarly treat or incorporate the following design elements: 
1.  Type of construction materials; 
2.  Sign/letter color and style of copy; 
3.  Method used for supporting sign (i.e., wall or ground base); 
4.  Sign cabinet or other configuration of sign area; 
5.  Illumination; and 
6.  Location. 
E.  Except for signs of a temporary nature (banners, flags, etc.), all signs must be constructed of durable materials. 
F.  Every sign, including all parts, portions and materials, must be manufactured, assembled and erected in compliance with all applicable state, federal and city regulations including the city's building code and electrical code. Under no circumstances may a permanent sign have an exposed back. 
G.  All permanent signs must be permanently attached to the ground, building or other structure by direct attachment. 
H.  Every sign and all parts, portions and materials must be maintained in good repair. The display surface of all signs must be kept clean, neatly painted, and free from rust, cracking, peeling, corrosion or other states of disrepair. This maintenance obligation includes the replacement of malfunctioning or burned out lamps or lighting, replacement of broken faces, repainting of rust, chipped or peeling structures or faces within fifteen days following written notification by the city. When there is a change or discontinuance of a business or occupancy such that a sign no longer represents a place of business or occupancy, the sign must be removed or the name of the prior business or occupant either removed, or the sign face covered in a manner that blends with the building or supporting structure. 
I.  Within thirty days of the removal of a sign from a building wall or from the grounds of the premises if a freestanding sign, the wall of the building or the grounds of the premises must be repaired and restored to remove any visible damage or blemish left by the removal of the sign. 
(Ord. No. 876, § 3(Exh. B), 4-8-2014)  
17.27.090 - Zoning district sign standards. 
Each sign must comply with the sign area, height and number provided by this section except as otherwise provided. 
Table 17.27-2: Standards for Signage in R-L*, R-M, R-H, R-M/M-H and P-I Districts 
Sign Type Allowed 	Maximum Height 	Maximum Number 	Maximum Sign Area 
Wall mount 	Below edge of roof. 	1 of either sign type per street frontage 	16 sf. each sign; 32 sf. total for all signs 
Freestanding 	6 ft. 		
 
*  Applies to attached single-family, public and quasi-public land uses only in an R-L zoning district. 
Table 17.27-3: Standards for Signage in C-N, C-O, M-U and OS-EC Districts 
Sign Type Allowed 	Maximum Height 	Maximum Number 	Maximum Sign Area 
Freestanding 	8 ft. 	1 per street frontage 	0.25 sf. per linear ft. of property line adjoining street 
Building Mounted (ground floor) 
  Awning 	Below edge of roof 	3 of any combination of allowed building mounted sign types per primary street frontage, plus 1 of any allowed sign type per secondary street frontage. Sites with 3 or more tenants require a Sign Program with 1 of any allowed sign type per business frontage. 	0.5 sf for each linear ft of building frontage; and 100 sf maximum area per lot of record (may be exceeded with a Sign Program). 
  Projecting 	Below edge of roof 		
  Suspended 	Below eave or canopy; and at least 8 ft. above a walking surface 		
  Wall 	Below edge of roof 		
Temporary/ 
Portable 	Section 17.27.050 (H) (Exempt Signs) 
Window 	Section 17.27.100 (J) (Special Sign Type Requirements) 
Building Mounted (second floor and above) 
  Awning 	Below edge of roof 	1 sign per tenant space 	12 sf for each tenant, plus 1 directory sign not to exceed 12 sf per floor to identify upper floor occupants. 
  Projecting 			
  Wall 			
Window 	Section 17.27.100 (L) (Special Sign Type Requirements) 
 
Table 17.27-4 Standards for Signage in C-R, I-L, and I-L/O Districts 
Sign Type Allowed 	Maximum Height 	Maximum Number 	Maximum Sign Area 
Freestanding 	8 ft. 	1 per street frontage 	0.5 sf for each linear ft of property line adjoining street 
Building Mounted (ground floor) 
  Awning 	Below edge of roof 	3 of any combination of allowed sign types per primary street frontage 
plus 
1 of any allowed sign type per secondary street frontage 
Sites with 3 or moreTenants require a Sign Program with 1 of any allowed sign type per business frontage 	1.0 sf for each linear ft of building frontage 
200 sf per lot of record (may be exceeded with a Sign Program 
  Projecting 	Below edge of roof 		
  Suspended 	Below eave or canopy; at least 8 ft above a walking surface 		
  Wall 	Below edge of roof 		
Temporary/ 
Portable 	Section 17.27.040 (H) (Exempt Signs) 
Window 	Section 17.27.100 (L) (Special Sign Type Requirements) 
Building Mounted (second floor and above) 
  Awning 	Below edge of roof 	1 sign per tenant space. 	12 sf for each tenant 
plus 
1 directory sign not to exceed 12 sf per floor to identify upper floor occupants 
  Projecting 			
  Wall 			
Window 	Section 17.27.100 (L) (Special Sign Type Requirements) 
 
(Ord. No. 876, § 3(Exh. B), 4-8-2014)  
17.27.100 - Special sign type requirements. 
This section is intended to be used in conjunction with other standards contained in this chapter. The director is authorized to issue a sign permit for the following signs consistent with the regulations of this chapter, the city's design guidelines and any required building permit is obtained. 
A.  Awning Signs. 
1.  Area. Not more than twenty-five percent of the awning face or twenty-five square feet, whichever is less. Sign width on the sloped face or valance is limited to eighty five percent of the awning width, on the sloped awning surface the maximum size of logos limited to two square feet. 
2.  Height. Below edge of roof. 
3.  Illumination. External lighting only. Back-lit or translucent awnings are not allowed. 
4.  Location. One or two story buildings only. 
5.  Information limited to the name, logo, and type of business. 
6.  On the valance the height of the letters should be limited to eighty percent of the valance height. 
B.  Directory Signs. 
1.  Area. Not more than twelve square feet. 
2.  Height. Six feet maximum when freestanding or attached to wall. 
3.  3. Location. Permitted in any zoning district. 
C.  Electronic Message Centers. 
1.  Area. Determined by conditional use permit. 
2.  Height. Determined by conditional use permit. 
3.  Illumination. Determined by conditional use permit. 
4.  Location. Publicly owned properties located adjacent to a major arterial or highway. 
D.  Freestanding (Monument) Signs. 
1.  Area. Subject to the requirements of Section 17.27.090 (Zoning District Standards). 
2.  Height. Subject to the requirements of Section 17.27.090 (Zoning District Standards). 
3.  Illumination. Internal or external lighting allowed subject to review. 
4.  Location. Permitted in all zoning districts. 
E.  Freeway Oriented Freestanding Signs. 
1.  Area. Determined by conditional use permit. 
2.  Height. Determined by conditional use permit. 
3.  Illumination. Determined by conditional use permit. 
4.  Location. Any nonresidential zoning district immediately adjacent to Highway 101. 
F.  Murals. 
1.  Area. Determined by conditional use permit. 
2.  Height. Determined by conditional use permit. 
3.  Illumination. Determined by conditional use permit. 
4.  Location. Determined by conditional use permit. 
G.  Neon Signs and Tubing. Notwithstanding neon signs and tubing that are approved in conjunction with site plan and architectural review for a building, neon signs and tubing are subject to a conditional use permit in the C-R, C-N, I-L/O and M-U zoning districts. 
1.  Area. Determined by conditional use permit. 
2.  Height. Determined by conditional use permit. 
3.  Illumination. Determined by conditional use permit. 
4.  Location. Determined by conditional use permit. 
H.  Projecting and Suspended Signs. 
1.  Area. No more than nine square feet. 
2.  Height. Below the edge of roof and not to exceed the top plate of the first floor of a multistoried building. Minimum clearance of ten feet between the bottom of the sign and the finished grade below. The clearance may be reduced to eight [feet] if the sign is suspended below an awning, portico or other roof overhang. 
3.  Illumination. Internal or external lighting allowed subject to review. 
4.  Location. No more than thirty-six inches of sign may project over a public right-of-way or easement. Signs which project over a public right-of-way or easement will need to secure an encroachment permit. 
I.  Theatre Marquee Signs. In addition to the signage allowed in Section 17.27.090 in (Zoning District Standards), a sign with changeable copy that does not exceed sixty-five square feet may be permitted upon approval of a conditional use permit. 
J.  Time and Temperature Devices. In addition to the signage allowed in Section 17.27.090 (Zoning District Standards), a time and temperature device that does not exceed eight square feet may be permitted. 
K.  Wall Signs. 
1.  Area. Notwithstanding the standards in Section 17.27.090 (Zoning District Standards), a wall sign may be located on any primary or secondary building frontage according to the area limits established in Tables 17.27-2, 17.27-3 and 17.27-4. 
2.  Height. Below edge of roof. 
3.  Illumination. Internal or external lighting allowed subject to review. 
4.  Location. No sign may project from the surface to which it is attached more than required for construction purposes, and in no case more than twelve inches. No sign may interfere with the operation of a door or window. 
L.  Window Signs (Permanent). 
1.  Area. No more than twenty percent of each glazed area. 
2.  Height. Within the window frame. 
3.  Illumination. By conditional use permit. 
4.  Location. The first and second floors of a building only. 
(Ord. No. 876, § 3(Exh. B), 4-8-2014)  
17.27.110 - Nonconforming signs. 
A.  General Requirements. Signs which lawfully existed, were maintained and became nonconforming after the adoption date of the ordinance codified in this chapter that rendered such sign nonconforming, must be removed or made to conform within thirty days after written notice by the department in the following circumstances: 
1.  Where there is a land use change on the site; 
2.  When a request is made for an exterior alteration or remodel where site design and architectural review is required; 
3.  When a sign is damaged by any cause which results in replacement or repairs where the cost for replacement or repair is greater than fifty percent of its replacement value at the time the damage occurred; or 
4.  The sign is amortized in accordance with the Amortization Schedule Table. 
Table 17.27-5: Amortization Schedule 
200% Original Value (dollars) 	Amortization Period (years) 
< 500 	Two 
500 to < 1,000 	Three 
1,000 to < 3,000 	Five 
3,000 to < 6,000 	Eight 
6,000 and above 	Ten 
 
B.  Multiple Signs. For the purpose of determining value when more than one nonconforming sign is located on a site, the original values will be aggregated. 
C.  Value Determination. The original value of a sign shall be determined by any one of the following methods: 
1.  Appraisal in writing by a sign manufacturer; 
2.  Bill of sale; or 
3.  Description schedule from federal or state income tax return. 
(Ord. No. 876, § 3(Exh. B), 4-8-2014)  
17.27.120 - Removal of signs. 
A.  Unsafe Signs. Any unsafe sign may be removed by the city without prior notice. Alternatively, the director may issue a notice of violation and give the permit holder, property owner or person in possession and control of the property fifteen days to cure the violation. In the case of an unsafe sign removed by the city, the costs of such removal and storage will be borne by the permit holder, property owner, or person in possession and control of the property, as applicable, and may be collected by the city in the same manner as it collects any other debt or obligation. No unsafe sign that has been removed and stored by the city may be released until the costs of removal and storage have been paid. If an unsafe sign remains unclaimed for a period of thirty days after notice of removal is sent to the permit holder, property owner, or person in possession and control of the property, it will be deemed to be unclaimed personal property and may be disposed of in accordance with applicable law. 
B.  Illegal Signs. Any illegal sign must be removed or brought into conformity by the permit holder, property owner, or person in possession and control of the property following written notice from the director. Such notice must specify the nature of the violation, order the cessation of the use and require either the removal of the sign or the execution of remedial work in the time and in the manner specified by the notice. The time for removal or repair may not be less than fifteen days from the date of mailing the notice. The director's order may be appealed to the planning commission according to the procedure in Section 17.25.120 and following. 
C.  Legal Nonconforming Signs—Special Circumstances. In accordance with California Business Profession Code section 5499, no legal nonconforming sign will be required to be removed on the sole basis of its height or size if special topographic circumstances would result in a material impairment of visibility of the sign or the owner's or user's ability to adequately and effectively continue to communicate to the public through the use of the sign. The owner or user may maintain the sign at the premises and at a location necessary for continued public visibility at the height or size at which the sign was previously lawfully erected pursuant to all applicable codes, regulations and permits. Any such sign will be deemed to be in conformance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 876, § 3(Exh. B), 4-8-2014)  
17.27.130 - Enforcement. 
A.  The violation of any section of this chapter is an infraction and may be punished in accordance with the provisions set forth in Chapter 1.16 (General Penalty) of this code. 
B.  If the owner of any sign or sign structure fails or neglects to comply with provisions of this chapter, such noncompliance constitutes a public nuisance in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.24 (Nuisance Abatement) of this code and may be abated in the manner provided by such chapter. 
(Ord. No. 876, § 3(Exh. B), 4-8-2014)  
17.27.140 - Appeals. 
A.  Any person seeking to appeal a decision of the director or planning commission granting or denying an application for issuance of a sign permit or sign program, revoking a permit or approval, or ordering the remediation or removal of a sign may appeal such action in the manner provided by Article XII of Title 17 of this code commencing at Section 17.25.120. 
B.  Any person dissatisfied with the final action taken by the planning commission or city council, as applicable, may seek prompt judicial review of such decision pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.8. 
(Ord. No. 876, § 3(Exh. B), 4-8-2014) 
