HOME RULE CHARTER AND CODE OF THE TOWN OF BASALT, COLORADO 
1991 
Beginning with Supp. No. 16, 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
TOWN OF BASALT 
Mayor 
Jacque Whitsitt 
Mayor Pro Tem 
Glenn Rappaport 
Town Council 
Anne Freedman 
Rob Leavitt 
Glenn Rappaport 
Herschel Ross 
Rick Stevens 
Karin Teague 
Town Manager 
William Kane 
Town Clerk 
Pamela Schilling 
Town Attorney 
Tom Smith 
SUPPLEMENTATION 
The Basalt, Colorado Municipal Code, originally published by Colorado Code Publishing Company, will be kept current by regular supplementation by Municipal Code Corporation, its successor in interest. 
Supplements to this Code provide periodic updating through the removal and replacement of pages. This inter-leaf supplementation system requires that each page which is to be removed and replaced is identified so that the updating may be accurately accomplished and historically maintained. 
Instructions for supplementation are provided for each supplement, identified by Supplement number, date and inclusive ordinance numbers. The Instructions for posting the removal and replacement of pages must be followed and accomplished in sequence, with the most recent supplementation posted last . 
When supplementation is completed and the removal and replacement of all pages are accomplished, the Instructions should be placed under the Supplementation tab, behind this page, with the most recent Instruction sheet on top. Previous Instructions should not be removed, so that the user may refer to this tab section to verify whether the code book is fully updated with all supplements included. 
The maintenance of a Municipal Code with all supplementation is an important activity which deserves close attention so that the value of the code is maintained as a fully comprehensive compilation of the legislative ordinances of the municipality. 
AMENDMENTS 
Amendments may be made to the Code by additions, revisions or deletions therefrom. Those changes may be made as follows: 
Additions : Additions may be made by ordinance to the Code as follows: 
The "Basalt Municipal Code" is amended by the addition thereto of a new Section 2-121, which is to read as follows: 
(Set out full section number, title and contents) 
or if the location of the new section number or numbers is undetermined, the Code may be amended as follows: 
The "Basalt Municipal Code" is amended by the addition of the following: 
(Set out section title and contents) 
Revisions : A revision of the Code may be accomplished as follows: 
Section 2-121 of the "BasaltMunicipal Code" is repealed in its entirety and readopted to read as follows: 
(Set out section number, title and entire contents of the readopted code section) 
or as follows: 
Section 2-121 of the "BasaltMunicipal Code" is amended to read as follows: 
(Set out section number, title and entire contents of the amended code section) 
Repeal : Sections, articles and chapters may be repealed as follows: 
Section 2-121 of the "Basalt Municipal Code" is repealed in its entirety. 

SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
  
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Include/ 
Omit Supp. No. 01-2012  2-14-2012 Include 16 05-2012  3-27-2012 Include 16 07-2012  6-26-2012 Include 16 10-2012  1- 8-2013 Include 16 14-2012  8-28-2012 Include 16 04-2013  4- 9-2013 Include 16 09-2013  8-13-2013 Include 16 11-2013  8-27-2013 Include 16 12-2013  8-27-2013 Include 16 14-2013  9-10-2013 Include 16 21-2013 12-10-2013 Include 16 23-2013 12-10-2013 Include 16 24-2013 12-10-2013 Include 16 30-2013  1-14-2014 Include 16 31-2013  1-14-2014 Include 16 05-2014  3-25-2014 Include 16 06-2014  3-11-2014 Include 16 07-2014  3-11-2014 Include 16 08-2014  3-11-2014 Include 16 09-2014  3-11-2014 Include 16 10-2014  3-11-2014 Include 16 Election of  4- 1-2014 Include 16 12-2014  4-22-2014 Include 16 14-2014  5-27-2014 Include 16 15-2014  6-24-2014 Include 16 17-2014  6-10-2014 Include 16 22-2014  6-24-2014 Include 16 24-2014  8-26-2014 Include 16 30-2014  9-23-2014 Include 16 31-2014(Res.) 11- 4-2014 Include 16 04-2015  3-24-2015 Include 17 12-2015  7-28-2015 Include 17 14-2015  7-28-2015 Omit 17 19-2015 10-27-2015 Include 17 21-2015 12- 8-2015 Include 17 03-2016  1-26-2016 Include 18 21-2016  9-27-2016 Include 18 22-2016  9- 6-2016 Include 18 24-2016 10-18-2016 Include 18 25-2016  2-14-2017 Include 18 27-2016 10-25-2016 Include 18 28-2016 10-18-2016 Include 18 30-2016  2-14-2017 Include 18 33-2016  1-10-2017 Include 18 19-2017  9-12-2017 Include 19 22-2017 10-10-2017 Include 19 24-2017 10-10-2017 Include 19  
HOME RULE CHARTER 
FOR THE TOWN OF 
BASALT, COLORADO 
Adopted November 5, 2002 

HOME RULE CHARTER 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
PREFATORY SYNOPSIS 
The Basalt Home Rule Charter Commission hereby presents this Charter to the citizens of Basalt, Colorado. The Charter has been prepared by the nine elected members of the Commission in accordance with Article XX of the Colorado Constitution and the Municipal Home Rule Act of 1971, as amended. 
The Charter seeks to achieve the following objectives: 
(1)  to reserve for the Town of Basalt the greatest autonomy and self-government legally permissible under the Constitution and laws of the State of Colorado; 
(2)  to establish a structure for the efficient, fair, and orderly conduct of the Town government while also providing for flexibility and encouraging citizen participation to the fullest extent possible; and 
(3)  to safeguard the well-being of all inhabitants of the Town, to maintain a community that sustains livability and places the highest value on the good of the entire community, and to set forth a framework for the future growth and development of the Town while protecting both its fundamental identity and its future economic vitality. 
The purpose of the Charter is not to institute dramatic changes in the Town's government. 
Existing ordinances will stay in effect unless superceded by the Charter, but both existing and future ordinances will have greater force of law under the authority of the Charter. 
In keeping with the present system of elected government, the Charter provides for a Town Council consisting of seven elected officials - six Councilors and one Mayor - who are elected to four year terms on a rotating basis to assure continuity in Town government. Municipal elections will continue to be held in April of even-numbered years. The current Board of Trustees and the Mayor will serve out their elected terms as members of the new Town Council. 
The Charter gives the Town new powers and changes certain procedures in how the Town government operates. 
The Charter makes certain changes in how officials are to be elected. A procedure known as "instant runoff voting" will apply to the election of the Mayor when more than two candidates are running for that office. 
The Charter includes several new procedures that are meant to increase and encourage citizen participation and input in the governance of the Town. In particular, ordinances will require two readings at public meetings, which will allow for further discussion and consideration of proposed amendments at the time of second reading. Further, to the maximum extent practicable, the Charter provides for use of internet technology to post ordinances and to provide greater opportunity for notice to and input from the members of the community. 
The Charter grants the Town new powers including the power of eminent domain outside the municipal limits and the power to organize any type of municipal utility. 
The Charter also requires the Town to adopt and maintain a master plan for the community and to consider the master plan in the context of all major new development applications. The purpose of this requirement is to demonstrate that the Town can thrive economically and function as a community with a diverse population while still maintaining environmental quality, protecting the two rivers that form integral parts of the Town's identity, and promoting growth in a thoughtful and responsible manner. 
PREAMBLE 
We, the citizens of Basalt, Colorado, believing that the government of Basalt exists to serve the people of Basalt; desiring to preserve the heritage of Basalt - its rivers, wildlife habitat, open spaces, and historic small town character; seeking to enable effective citizen participation and to promote involvement in the political process; committed to securing the benefits and advantages of the Constitution of Colorado and to availing ourselves of the rights and privileges of home-rule and self-government in local affairs to the fullest possible extent; do hereby adopt this Charter. 
ARTICLE I - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 1.1 - Definitions 
    As used in this Charter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
    Ad valorem tax. A general property tax levied annually on real or personal property listed with the Assessors of Eagle County or Pitkin County, Colorado, not including income tax, sales tax, use tax, excise tax, or specific ownership tax on a motor vehicle or trailer. The generality of this definition shall not be restricted by the listing set forth herein. 
    Appropriation. The authorized amount of money set aside for expenditures during a specified time for a specific purpose. 
    Constitution. The Constitution of the State of Colorado. The "federal" constitution means the Constitution of the United States of America. 
    Council or Town Council. The Town Council of the Town of Basalt, Colorado, including the Mayor. 
    Franchise . A privilege granted by the Town permitting a specified use of public property for a specified length of time. 
    General election . A scheduled town-wide election, whether for Town officers or issues in April or for local, state or national issues in November. The terms "regular election" and "special election" refer only to those elections held pursuant to Section 2.3 of the Charter. 
    Officer. Any person elected to office or appointed by the Council, including appointees to Boards and Commissions. 
    Person. An individual, partnership, corporation, company, body politic, or other legal entity. 
    Public hearing. A meeting, or a portion of a meeting, of the Council or any Board or Commission during which members of the public are given the opportunity to offer input, information, and opinions to be considered by the Council, Board, or Commission on a specific subject or subjects. 
    Publication. Whenever publication or published notice is required herein or by an ordinance, publication for the requisite period in a newspaper generally available in the Town shall be sufficient. 
    Public utility. Any person, firm, or corporation providing public services such as heat, power or light, communication or telecommunication systems, water, sewer, or scheduled transportation systems, and serving or supplying the public under a franchise granted by the Town. The term also includes an enterprise established by the Town. 
    State. The State of Colorado. 
    Supermajority . A quorum plus one. 
    Town. The Town of Basalt, Colorado, a municipal corporation. 
    Written or in writing. Except in reference to signatures, any communication by printing, writing, typing, engraving, facsimile, or by electronic means (provided that a record is kept of any such communication by computer or other electronic means), or any other similar method. 
Section 1.2 - Name and Boundaries 
    The municipal corporation heretofore existing as the Town of Basalt, which is located in Eagle and Pitkin Counties, State of Colorado, shall remain and continue as a body politic and corporate and under this Charter be known as the Town of Basalt, with the same boundaries, until changed in a manner authorized by law. 
Section 1.3 - Powers 
    The Town shall have all the power of local self-government and home rule and shall retain all power possible for a home rule town to have under the Constitution. The enumeration of particular powers in this Charter is not exclusive of others and shall not be construed as a limitation of any power otherwise available to a home rule town. Additionally, the Town shall have the following specific powers: 
(A)  Eminent Domain The Town shall have the right of eminent domain to acquire property both within and without the boundaries of the Town for any purpose deemed by the Council to be in the Town's best interest. 
(B)  Power to Supercede State Statutes The Town shall have the power to supercede statutes of the State in matters of local concern to the fullest extent possible, subject only to the limitations found in this Charter and the Constitution. 
(C)  Intergovernmental Agreements The Council may, by resolution or by ordinance, enter into contracts or agreements with other governmental units or special districts for the use of building, equipment, or facilities, and for furnishing or receiving commodities or services and for other matters in the best interests of the Town. 
(D)  Bequests, Gifts, and Donations The Council, on behalf of the Town, may receive bequests, gifts, and donations of all kinds of property in fee simple, or in trust, for public, charitable or other purposes, and do all things and acts necessary to carry out the purposes of such gifts, bequests, and donations, with the power to manage, sell, lease, or otherwise dispose of the same in accordance with the terms of the gift, bequest, or trust. 
(E)  Lease Agreements The Council may lease, for such time as the Council shall determine, any real or personal property to or from any person, firm or corporation, public or private, governmental or otherwise. This power shall include the power to enter into lease-purchase agreements. 
(F)  Water Rights The Town shall have the power to acquire, own, sell, lease, exchange, dispose of, abandon or change water rights by ordinance without the need for an election. 
(G)  Property Rights The Town shall have the power to acquire, own, sell, lease, exchange, dispose of, or otherwise deal with real or personal property by ordinance without the need for an election. 
(H)  Master Plan The Council shall adopt and maintain a comprehensive Master Plan for the Town. Any development review application filed with the Town under this Section, including, but not limited to, all applications for planned unit development, site plan, special review, rezoning or text amendment shall demonstrate that the proposal is in general conformance with the Master Plan as then in effect. Approval of any such development application shall require a finding by the approving body that the application is in general conformance with the Master Plan as then in effect. 
(I)  Licenses. The Town shall have the right and power to grant and enter into revocable license agreements for the use of public streets, rights of way, easements, and alleys by private parties by resolution without the need for an election. 
Section 1.4 - Rights and Liabilities 
    By the name of the Town of Basalt, the municipal corporation shall have perpetual succession; shall own, possess and hold all property, real and personal heretofore owned, possessed and held by the Town of Basalt, and shall assume and manage and dispose of all trusts in any way connected therewith; shall succeed to all the rights and liabilities and shall acquire all benefits and shall assume and pay all bonds, obligations and indebtedness of the Town of Basalt; may purchase, receive, hold and enjoy or sell and dispose of real and personal property, including water rights; may sue, defend, plead and be impleaded in all courts and places and in all matters and proceedings; and may have and use a common seal and alter the same at pleasure. 
Section 1.5 - Form of Government 
    The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as the "Council-Manager" Government. Pursuant to the Charter provisions and subject only to limitations imposed by the Constitution and by this Charter, all powers of the Town shall be vested in an elective Council, hereinafter referred to as the "Council" or the "Town Council." The Council shall determine policies, enact local legislation, adopt budgets, and exercise such other powers and functions as provided in this Charter. The Council shall delegate administrative and executive power as provided in this Charter, or when not so provided, as it deems necessary to the Mayor and/or the Town Manager. All powers of the Town shall be exercised in a manner consistent with the provisions of this Charter. If the manner of exercise of a power is not expressly prescribed in the Charter, then it shall be exercised as may be prescribed by ordinance or resolution, or by other applicable law, or by custom and practice. 
ARTICLE II - ELECTIONS 

Section 2.1 - Colorado Municipal Election Laws Adopted 
    All Town elections shall be governed by the Colorado Municipal Election Code of 1965, as now existing or hereafter amended or modified, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, or by ordinance. 
Section 2.2 - Qualifications of Municipal Electors 
(1)  Every person who has attained the age of eighteen years possessing the following qualifications is entitled to register to vote at all municipal elections: 
(A)  He is a citizen of the United States. 
(B)  The person is a resident of the municipal precinct and has resided in this state for twenty-two days immediately preceding the election at which the person offers to vote. In order to vote in a municipal election a person must be a registered elector. An otherwise qualified and registered elector who moves from the municipal election precinct where registered to another precinct within the Town is permitted to cast a ballot for an election at the polling place in the precinct where registered. 
(2)  No person confined in any public prison is entitled to register or to vote at any regular or special election. Every person who was a qualified elector prior to such imprisonment and who is released by pardon or by having served his full term of imprisonment shall be vested with all the rights of citizenship except as otherwise provided in the state Constitution. 
(3)  The judges of election, in determining the residence of a person offering to vote, shall be governed by the following rules, so far as they may be applicable: 
(A)  The residence of a person is the principal or primary home or place of abode of a person. Principal or primary home or place of abode is that home or place in which his habitation is fixed and to which a person, whenever he is absent, has the present intention of returning after a departure or absence therefrom, regardless of the duration of absence. In determining what is a principal or primary place of abode of a person, the following circumstances relating to such person may be taken into account: Business pursuits, employment, income sources, residence for income or other tax purposes, age, marital status, residence of parents, spouse, and children, if any, leaseholds, situs of personal and real property, and motor vehicle registration. 
(B)  A person shall not be considered to have lost his residence if he leaves his home and goes into another state or territory or another county or municipality of this state merely for temporary purposes with an intention of returning. 
(C)  A person shall not be considered to have gained a residence in this state or in the Town while retaining his home or domicile elsewhere. 
(D)  If a person moves to any other state or territory with the intention of making it his permanent residence, he shall be considered to have lost his residence in the Town. 
(E)  If a person moves from the Town to any other municipality in this state with the intention of making it his permanent residence, he shall be considered and held to have lost his residence in the Town. 
(4)  (A)  For the purpose of voting and eligibility to office, no person is deemed to have gained a residence by reason of his presence or lost it by reason of his absence while in the civil or military service of this state or of the United States, nor while a student at any institution of higher education, nor while kept at public expense in any public prison or state institution unless the person is an employee or a member of the household of an employee of such prison or institution. 
(B)  The provisions of paragraph (A) of this subsection (4) notwithstanding, no person otherwise qualified under the provisions of this article shall be denied the right to vote at any municipal election solely because he is a student at an institution of higher education if such student, at any time when registration is provided for by law, files with the county clerk and recorder a written affidavit under oath, in such form as may be prescribed, that he has established a domicile in this state, that he has abandoned his parental or former home as a domicile, and that he is not registered as an elector in any other municipality of this state or of any other state. The fact that such affidavit has been filed shall be noted in the registration book. 
(Amended 4/06/04 Election; 11/04/08 Election; 11/4/14 Election ) 
Editor's note- Ord. 22 , § 1, adopted June 24, 2014, passed Nov. 4, 2014, changed the title of § 2.2 from "Elector Qualification" to read as herein set out. 
Section 2.3 - Time of Elections 
    All regular elections of the Town shall be held on the first Tuesday of April in even numbered years. Any special election of the Town shall be called by resolution enacted at least 60 days in advance of such election. The resolution calling a special election shall set forth the purpose of such election. 
Section 2.4 - Non-Partisan Elections 
    All municipal elections shall be non-partisan. No candidate for any municipal office shall run under a party label of any kind. 
Section 2.5 - Elective Officers 
    The elective officers of the Town shall be six Councilors and one Mayor, all of whom shall be nominated and elected from the Town at large unless otherwise provided by ordinance in accordance with this Charter. Nominations shall be by petition as provided in the Colorado Municipal Election Code of 1965 as now existing, or hereafter amended or modified, except that at least 25 signatures shall be required on each petition. Notwithstanding the provisions of the Colorado Municipal Election Code, a registered elector may sign any number of nominating petitions regardless of the number of separate offices to be filled in any municipal election. 
Section 2.6 - Election Precincts 
    The Town shall consist of one (1) voting precinct, provided that the Town Council may by ordinance, for the convenience of voters, establish precincts thirty (30) days or more prior to any election. Any precincts so established shall remain for subsequent elections until otherwise provided by ordinance. 
Section 2.7 - Election Procedures 
    The establishment of regulations on registration, judges, and clerks, and the conduct of elections shall be governed by the Colorado Municipal Election Code as now existing, or hereafter amended or modified, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, or by ordinance. 
Section 2.8 - Instant Runoff Voting for Mayor 
    For election of the Mayor, if more than two (2) candidates are running for that office, the Town shall use a procedure for instant runoff voting. The ballot shall provide a means for voters to rank all of the candidates for Mayor in order of preference. If any candidate receives a majority of all first-choice votes cast, then that individual shall be elected as Mayor. If no candidate receives a majority of first-choice votes, then the candidate receiving the fewest first-choice votes shall be declared defeated. For each ballot that listed the defeated candidate as a first choice, the second choice shall then be counted as a first choice for that ballot. If one candidate has still not received a majority of first-choice votes, then the candidate with the next-fewest first-choice votes shall be declared defeated, and the ballots for that candidate shall again be recounted based on the next choice in order on such ballots. This process shall continue until one candidate has received the majority of votes cast and counted as provided herein, and that person shall be elected Mayor. 
Section 2.9 - Recall 
    Any elected officer of the Town may be recalled at any time after six (6) months in office by the electors entitled to vote for a successor of such incumbent, as provided for in Article XXI of the Constitution. Consistent with the Constitution and this Charter, the Council may provide by ordinance for further recall procedures. 
ARTICLE III - TOWN COUNCIL 

Section 3.1 - Town Council 
    There shall be a Council consisting of six Councilors and one Mayor, who shall act as and be considered as a full member of the Council. The Council shall be the governing body of the Town and shall have all policy-making and legislative powers and other powers possessed by the Town not otherwise limited or conferred upon others by this Charter. These powers shall include but not be limited to the power to own and transfer property, the power of taxation, the power to provide for health, safety, morals, and the common good, the power of eminent domain, and the power to construct and operate any type of public utility. No enumeration of particular powers shall in any way limit or impair any other powers or any general grant of powers by this Charter, the Constitution, or other law. 
Section 3.2 - Terms of Office 
    Each Councilor and the Mayor shall be elected for a term of four years. Three Councilors and the Mayor shall be elected at the general election in April of 2004 and every four years thereafter. Three Councilors shall be elected at the general election in April of 2006 and every four years thereafter, subject to the provisions of Section 3.6 of this Article. 
Section 3.3 - Qualifications for Elected Office 
    Each Councilor and the Mayor shall be a qualified elector of the Town in accordance with the requirements of Section 2.2 of this Charter. In addition, each Councilor and the Mayor must reside in the Town for a period of at least twelve consecutive months immediately preceding the date of the election. The determination of residency shall be made in accordance with the provisions of C.R.S., 31-10-201(3), as amended from time to time. Neither any Councilor nor the Mayor shall be a paid employee of the Town, nor shall they apply for any employment position with the Town while in office. The term of any Councilor or the Mayor shall terminate when he or she no longer resides within the boundaries of the Town of Basalt. 
(Amended 11/04/08 Election) 
Section 3.4 - Duties of the Mayor 
    The Mayor shall preside at all regular and special meetings of the Council and shall be required to vote except as otherwise provided herein. The Mayor shall act as the ceremonial head of government of the Town. The Mayor shall execute and authenticate legal instruments, contracts, and documents requiring a signature on behalf of the Town. The Council may, for specific and limited purposes, delegate certain non-legislative duties of the Mayor to the Town Manager or other employees of the Town. 
Section 3.5 - Mayor Pro Tem 
    At the first regular meeting following a regular election of the Town, the Council shall appoint one of its Councilors as Mayor Pro Tem, who shall act as Mayor during the absence of the Mayor with all powers herein granted to the Mayor. Such appointment shall be made by a majority of the Council present constituting a quorum. If the office of Mayor Pro Tem becomes vacant, then the Council shall appoint a new Mayor Pro Tem at its next regular meeting. 
Section 3.6 - Vacancies 
(A)  Occurrence of a Vacancy A vacancy shall occur whenever a Councilor or the Mayor dies, becomes incapacitated, resigns, becomes a non-resident of the Town, or is convicted while in office of a felony or of any misdemeanor offense for abuse of public office as defined in Part 4, Article 8, Title 18, C.R.S., as now existing or as may be hereafter amended or recodified. Any person filling such a vacancy must comply with the requirements of Section 3.3 above. 
(Amended 11/04/08 Election) 
(B)  Procedure to Fill Vacancy for Councilor Other than the Mayor Whenever a vacancy occurs more than ninety (90) days prior to the next regular Town election, the Council shall solicit the general public for applications to fill the vacancy. Within sixty (60) days following the occurrence of the vacancy, the Council shall either appoint a replacement or call a special election to replace such person. If the Council fails to appoint a replacement within sixty (60) days following the occurrence of the vacancy, then the Council shall schedule a special election to be held within ninety (90) days after such failure, unless a general election is already scheduled within that time period. If a vacancy occurs within ninety (90) days of the next general election, then the Council may leave the office vacant and provide for a replacement to be elected at such general election. 
(C)  Procedure to Fill Vacancy for Office of the Mayor If the office of Mayor becomes vacant within six (6) months of a general election, then the office shall remain vacant, and the Mayor Pro Tem shall assume the duties of the Mayor until such general election, at which time a new Mayor shall be elected. If the office of Mayor becomes vacant more than six (6) months before a general election, then the Council shall schedule a special election to elect a new Mayor within ninety (90) days of the occurrence of the vacancy. 
(D)  Multiple Vacancies If three or more vacancies exist on the Council at any given time, then the Council shall immediately schedule a special election to take place within sixty (60) days after the occurrence of the third vacancy, unless a general election is already scheduled within ninety (90) days. 
(E)  Terms of Persons Filling Vacancies Any person appointed or elected to the Council to fill a vacancy shall serve the remainder of the term of office for such position. If a current Councilor is elected as Mayor, that Councilor's former seat shall become vacant upon the effective date of the election, and a replacement shall be appointed or elected in accordance with this Section. 
Section 3.7 - Council Meetings 
(A)  Meetings in General The Council shall hold meetings not less than twice per month and shall schedule by ordinance a time and place for regular meetings. 
(B)  Special Meetings Special meetings of the Council shall be called by the Town Clerk on the request of the Mayor or the Town Manager with the informal consent of at least a quorum of the Council. At least twenty-four (24) hours prior to such meeting, the Town Clerk shall post a notice of the meeting in at least one (1) public place within the Town and shall provide reasonable notice to all Councilors of the meeting. Councilors shall have the duty to keep the Town Clerk informed of their preferred method of receiving notice for this and other provisions of this Charter. A special meeting may be held on shorter notice to the members of the Council and with less than 24-hour advance posting of notice if a quorum of the Council consents at the beginning of such meeting. 
(C)  Organizational Meeting At the first regular meeting following a regular election, and before the Council conducts any official business other than approval of minutes from past meetings, the Town Clerk shall administer the oath of office to newly-elected members of the Council, and they shall assume office at that time. The Council shall then proceed to appoint the Mayor Pro Tem, the Town Manager, the Town Attorney and the Municipal Judge and conduct such other organizational business as it sees fit. 
(D)  Meetings Open to the Public - Executive Sessions Authorized All meetings of the Council shall be open to the public. Executive sessions may be conducted during regular or special meetings of the Council to the maximum extent permitted by the laws of the State as may be enacted from time to time. Executive sessions shall not be "meetings" for the purpose of this Section. 
(E)  Quorum A majority of the Council in office at the time shall be a quorum for the transaction of business at all Council meetings. 
Section 3.8 - Oath of Office 
    Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, every person elected or appointed to any office shall take and file with the Town Clerk an oath or affirmation to support the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the State of Colorado, and the Charter and ordinances of the Town of Basalt, and to perform faithfully the duties of the office. 
Section 3.9 - Compensation of Elected Officials 
    The compensation for the Mayor and other Councilors shall be as established by ordinance from time to time; provided, however, that any change or increase passed during a Councilor's or the Mayor's current term of office shall not take effect with respect to that official until a subsequent term, if any. 
Section 3.10 - Council/Administration Relations 
    Except for informal inquiry, Councilors and the Mayor shall deal with Town administrative personnel and employees solely through the Town Manager and shall not give orders directly to Town employees. 
Section 3.11 - Independent Annual Audit and Report 
    An independent audit shall be made annually of all financial affairs of the Town, and more frequent audits may be made if deemed necessary by the Council. Such audits shall be made by certified public accountants experienced in municipal accounting selected by the Council. Copies of such audits shall be made available for public inspection at the office of the Town Clerk. 
Section 3.12 - Term Limits 
(A)  No person shall serve more than two consecutive terms in the same office, that is, the office of Mayor or the office of Town Councilor. 
(B)  For the purposes of this section, the office of Mayor and the office of Town Councilor are to be considered separate and distinct offices. 
(C)  For the purposes of this section, terms are considered consecutive unless they are at least four years apart. 
(D)  A person is deemed to have completed a full term of office if such person resigns prior to expiration of the term. 
(E)  When a person is appointed or elected to fill a vacancy, such partial term shall not be counted toward the limitation of subsection (A) or (D). 
(Added 4/1/14 Election) 
ARTICLE IV - TOWN COUNCIL PROCEDURES 

Section 4.1 - Ordinances, Resolutions and Motions 
    All actions of the Council shall be by ordinance, resolution, or motion. In addition to such Council acts that are required by other provisions of this Charter to be by ordinance, every action making an appropriation, creating an indebtedness, authorizing the borrowing of money, levying a tax, establishing any rule or regulation for the violation of which a penalty is imposed, disposing of any municipally-owned real estate, repealing a prior ordinance, or placing any burden upon or limiting the use of private property shall be by ordinance; provided, however, that this Section shall not apply to the annual appropriation and budget procedures set forth in Article IX of this Charter, nor shall an ordinance be required to levy an ad valorem tax. Ordinances making appropriations shall be confined to the subject of appropriation. Policies of the Town may be adopted by the Council by resolution or motion. 
Section 4.2 - Voting 
    A vote shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances and entered in the minutes of the Council proceedings. A roll call vote shall be taken upon the passage of any ordinance or resolution making an appropriation or levying a tax and shall be entered upon the minutes of the Council proceedings. Except as otherwise provided herein, all ordinances, motions, and resolutions shall pass if the majority of the votes cast are in the affirmative. Any member of the Council may abstain from any vote in his or her discretion, including without limitation "line item" abstentions from specific items that are part of a general payment or budgeting authorization. If an abstention is for the stated reason that the vote concerns a matter involving the consideration of his or her own official conduct or that his or her personal or financial interest is involved, then such member of the Council shall not be counted in determining whether a quorum is present for that vote. Otherwise, an abstaining member of the Council who is entitled to vote shall still be considered present. Nothing herein shall preclude the Council from requiring by ordinance a greater number of votes in certain instances. 
(Amended 4/06/04 Election) 
Section 4.3 - Procedure for Ordinances 
    Except for emergency ordinances, ordinances making general codification of existing ordinances, and ordinances adopting standard codes, the following procedure for enactment of ordinances shall be followed: 
(A)  The ordinance shall be introduced at any regular or special meeting of the Council by any member of the Council or Town Staff by reading the title of the ordinance. The title of the ordinance shall include a brief general description of the subject matter of the ordinance. Copies of the ordinance shall be available for review in the meeting room. In lieu of having copies of the ordinance available during the meeting in which the ordinance is discussed, Town Staff or a member of Council may read the ordinance in full. 
(B)  Reserved. 
(C)  After the first reading of the ordinance, the same shall be approved or rejected by a vote of the Council. If approved, the Council shall set a date, hour and place at which the Council will hold a public hearing on the ordinance for its second introduction. 
(D)  If passed upon first introduction, the ordinance shall be posted in full in at least one public place within the Town and whenever technologically feasible, on the internet. A First Notice shall be published and shall be posted in at least one public place which shall include the number and title of the ordinance, a statement indicating where the full text is available to the public (including the internet web address if applicable), and the date, hour and place of the public hearing scheduled thereon. 
(E)  The ordinance shall be introduced a second time in a public hearing at a regular or special meeting of the Council held not sooner than three (3) days after publication of the First Notice. The ordinance shall be read by title and number at the second introduction. 
(F)  The ordinance may be amended at the second introduction provided that any amendments address the same general subject matter addressed at first introduction. Any amendments shall be read in full, unless copies of all amendments are available to the Council and to those persons in attendance at the Council meeting. 
(G)  After the second reading, including any amendments, the ordinance shall be passed or rejected by a vote of the Council. 
(H)  After final passage, the ordinance shall again be posted in least one public place within the Town and, whenever technologically feasible, on the internet. A Second Notice shall be published and posted in at least one public place which shall include the number and title of the ordinance, a statement where the full text is available to the public (including the internet web address if applicable), and a statement as to the effective date of the ordinance. Unless the ordinance provides for a later effective date, it shall be in force and take effect fourteen (14) days after publication of the Second Notice. 
(Amended 4/06/04 Election) 
Section 4.4 - Form of Ordinances 
    Every ordinance shall be in written or printed form. The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be, "BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF BASALT, COLORADO." Failure of the enacting clause to comply with this Section shall not invalidate the ordinance. 
Section 4.5 - Disposition of Ordinances 
    A true copy of every ordinance, as adopted by the Council, shall be numbered and recorded, and adoption and publication of the First Notice and the Second Notice shall be authenticated by the signatures of the Mayor and the Town Clerk and by the certificate of the publisher. Copies of the original ordinances and the certificates of the publisher of same shall be kept and be available for public inspection in the office of the Town Clerk. 
Section 4.6 - Codes Adopted by Reference 
    Standard codes, promulgated by the Federal Government, the State, or any agency of either, or by any municipality within the State of Colorado, or by recognized trade or professional organizations, or amendments or revisions thereof, may be adopted by reference without posting in full but otherwise as provided by Section 4.3 of this Charter, provided that copies of such codes shall be made available for inspection at the office of the Town Clerk and, whenever feasible, on the internet. The First Notice and the Second Notice shall advise where such copies are available. Any part of such standard codes imposing a penalty or fine shall be posted in full as provided in Section 4.3. 
Section 4.7 - Emergency Ordinances 
(A)  An ordinance that is immediately necessary for the preservation of public peace, health, or safety may be enacted as an "emergency ordinance" at any regular or special meeting of the Council by the affirmative vote of every member of the Council present or by affirmative votes equal to a quorum plus one, whichever is less. Any emergency ordinance shall state expressly that it is an emergency ordinance and shall describe the nature of the emergency. An emergency ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage. The ordinance shall be posted, and a notice thereof shall be published, as provided above in Section 4.3(H) as soon as reasonably possible. 
(B)  No ordinance granting any special privilege, levying taxes, or incurring general obligation indebtedness shall be passed as an emergency ordinance. 
Section 4.8 - Severability of Ordinances 
    Unless an ordinance shall expressly provide to the contrary, if any portion of an ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be found to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining portions or applications of the ordinance that can be given effect without the invalid portion or application; provided such remaining portions or applications are not determined by the court to be inoperable, and to this end ordinances are declared to be severable. 
ARTICLE V - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM 

Section 5.1 - Initiative and Referendum 
    Except as provided herein, an ordinance may be submitted by petition, or a referendum on an enacted ordinance may be held by petition, or the Council may, on its own motion, submit an ordinance or any other matter to the electorate as hereafter provided. 
Section 5.2 - Ordinances Excepted from Referendum 
    Ordinances necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health or safety and ordinances pertaining to the appropriation of funds shall be excepted from the referendum. 
Section 5.3 - Petition Requirements 
    An initiative or referendum petition shall designate a resident of the Town as the Applicant for purposes of coordinating procedures and being the primary point of contact with the Town Clerk. The petition shall be signed by qualified electors of the Town equal in number to ten percent (10%) of the number of persons who were registered electors of the Town as of the date of the last general election. All signatures on said petition shall be obtained within ninety (90) days before the date of filing the petition with the Town Clerk. Any such petition shall be addressed to the Council and may be the aggregate of two or more petition papers identical as to content and simultaneously filed by the Applicant. An initiative petition shall set forth in full the ordinance it proposes to initiate, and no petition shall propose to initiate more than one ordinance. A referendum petition shall identify the ordinance or part thereof or code section it proposes to have approved or repealed. Each signer of a petition shall sign his or her name, the date, and his or her place of residence by street and number, or by other customary designation. To each petition paper, there shall be attached a sworn affidavit by the circulator thereof stating the number of signers thereof, that each signature thereon is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be, and that it was made in the presence of the affiant. Such petition shall be filed with the Town Clerk who shall, within five (5) business days, canvass the signatures thereon. If the petition does not contain a sufficient number of signatures of qualified electors of the Town, or if any other error or insufficiency is found in the petition, the Town Clerk shall post a notice in the Town Clerk's office to this effect, and it shall be the Applicant's duty to check with the Town Clerk for such a notice. Three (3) business days from the date of posting of such notice shall be allowed for filing of supplemental or corrected petition papers, and the Town Clerk shall canvass the signatures of the corrected or supplemental petition within two (2) business days after receipt. When a petition with sufficient signatures is filed within the time allowed by this Section, the Town Clerk shall present the petition to the Council at the next regular meeting. 
Section 5.4 - Time for Submission of Referendum Petition - Suspension of Ordinance 
    Any person seeking a referendum on an enacted ordinance shall submit to the Town Clerk a written notice of intent to circulate a referendum petition within thirteen (13) days after publication of the Second Notice of the ordinance, and the Town Clerk shall promptly transmit same to the Council. The petitioner shall then file the referendum petition with the Town Clerk within fourteen (14) days of submission of the notice of intent to circulate. Upon filing of the notice of intent, the ordinance shall be suspended and shall not go into effect until one of the following has occurred: 
(A)  Fourteen (14) days have passed since the filing of the notice of intent, and a referendum petition meeting all the requirements of this Charter has not been filed with the Town Clerk; or 
(B)  The subject ordinance has been approved by the electorate in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. 
Section 5.5 - Procedure on Petitions 
    Upon presentation to the Council of an initiative or referendum petition by the Town Clerk, the Council shall, within thirty (30) days, either: 
(A)  Adopt the ordinance as submitted by an initiative petition, unless the ordinance requires voter approval in advance pursuant to Article X, Section 20(4)(a) of the Constitution; or 
(B)  Repeal the ordinance, or part thereof, referred by a referendum petition; or 
(C)  Determine to submit the proposal provided for in the petition to the electors. 
No initiated ordinance calling an election on a measure requiring voter approval in advance pursuant to Article X, Section 20(4)(a) of the Constitution shall require both an election as provided in subsection (C) above and also the election required by Article X, Section 20(4)(a) of the Constitution. 
If the Council adopts the ordinance, it shall follow the procedures and publication requirements for all other ordinances as provided in Article IV. If the Council submits a proposed ordinance to the electorate, a First Notice of the proposed ordinance shall be published in accordance with Section 4.3 at least thirty days prior to the election. In addition to the matters required by Section 4.3, the First Notice shall state the date, time and place of the election. If approved, the ordinance shall take effect on the first business day following the election. 
Section 5.6 - Submission of Initiative and Referendum to Electors 
    Should the Council decide to submit the proposal to the electors, or should they, on their own motion, submit an ordinance or other matter to the electors, the ordinance shall be submitted at the next general election held in the Town for any other purpose, or if not prohibited by Article X, Section 20(3)(a) of the Constitution, in the discretion of the Council at a special election called for that specific purpose. Any petition submitted to the Council less than sixty (60) days prior to the next scheduled election may, at the discretion of the Council, be held over and submitted at the first election thereafter. In the case of an initiative petition, if no election at which the proposal may be considered is to be held in the Town for any other purpose within one hundred fifty (150) days from the time the petition is submitted to the Council, and it does not enact the ordinance, then the Council shall, if not prohibited by Article X, Section 20(3)(a) of the Constitution, call a special election within ninety (90) days from such date of presentment for the submission of the proposal. The result of all elections held under the provisions of this Section shall be determined by a majority vote of the electors voting thereon. 
Section 5.7 - Miscellaneous 
    An ordinance adopted by the electorate may not be amended or repealed for a period of two (2) years after the date of the election at which it was adopted, and an ordinance repealed by the electorate may not be re-enacted for a period of two (2) years after the date of the election at which it was repealed; provided, however, that any ordinance may be adopted, amended, or repealed at any time by appropriate referendum or initiative procedure in accordance with the foregoing provisions of this Charter, or if submitted to the electorate by the Council on its own motion. If two or more ordinances adopted at the same election shall have conflicting provisions, the provisions in the ordinance receiving the highest number of affirmative votes shall govern. 
ARTICLE VI - TOWN ADMINISTRATION 

Section 6.1 - Town Manager 
    The Council shall appoint a Town Manager, who shall execute the laws and ordinances of the Town, shall have the duty and authority to hire, suspend, transfer and remove any Town Employee except as otherwise provided in this Charter or by ordinance, and other powers and duties as provided by ordinance. If the office of the Town Manager becomes vacant, the Council shall appoint either a temporary or permanent replacement as soon as reasonably possible. The Council shall appoint the Town Manager on the basis of fitness, competency, training and experience. The Town Manager shall serve at the pleasure of the Council and may be removed by the Council at any time with or without cause upon the affirmative vote of a supermajority of the Council. 
Section 6.2 - Town Clerk 
    The Town Manager shall appoint a Town Clerk with the approval of the Council. The Town Clerk shall be the custodian of the Town Seal and shall keep records of Council proceedings and record in full all ordinances, motions, and resolutions. The Town Clerk shall have the power to administer oaths and take acknowledgments under the seal of the Town and shall perform such other duties as required by this Charter or the Council. 
Section 6.3 - Finance Director 
    The Town Manager shall appoint a Finance Director with the approval of the Town Council. The Finance Director shall have charge of the financial records of the Town and shall collect, receive and disburse all monies belonging to the Town and shall have all other duties required to administer properly the financial affairs of the Town. 
Section 6.4 - Police Chief 
    The Town Manager shall appoint a Police Chief with the approval of the Council. The Police Chief shall be the head of the Police Department, shall see that the ordinances of the Town are duly enforced, and shall have such other powers and duties as provided by ordinance. 
Section 6.5 - Multiple Positions 
    Unless otherwise prohibited by this Charter or by ordinance, any one person may be appointed to multiple positions. 
Section 6.6 - Council Nepotism 
    No person who is a parent, child, spouse or sibling of an elected official of the Town shall be an employee of the Town or hold any paid position appointed directly by the Council. This Section does not apply to employees who do not receive benefits (other than wages), nor does it apply to membership on a board or commission. 
ARTICLE VII - BOARDS & COMMISSIONS 

Section 7.1 - Existing Boards & Commissions 
    All existing Boards and Commissions shall continue as established, except as otherwise provided by ordinance or this Charter. 
Section 7.2 - General Provisions 
    The Council may establish Boards and Commissions and provide for their powers and duties, and the Council may consolidate, merge, or abolish any Board or Commission. Further, the Council may establish temporary Advisory Commissions for advising the Council with regard to a specific matter or for accomplishing specific tasks. The establishment, consolidation, merger, or abolishment of any Boards or Commissions shall be accomplished only by ordinance, except that the Council may create, merge, or abolish temporary Advisory Commissions by resolution. The ordinance establishing a Board or Commission, or the resolution establishing an Advisory Commission, shall provide for any required qualifications of Board and Commission members, the terms of office for such members and the method of appointment. Members of Boards or Commissions shall be removable only by a supermajority vote of the Council. The resolution creating a temporary Advisory Commission shall describe the advice to be provided to the Council or the task to be accomplished by the temporary Advisory Commission. Unless otherwise provided by the establishing ordinance or resolution, the Council shall make appointments to fill vacancies for unexpired terms. Unless otherwise provided by this Charter or the establishing ordinance or resolution, each Board and Commission shall choose its own chairperson from its members and adopt and follow its own rules of procedure. 
All meetings shall be open to the public. Copies of all records of all meetings shall be kept and placed in the office of the Town Clerk for public inspection. Reports shall be made to the Council as the Council shall require. Members of Boards and Commission shall not be paid, but they may be reimbursed for their reasonable expenses. A majority of any Board or Commission shall constitute a quorum. A vote of a majority of a quorum shall be a vote of the Board or Commission; provided, nothing herein shall preclude the Council or a Board or Commission from requiring a greater number of affirmative votes in certain instances. 
ARTICLE VIII - TOWN ATTORNEY AND MUNICIPAL COURT 

Section 8.1 - Town Attorney 
    The Council shall appoint a Town Attorney, who shall be the legal representative of the Town and shall advise the Council and Town officials in matters relating to their official powers and duties and legal matters affecting the Town. The Town Attorney or his or her assistants shall represent the Town in legal proceedings and shall assist with the drafting of ordinances and resolutions and the preparation of other legal documents. The Town Attorney shall be an attorney-at-law licensed and admitted to practice in the State of Colorado. The Council shall establish the compensation to be paid to the Town Attorney, and the Council may remove the Town Attorney at any time with or without cause. The Town Attorney may use associated counsel. The Council may also retain the services of special counsel for any matter and may, in its discretion, delegate any duty of the Town Attorney to such special counsel. 
Section 8.2 - Municipal Court 
    There shall be a Municipal Court which shall have jurisdiction to hear and try all alleged violations of this Charter and the Town ordinances. The Municipal Court shall have all jurisdiction as is provided under State statutes and rules promulgated by the Colorado Supreme Court. The Municipal Court shall be a qualified Municipal Court of Record and shall keep a verbatim record of all proceedings and evidence at trials by either electronic or stenographic means. 
Section 8.3 - Municipal Judge 
    The Council shall appoint a Municipal Judge. The Council may establish by ordinance the position(s) of one or more Assistant Municipal Judges as may be reasonably necessary to insure the prompt and expeditious determination of Municipal Court matters. The Council may also appoint substitute municipal judges as circumstances may require in case of temporary absence, sickness, disqualification, or other inability of the presiding or Assistant Municipal Judges to act. 
The Municipal Judge shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years, and any vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the Council for the remainder of the unexpired term. The Council shall determine the compensation for the Municipal Judge, but such compensation shall not be based upon the fees or fines assessed by the Court, nor upon the basis of "per case" handled, nor shall such compensation be increased or decreased during the two-year term. The Municipal Judge shall be removable only for cause. A judge may be removed for cause if: 
(A)  He or she is found guilty of a felony or a crime of moral turpitude; 
(B)  He or she has a disability which interferes with the performance of his or her duties and which is or is likely to become of a permanent character; 
(C)  He or she has willfully or persistently failed to perform his or her duties; or 
(D)  He or she is habitually intemperate or lacking restraint. 
ARTICLE IX - TOWN FINANCES 

Section 9.1 - Fiscal Year 
    The fiscal year of the Town shall commence on January 1 of each year and shall extend through December 31 of each year. 
Section 9.2 - Budget 
    The Finance Director or such other Town staff member as the Council may designate shall be the Budget Officer and shall annually prepare a proposed budget, which shall be submitted to the Council by October 15 of each year. The proposed budget shall provide a complete financial plan for all Town funds and activities for the ensuing fiscal year, and, except as required by law or by this Charter, shall be in such form as the Budget Officer deems desirable or the Council may require. In organizing the budget, the Budget Officer shall utilize the most feasible combination of expenditure classification by fund, organization unit, program, purpose or activity and object. The budget shall begin with a clear statement showing comparative figures for income and expenditures of the preceding fiscal year. The Budget Officer may require spending agencies and departments within the Town to submit estimates of their expenses for the coming fiscal year and any special requests prior to the deadline to submit the budget to the Council. 
Section 9.3 - Capital Program 
    Each year, the Budget Officer shall prepare a long-range capital program and shall submit the same to the Council no later than the time the budget is submitted to the Council. 
Section 9.4 - Budget Hearing 
    A public hearing on the proposed budget and proposed capital program shall be held before the budget's final adoption at such time and place as the Council may direct. Notice of such public hearing and notice that the proposed budget and capital program are on file for public inspection in the office of the Town Clerk or of the Finance Director shall, at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing, be published one time and posted in at least one (1) public place within the Town. 
Section 9.5 - Budget Amendment After Public Hearing 
    After the public hearing, the Council shall give due consideration to the input of the public and any issues raised at the hearing, and it may then proceed to adopt the budget with or without amendment. In amending the budget, it may add or increase programs or amounts and may delete or decrease any programs or amounts, except expenditures required by law or for debt service or for estimated cash deficit. 
Section 9.6 - Budget Adoption 
    The Council shall adopt the budget by resolution on or before the final day established by law for the certification of the ensuing year's tax levies to the counties. If it fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for the current operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly, until such time as the Council adopts the budget for the ensuing fiscal year. As soon as reasonably practical after adoption of the budget, the Town Manager shall prepare, with input from the Budget Officer, a budget message to accompany the budget. 
Section 9.7 - Property Tax Levy 
    Adoption of the budget by the Council shall constitute appropriations of the amounts specified therein as expenditures from the funds indicated and shall constitute a levy of the property tax therein proposed. The Council shall cause the same to be certified to the County Assessors as required by law. 
Section 9.8 - Amendments after Adoption 
(A)  Supplemental Appropriations If, during the fiscal year, the Finance Director certifies that there are available for appropriation revenues in excess of those estimated in the budget, the Council by ordinance may make supplemental appropriations for the year up to the amount of such excess. 
(B)  Emergency Appropriations To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or the public peace, the Council may make emergency appropriations. Such appropriations shall be by emergency ordinance in accordance with Section 4.7 of this Charter. 
(C)  Reduction of Appropriations If at any time during the fiscal year, it appears probable to the Finance Director that the revenues available will be insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, he or she shall report to the Council without delay, indicating the estimated amount of deficit, any remedial action taken by him or her, and his or her recommendation as to any other steps to be taken. The Council shall then take such further action as it deems necessary to prevent or minimize any deficit and for that purpose it may by ordinance reduce one or more appropriations. 
(D)  Transfer of Appropriations Any time during the fiscal year, the Town Manager may instruct the Finance Director to transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance among programs within a department, office or agency and, upon written request of the Town Manager, the Council may by resolution transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance from one department, office, agency or object to another. 
(E)  Limitation - Effective Date No appropriation for debt service may be reduced or transferred, and no appropriation may be reduced below any amount required by law to be appropriated or by more than the amount of the unencumbered balance thereof. The supplemental and emergency appropriations and reduction or transfer of appropriations authorized by this Section may be made effective immediately upon adoption. 
ARTICLE X - BONDED INDEBTEDNESS 

Section 10.1 - Forms of Borrowing 
    The Town may borrow money and to evidence such borrowing may issue the following securities in accordance with the provisions of this Article X: 
(A)  General Obligation Bonds and other like securities; 
(B)  Revenue Bonds and other like securities; 
(C)  Special or Local Improvement Bonds and other like securities; 
(D)  Tax Increment Bonds and other like securities; 
(E)  Short-Term Notes; 
(F)  Lease Certificates of Participation; 
(G)  Refunding Bonds and other like securities; 
(H)  Development Revenue Bonds and other like securities; 
(I)  Any other securities not in contravention of this Charter. 
Section 10.2 - General Obligation Bonds 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Article X of this Charter, no bonds or other evidence of indebtedness payable in whole or in part from the proceeds of ad valorem taxes, or to which the full faith and credit of the Town are pledged, shall be issued until the question of their issuance shall be submitted to a vote of the electors of the Town and approved by a majority of those voting on the question. To the extent not prohibited by the Constitution, such securities issued for creating, improving or extending any municipal utility system, including but not limited to water and sewer systems, may be issued without an election and shall not be included in the determination of any debt limitation which may be imposed by law. 
Section 10.3 - Revenue Bonds 
(A)  The Town may issue bonds payable solely from revenues derived from the operation of the project or capital improvement acquired with the proceeds of the securities, or from other projects or capital improvements, or from the proceeds of any sales tax, use tax, or other excise tax, or solely from any source or sources or any combination thereof other than ad valorem taxes of the Town. 
(B)  The Council may, by ordinance, establish any one or more of the Town's water, wastewater, stormwater or other utilities or activities as an enterprise of the Town. The Council may also, by ordinance, authorize any such Town-owned enterprise, acting by and through the Council, sitting as the board of the enterprise, to issue its own revenue bonds or other obligations (including refunding securities), which revenue bonds or other obligations shall be payable solely from the net revenues (including special assessments) derived from the operation of the enterprise. Such revenue bonds or other obligations shall be issued by ordinance of the board of the enterprise, adopted in the same manner and subject to referendum to the same extent as ordinances of the Council. Nothing in this Section shall invalidate any enterprise existing, or any enterprise bond issued or approved, as of the time of adoption of this Charter. 
Section 10.4 - Special or Local Improvement Bonds 
    The Town Council may, by ordinance, create special or local improvement districts and assess the cost relating to the construction or installation of special or local improvements of every character against benefited property within designated districts in the Town by: 
(A)  Order of the Council upon its determination that such improvements are necessary for the preservation of the public peace, safety, health, or welfare; or 
(B)  On a petition signed by the owners of land having at least fifty percent (50%) of the proposed assessment burden and by not less than fifty percent (50%) of the owners of the land within the territory. 
In either event, a public hearing shall be held at which all interested parties may appear and be heard. Right to protest and notice of hearing shall be given as provided by ordinance. Such improvements shall confer special benefits to the real or personal property within said district and general benefits to the Town at large. The Council may, by ordinance, prescribe the method of making such improvements and of assessing the cost thereof and issue bonds, payable in whole or in part from special assessments, for the cost of constructing or installing such improvements, including the costs incidental thereto. 
Where all outstanding bonds of a special or local improvement district have been paid and any money remains to the credit of the district, such money may be transferred to a special surplus and deficiency fund. Whenever there is a deficiency in any special or local improvement district to meet payment of outstanding bonds and interest due thereon, it may be paid out of said fund. 
Whenever a special or local improvement district has paid and canceled three-fourths of its bonds issued, and for any reason the remaining assessments are not paid in time to pay the remaining bonds of the district and interest thereon, and there is not sufficient money in the special surplus and deficiency fund, then the Town may pay the bonds when due and interest thereon and reimburse itself by collecting the unpaid assessments due the district. 
In consideration of general benefits conferred upon the Town at large from the construction and installation of improvements in special or local improvement districts, the Council may levy annual taxes on all taxable property within the Town at a rate to be determined by the Council for the purpose of advancing moneys to maintain current payments of interest and equal annual payments to the principal amount of bonds issued for any special or local improvement district. The proceeds of such taxes shall be placed in a special fund and shall be disbursed only for the purposes specified herein, provided that in lieu of such tax levies, the Council may annually transfer to such special fund any available money of the Town. 
Section 10.5 - Tax Increment Bonds 
    The Council shall have the power, by ordinance, to create downtown development authorities and other similar authorities and may issue bonds payable in whole or in part from incremental municipal property, sales and use and other excise taxes as authorized by Colorado statutes or Town ordinance. 
Section 10.6 - Short-Term Notes 
    The Town may issue notes in anticipation of the collection of taxes or other revenues or grants. Such notes shall mature within the fiscal year in which they are issued. 
Section 10.7 - Lease Certificates of Participation 
    The Council shall have the power, by ordinance, to approve the execution and delivery of certificates of participation, representing undivided interests in rights to receive principal and interest components of rental payments by the Town under any lease from an owner of real or personal property to the Town. 
Section 10.8 - Refunding Bonds 
    The Council may authorize, by ordinance, without an election, issuance of refunding securities for the purpose of refunding or providing for the payment of any outstanding securities of the Town as they mature, or in advance of maturity by means of an escrow or otherwise. 
Section 10.9 - Development Revenue Bonds 
    The Town may issue industrial or commercial development revenue bonds, hospital or health care development revenue bonds, multi-family housing revenue bonds, single-family mortgage revenue bonds and other development revenue bonds as authorized by Colorado statutes or by Town ordinance and loan the proceeds thereof to private companies, hospitals, health care providers, housing developers, banks and other organizations under loan agreements pledged as the security for such bonds. 
Section 10.10 - Limitation of Actions 
    Any litigation challenging the issuance of any bond or other form of borrowing authorized by this Article X shall be filed in a court of competent jurisdiction no later than thirty (30) days after the effective date of the ordinance authorizing such borrowing. Any claims filed outside the time limits of this Section shall be barred. 
Section 10.11 - No Additional Limitations 
    Expect as explicitly provided in this Article, there shall be no limitations on the authority of the Town to incur indebtedness or to issue securities. 
ARTICLE XI - TAXATION 

Section 11.1 - Authority to Levy Taxes 
    The Council may levy and collect taxes without limitation as to amount for municipal purposes, which may include, but shall not be limited to, general ad valorem property taxes, sales taxes and excise taxes. The authority to levy taxes shall be subject only to those limitations imposed by a duly adopted ordinance, by this Charter, or by the Constitution, as now existing or as may be hereafter adopted or amended. 
Section 11.2 - Authority to Acquire Property at Tax Sales 
    In addition to any other power it has to acquire property, the Town is hereby authorized to purchase or otherwise acquire property on which there are delinquent taxes and/or special assessments. The Town may sell and dispose of any property acquired under this authority, provided approval for any such sale or disposal is accomplished by ordinance. 
ARTICLE XII - PUBLIC UTILITIES AND FRANCHISES 

Section 12.1 - General Powers 
    The Town shall have and exercise with regard to all utilities and franchises all municipal powers including, without limitation, all powers not expressly forbidden by the Constitution or statute. The right of the Town to create, operate, maintain, organize, construct, purchase, or condemn any public utility, work or way is expressly reserved. Except as expressly forbidden by the Constitution or this Charter, all powers concerning the granting, amending, revoking or otherwise dealing in franchises shall be exercised by the Council. 
Section 12.2 - Utility Rates and Service Areas 
    The Council shall by ordinance establish rates for services provided by Town-owned utilities. The Council may by ordinance extend the municipal utilities beyond Town boundaries. 
Section 12.3 - Granting of Franchises 
    The Town shall have the power to grant a franchise for a period of up to and including ten (10) years by ordinance. If an ordinance granting a franchise is put to voter approval pursuant to the initiative or referendum process, the proposed franchisee shall pay the expense of such election. Any franchise may be renewed for additional term(s) of ten (10) years or less (per term) in accordance with the procedures to grant a new franchise. 
Section 12.4 - Control of Water Reserved to Town 
    No franchise, right, or privilege shall be granted affecting the use of water or water rights belonging to the Town, or affecting its water systems, without retaining complete and absolute control for the Town. 
Section 12.5 - Franchise Records 
    The Council shall cause to be kept in the office of the Town Clerk a franchise record in which shall be transcribed copies of all franchises granted by the Town. The record shall be a complete history of all such franchises and shall include a comprehensive and convenient reference to all actions at law affecting the same, and copies of all annual and inspection reports, and such other information as the Council may require. 
Section 12.6 - Existing Franchises 
    All franchise ordinances of the Town in effect at the time that this Charter is adopted shall remain in full force and effect according to their provisions and terms until the expiration date provided in such ordinance or until modified by another franchise. 
ARTICLE XIII - TRANSITIONAL PERIOD 

Section 13.1 - Purpose of Transitional Provisions 
    The purpose of this Article is to provide for an orderly transition from the present Town government to the Home Rule government under the provisions of this Charter. 
Section 13.2 - Effective Date of Charter and Transition Period 
    This Charter shall become effective on January 1, 2003; provided, however, that the provisions regarding adoption of the budget shall become effective so as to control adoption of the budget for the 2004 fiscal year and for subsequent years. Beginning with the effective date of the Charter, there shall be a period of one (1) year which shall be known as the "transition period." During the transition period, the Council shall review the existing ordinances of the Town and shall take steps to enact new ordinances or resolutions to implement the provisions of this Charter where necessary, and to supercede the provisions of otherwise applicable state statutes where appropriate, as determined by the Council. 
Section 13.3 - Prior Town Legislation 
    All ordinances and resolutions of the Town that are not inconsistent with this Charter and that are in force and effect upon the effective date of this Charter shall continue in full force and effect until repealed or amended. Those provisions of any effective bylaw, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation that are inconsistent with this Charter are hereby repealed to the minimum extent necessary to be consistent herewith. During the transition period, the Council shall amend the existing Town Code so as to delete the ordinances repealed by this Section 13.3; provided, however, that any provisions of the Town Code that are inconsistent with this Charter but that are not deleted during the transition period shall still be deemed repealed by this Section and shall be of no effect. 
To the extent that the Town has not adopted an ordinance or resolution to address a matter that is addressed by the Colorado Revised Statutes and would be applicable to a statutory town that did not have such an ordinance or resolution, then the provisions of such statutes shall continue to apply until the Town adopts such an ordinance or resolution. 
To the maximum extent permitted by law, any ordinance, resolution, or other official action taken by the Town prior to the effective date of this Charter shall be deemed to have taken place under the authority of this Charter. Without limiting the preceding sentence, to the extent that the Town's home-rule authority cannot legally be extended retroactively to apply to any particular ordinance or resolution, then, and only then, all such ordinances or resolutions which would otherwise be deemed wholly or partially invalid if enacted under the authority of a statutory town are hereby reenacted under the authority of this Charter as of the effective date hereof. 
Section 13.4 - Present Mayor and Board of Trustees to Continue in Office 
    The Board of Trustees and Mayor in office at the time of adoption of this Charter shall become the Councilors and the Mayor, respectively, and shall carry out the duties and responsibilities of the Council and the Mayor as provided herein. The terms of office of the Councilors and the Mayor shall remain the same as the terms for which they were elected. 
Section 13.5 - Continuation of Officers and Employees 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, after the effective date of this Charter, all appointed officers and all employees of the Town shall continue in that Town office or employment which corresponds to the Town office or employment they held prior to the effective date of this Charter as though they had been appointed or employed in the manner provided in this Charter. Except only as expressly set forth in this Charter, all employees and officers of the Town shall be deemed "at will" and may be removed or terminated at any time with or without cause, regardless of the terms or conditions of the original appointment or employment. 
Section 13.6 - Savings Clause 
    This Charter shall not affect any suit pending in any Court or any document heretofore executed in connection therewith. Except for the provisions of Section 13.5 concerning at will employment, nothing in the Charter shall invalidate any existing contracts between the Town and any person or public agency. 
ARTICLE XIV - MISCELLANEOUS LEGAL PROVISIONS 

Section 14.1 - Governmental Immunity 
    The Town reserves to itself all rights under the Colorado Governmental Immunity Act, as now existing or hereafter amended. 
Section 14.2 - Emergency Powers and Line of Succession 
    The Council shall, by ordinance, provide for emergency powers and a line of succession in case of riot, insurrection, disaster, or extraordinary emergency. 
Section 14.3 - Article and Section Headings 
    The headings and titles of Articles, Sections, and Subsections of this Charter are for convenience only and shall have no substantive effect. 
Section 14.4 - Charter Amendments 
    This Charter may be amended at any time in the manner provided by the Constitution. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as preventing the submission to the people of more than one Charter amendment at any one election. If provisions of two or more proposed amendments adopted or approved at the same election conflict, the amendment receiving the highest affirmative vote shall become effective. 
Section 14.5 - Interpretations 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the context hereof, all words used in this Charter indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the time of the adoption of this Charter but shall extend to and include the time of the happening of any event or requirement for which provision is made herein. The singular number shall include the plural, the plural shall include the singular, and the masculine gender shall extend to and include the feminine gender and the neuter. 
Section 14.6 - Saturdays, Sundays and Holidays 
    Except where expressly provided to the contrary, whenever a date fixed by this Charter, or by ordinance, for the doing or completion of any act falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, such act shall be done or completed on the next succeeding day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. 
Section 14.7 - Severability of Charter Provisions 
    If any provision, section, article or clause of this Charter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be found to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect any remaining portion or application of the Charter that can be given effect without the invalid portion or application, provided such remaining portions or applications are not determined by the court to be inoperable, and to this end this Charter is declared to be severable. 
Section 14.8 - Reserved 
Editor's note- Ord. 11 , § 1, adopted Aug. 27, 2013, repealed former § 14.8, which pertained to termination of appointed officials. 
CERTIFICATE OF ADOPTION 
We, the undersigned, present members of the Town of Basalt Home Rule Charter Commission, duly elected by the people of Basalt, Colorado, at a special election held on May 21, 2002, under authorization of Article XX, Constitution of the State of Colorado, do hereby certify that the foregoing is the Proposed Charter as finally approved and adopted by the members of the Commission on the 11 th day of September, 2002, for submission to the people of Basalt at the general election to be held on November 5, 2002. 
Done in triplicate at Basalt, Colorado, this 17 th day of September, 2002. 
/s/   
      LEROY DEROUX 
      Chairman   /s/   
      Laurie Dows   
/s/   
      Franklin McSwain   /s/   
      Anne Freedman   
/s/   
      Dick Merritt   /s/   
      Peter Frey   
/s/   
      Jim Paussa   /s/   
      Tiffany Gildred   
/s/   
      Bob Rugile   I hereby certify that the above and foregoing document is the Charter adopted at a general election in the Town of Basalt, Colorado, held November 5, 2002, and duly filed by me with the Secretary of State of the State of Colorado. 
/s/   
      Pam Schilling 

      Town Clerk of Basalt, Colorado   
BASALT MUNICIPAL CODE 
1991 
A Codification of the General Ordinances 
  
of the Town of Basalt, Colorado 
  
A Home Rule Municipality 

PREFACE 
The Town of Basalt, a statutory town, has published its Municipal Code in a format which features the following: 
The Table of Contents is the table containing each chapter and article title, with reference to page location. Preceding each chapter is a chapter table of contents, also identifying each article by the subject name provided. 
The two-place section numbering system places the chapter number first, followed by a hyphen and section number. This two-place system is simplified by the elimination of article numbering. Each section may be cited by the chapter and section numbers which, together with reserved section numbers, are in sequence within each chapter. 
The open chapter and page numbering system creates reserved chapter and page numbers for expansion or revision of the code without undue complication when changes are made to the code by supplementation. 
The Disposition of Ordinances Table identifies the source for the contents of the code. This table provides ordinance numbers in chronological order and location by section number for the present code contents. Thus, if there is interest in determining whether an ordinance, or a portion thereof, is contained within the code, the Disposition of Ordinances Table will provide that information. The Table of Up-to-Date Pages lists all of the current pages through the most recent supplementation. 
The Index provides references by common and legal terminology to the appropriate code sections. Cross references are provided with the Index when appropriate. 
Supplements to the code provide regular updating of the code to maintain it as a current compilation of all the legislation which has general and continuing effect. Without regular supplementation, the code would soon lose its usefulness as a complete source of the general law of the municipality. Supplementation is accomplished by the periodic publication of additions and amendments to the code. 
TOWN OF BASALT, COLORADO 
ORDINANCE NO. 22 
SERIES OF 1991 
    AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF BASALT, ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE TOWN OF BASALT; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
    Be It Ordained by the Board of Trustees of the Town of Basalt, Colorado: 
    Section 1. The code entitled Municipal Code of the Town of Basalt published by Colorado Code Publishing Company, consisting of Chapters 1 through 18, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before December 30, 1991, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal established in the foregoing section shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that had been previously repealed by any ordinance which is repealed by this Ordinance. 
    Section 4. The following codes were adopted by reference and incorporated in the Municipal Code of the Town of Basalt. One (1) copy is on file in the Town Clerk's office: 
(1)  The Model Traffic Code for Colorado Municipalities , 1977 edition, published by the State Department of Highways, as adopted and amended in Section 8-1 et seq ; 
(2)  The Uniform Fire Code , 1988 edition, published by the Western Fire Chiefs Association and International Conference of Building Officials, as adopted and amended in Section 18-61 et seq ; 
    Section 5. The following codes are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in the Municipal Code of the Town of Basalt. One (1) copy is on file in the Town Clerk's office: 
(1)  The Uniform Building Code , 1991 edition, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, as adopted and amended in Section 18-1 et seq ; 
(2)  The Uniform Building Code Standards , 1991 edition, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, as adopted and amended in Section 18-1 et seq ; 
(3)  The Uniform Mechanical Code , 1991 edition, published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, as adopted and amended in Section 18-1 et seq ; 
(4)  The Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings , 1991 edition, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, as adopted in Section 18-1; 
(5)  The Uniform Plumbing Code , 1991 edition, published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, as adopted and amended in Section 18-1 et seq ; 
(6)  The National Electrical Code , 1990 edition, published by the National Fire Protection Association, as adopted and amended in Section 18-1 et seq ; 
    Section 6. The penalties provided by the Municipal Code of the Town of Basalt are hereby adopted as follows: 
(1)  Sec. 1-82.   General penalty for violations. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, any person violating any provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of the ordinances of the Town shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the ordinances of the Town shall be punished by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment except as hereinafter provided in Section 1-83. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the ordinances of the Town is committed, continued or permitted by any such person, and he or she shall be punished accordingly. 
(2)  Sec. 1-83.   Application of penalties to juveniles and to convictions of lesser offense. 
Every person who, at the time of commission of the offense, was at least ten (10) but not yet eighteen (18) years of age, and who is subsequently convicted of or pleads guilty or nolo contendere to, a violation of any provision of this Chapter, shall be punished by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) per violation or count. Any voluntary plea of guilty or nolo contendere to the original charge or to a lesser or substituted charge shall subject the person so pleading to all fines and/or penalties applicable to the original charge. 
(3)  Sec. 6-10.   Delinquent charges. (Article I, Business Licenses) 
Any person failing to pay any license fee levied under this Article by January 31 shall thereafter be deemed delinquent and the license deemed expired. To renew the license, licensee shall be subject to a delinquent fee charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each month thereof during which said fee is delinquent, assessed on the first day of the month, in addition to any other penalty which may be imposed for the violation of this Code. 
(4)  Sec. 7-141.   Dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs. 
(c)  Any potentially dangerous dog as described in Section 7-131(24) that has caused no human injury or a domestic animal injury and has been found running at large may be impounded, and the owner shall be fined fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first offense and one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for the second offense. The third offense will result in a mandatory court appearance of the dog's owner. 
(5)  Sec. 7-149.   Penalties. (Article VII, Dogs) 
(a)  Any person convicted of violating any provisions of this Article, which violation does not result in bodily injury to any person, shall be punished for such offense by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days or by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00), or by both such imprisonment and fine, plus the customary court costs as applicable. 
(b)  The following fines (penalty assessment), except those stated in Section 7-150, shall apply to any such violation and shall be applied either through the penalty assessment procedure of Section 16-2-201, C.R.S., or by the court after conviction, in which case the court shall also assess the appropriate court costs: 
(1)  First offense: Twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(2)  Second offense: One hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(3)  Third offense: Two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(4)  Fourth offense and any subsequent conviction: The court may impose a fine of up to the three hundred dollar ($300.00) maximum or imprisonment in the county jail for not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, for each separate offense. 
(5)  Any violations of Sections 7-111 or 7-112 shall be subject to the following penalties, which shall be assessed at the discretion of the court within the limits set forth below: 
a.  First offense within any one (1) year period, fifteen dollars ($15.00) to fifty dollars ($50.00). 
b.  Second offense within any one (1) year period, thirty dollars ($30.00) to one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
c.  Third offense within any one (1) year period, sixty dollars ($60.00) to three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
d.  Fourth or subsequent offense, no less than one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and a mandatory court appearance. 
(h)  Any violation of any provisions of this Article which results in bodily injury to any person or animal caused by a dog shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a minimum fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and imprisonment for three (3) months, or both, up to a maximum fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and imprisonment for twelve (12) months. 
(6)  Sec. 7-150.   Animal Control Center charges and fines. 
(7)  Failure to vaccinate and/or wear a rabies tag: 
a. First offense $15.00 b. Second offense $25.00 c. Third offense $50.00 d. Subsequent offenses $300.00 
maximum 
penalty  
(8)  Dangerous dog at large: Any offense $300.00 maximum penalty and mandatory court appearance 
(9)  Potentially dangerous dog at large: 
a. First offense $50.00 b. Second offense $150.00 c. Third offense $300.00 
maximum 
penalty and 
mandatory court 
appearance  
(10)  Barking dog: 
a. First offense $25.00 b. Second offense $100.00 c. Third offense $200.00 d. Subsequent offenses $300.00 
maximum 
penalty  
(11)  Female dog in estrus: 
a. First offense $25.00 b. Second offense $100.00 c. Third offense $200.00 d. Subsequent offenses $300.00 
maximum 
penalty  
(7)  Sec. 8-2.   Amendments. (Article I, Model Traffic Code) 
(11)  Article XXVII, Fine Schedule, is hereby created: 
"ARTICLE XXVII 
Fine Schedule 
    Except as may be otherwise provided, every person who is convicted of, who admits liability for, or against whom a judgment is entered for a violation of any provision of Section 1-1 to 20-19 shall be fined or penalized in accordance with the penalty schedule set forth below. These penalties shall apply whether the defendant acknowledges his guilt or liability or is found guilty by the court or otherwise has judgment entered against him. Penalties for violating specific actions shall be as follows: 
Violation of Description Fine Points Sec. 1-1 Vehicle approaching/entering intersection $20.00 3 Sec. 1-2 Vehicle turning left 20.00 3 Sec. 2-1 Controlled intersection at through streets 35.00 3 Sec. 2-2 Stop or yield intersection 35.00 3 Sec. 3-1 Stop sign at railroad crossing 35.00 4 Sec. 3-2 Obedience to railroad signal 35.00 4 Sec. 3-3 Stop at railroad grade crossings 35.00 3 Sec. 3-4 Moving heavy equipment at railroad crossing 35.00 0 Sec. 3-5 Emerging from/entering alley, driveway, building 35.00 3 Sec. 4-1 Speed 1-9 over 25.00 3 Speed 10-19 over 55.00 4 Speed 20-24 over 100.00 6 Sec. 4-4 Failure to reduce speed for special hazards 40.00 6 Sec. 4-5 Minimum speed regulation 15.00 3 Sec. 5-2 Careless driving 50.00 4 Sec. 6-1 Moving parked vehicle 15.00 3 Sec. 6-2 Signal required 20.00 2 Sec. 6-3 Position/method turning at intersection 20.00 3 Sec. 6-4 Signal required 20.00 2 Sec. 6-6 Turning around limitations 20.00 3 Sec. 7-1 Drive on right side 20.00 4 Sec. 7-2 Passing oncoming vehicles 20.00 4 Sec. 7-3 Overtaking vehicle on left 20.00 4 Sec. 7-4 Passing on right 20.00 4 Sec. 7-5 Limitations on passing on left 20.00 4 Sec. 7-6 Following too closely 20.00 4 Sec. 8-1 Driving on one way streets and alleys 20.00 3 Sec. 8-2 Driving on laned roadways 20.00 3 Sec. 8-3 Obeying lane control devices 20.00 3 Sec. 9-1 Driving on divided streets 20.00 3 Sec. 9-2 Use of controlled access roads 20.00 3 Sec. 10-1 Proper parking 10.00 0 Sec. 10-2 Angle parking obedience 10.00 0 Sec. 10-3 Lamps on parked vehicles 15.00 0 Sec. 10-4 Unattended motor vehicle 10.00 0 Sec. 10-5 Parking not to obstruct traffic/maintenance 10.00 0 Sec. 10-6 Parking in alleys 10.00 0 Sec. 10-7 Moving unattended vehicle 10.00 0 Sec. 10-8 Clearance between vehicles 10.00 0 Sec. 10-9 Waiting for parking space to be cleared 10.00 0 Sec. 11-1 Stopping, standing, parking prohibited 10.00 0 Sec. 11-2 Prohibited parking 10.00 0 Sec. 11-3 Stopping, standing, parking on highway 15.00 0 Sec. 12-1 Regulations not exclusive 10.00 0 Sec. 12-2 Obedience to regulations 10.00 0 Sec. 12-3 Parking in handicapped space 15.00 0 Sec. 12-4 All-night parking 10.00 0 Sec. 12-5 Emergency parking only 10.00 0 Sec. 13-1 Standing in passenger loading zone 10.00 0 Sec. 13-2 Standing in freight loading zone 10.00 0 Sec. 13-3 Permits for loading zones 10.00 0 Sec. 13-4 Bus stops regulated 10.00 0 Sec. 13-5 Taxicab stands regulated 10.00 0 Sec. 13-6 Standing in restricted parking zone 10.00 0 Sec. 15-2 Obedience to official devices 20.00 4 Sec. 15-3 Official devices for enforcement 20.00 4 Sec. 15-4 Legality of official devices 20.00 4 Sec. 15-5 Traffic control signals 20.00 4 Sec. 15-6 Flashing signals 20.00 4 Sec. 15-7 Lane-use-control signals 20.00 3 Sec. 15-9 Signals inoperative 20.00 4 Sec. 15-10 Marked traffic lanes 20.00 3 Sec. 15-11 Barricades 10.00 0 Sec. 15-12 Unauthorized signs, signals, markings 15.00 0 Sec. 15-13 Interference with official devices 10.00 0 Sec. 16-1 Pedestrians to obey traffic devices 20.00 0 Sec. 16-2 Pedestrians' right-of-way in crosswalks 20.00 0 Sec. 16-3 Crossing at right angles 10.00 0 Sec. 16-4 Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalk 10.00 0 Sec. 16-5 Crossing/yielding with no crosswalk 10.00 0 Sec. 16-6 Pedestrians to obey railroad signals 10.00 0 Sec. 16-7 Walking along roadways, hitchhiking 10.00 0 Sec. 16-8 Driving through pedestrian safety zone 10.00 0 Sec. 16-9 Driving on sidewalk 10.00 0 Sec. 16-10 Driving on play streets 15.00 0 Sec. 16-11 Colliding w/pedestrian, blind pedestrians 20.00 4 Sec. 17-1 Bicycle regulations, parents/guardian resp. 15.00 0 Sec. 17-10 Traffic laws apply to bicycles (deleted 12/03) 15.00 0 Sec. 17-11 Obedience to traffic control devices 15.00 0 Sec. 17-12 Riding on bicycles 15.00 0 Sec. 17-13 Riding on roadways/bicycle paths 15.00 0 Sec. 17-14 Bicycle speed 15.00 0 Sec. 17-15 Bicycle entering/emerging from alley/driveway 15.00 0 Sec. 17-16 Carrying articles on bicycles 10.00 0 Sec. 17-17 Bicycle parking 10.00 0 Sec. 17-18 Riding on sidewalks 15.00 0 Sec. 17-19 Equipment required 15.00 0 Sec. 17-20 Clinging to vehicles 15.00 0 Sec. 17-21 Bicycles prohibited 15.00 0 Sec. 18-2 Size and weight restrictions 85.00 0 Sec. 18-3 Height, width & length restrictions 75.00 0 Sec. 18-4 Projecting loads 20.00 0 Sec. 18-5 Spilling loads 40.00 0 Sec. 18-6 Trailers and towed vehicles 15.00 0 Sec. 18-9 Weight limits on certain streets 20.00 0 Sec. 18-13 Idling vehicle 35.00 0 Sec. 19-2 Required equipment for vehicles 40.00 0 Sec. 19-3 When lighted lamps required 15.00 2 Sec. 19-4 Windows unobstructed, wipers 15.00 0 Sec. 19-5 Unauthorized insignia 5.00 0 Sec. 19-8 Emblem for slow-moving vehicles 15.00 0 Sec. 20-1 Obstruction of view or driving mechanism 35.00 0 Sec. 20-2 Unlawful riding 35.00 0 Sec. 20-3 Boarding or alighting from vehicles 10.00 0 Sec. 20-4 Riding in trailers 10.00 0 Sec. 20-5 Opening/closing vehicle doors 15.00 0 Sec. 20-6 Limitations on backing 15.00 2 Sec. 20-7 Costing prohibited 15.00 3 Sec. 20-8 Following fire apparatus 15.00 3 Sec. 20-9 Crossing fire hose 15.00 0 Sec. 20-10 Littering/foreign matter on street 40.00 0 Sec. 20-11 Parade permits 10.00 0 Sec. 20-12 Funeral processions 20.00 4 Sec. 20-13 Motorcycle rules 15.00 0 Sec. 20-14 Impeding traffic 15.00 3 Sec. 20-15 Use of multiple-beam headlights 15.00 2 Sec. 20-16 Stop signs & speed limits in mobile home parks 20.00 0 Sec. 20-17 Temporary regulations for emergencies 10.00 0 Sec. 20-18 Safety belt required 10.00 0 Sec. 20-19 Child restraint 50.00 0"  
  
(8)  Sec. 8-6.   Violations and penalties. (Article I, Model Traffic Code) 
The following penalties, herewith set forth in full, shall apply to this Chapter: 
(1) It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions stated or adopted in this Chapter. 
(2) Except as provided in Section 8-2(11) of this Code, every person convicted of a violation of any provision stated or adopted in this Chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(9)  Sec. 13-24.   Inspections. 
Any authorized representative of the Water Department shall have the right to enter any property or building where water furnished by the Town is used, for the purpose of making an inspection of pipes, fixtures or appliances and for the further purpose of detecting and eliminating any alteration, connection to or disconnection from meters, wasting of water, improper or unauthorized use of water facility, installation of pipes or fixtures or other improper use of water. Property owners shall make access available during regular working hours to Water Department personnel within fifteen (15) days of notification. Failure to comply shall result in a penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) per quarter being added to owner's water bill and shall allow the Town to charge for the estimated usage of water, both at each billing period.. 
(10)  Sec. 13-31.   Additional service or fixtures. 
(b) Any user, owner or occupant of a structure who installs or uses additional fixtures or plumbing services and does not report same shall be charged at double the ordinary rates for such fixtures or plumbing service for the period of time that such fixtures are in use and remain unreported, in addition to a penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each violation, such amount to be added onto and collected with the water bill at each billing period. 
(11)  Sec. 16-268.   Penalty for violations. (Article XIII, Zoning Administration and Enforcement) 
Failure to comply with all of the provisions of the Chapter, unless a variance has been authorized by the Board of Zoning Adjustment, shall constitute a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or imprisonment for a period of not more than thirty (30) days, or both. Each day that such a violation continues to exist shall be considered as a separate offense subject to penalty as specified herein. 
(12)  Sec. 18-3.   Violation and penalties. (Article I, Construction Code) 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this code is committed, continued or permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punishable by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(13)  Sec. 18-5.   Amendments to the Electrical Code. 
(12) Violations and penalties. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the Town or cause or permit the same to be done contrary to or in violation of any or the provisions of this code. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this code shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this code is committed, continued or permitted, and, upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punishable by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(14)  Sec. 18-63.   Penalties for violations. (Article IV, Fire Prevention Code) 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of the Uniform Fire Code and amendments thereto or any other provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Upon conviction of each such violation such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00), or by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any the provisions of the Uniform Fire Code and amendments thereto is committed, continued or permitted 
    Section 7. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the Town to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 8. Ordinances adopted after December 30, 1991, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to those provisions of the Code. 
    Section 9. The Board of Trustees herewith finds, determines and declares that this Ordinance is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public health and safety in order to make this ordinance applicable to the Town at the earliest possible date so that administrative efficiency may be obtained therefrom and to assure that the purposes of this Ordinance are met. This Ordinance shall become effective thirty (30) days after publication thereof. 
    INTRODUCED this 11th day of December, 1991. 
      TOWN OF BASALT, COLORADO 
ATTEST: 
/s/ signature 
      Mayor Larry Gottlieb   /s/ signature 
      Stephanie Nye, Town Clerk   (SEAL) 
    ADOPTED AND ORDERED PUBLISHED on this 30th day of December, 1991. 
ATTEST: 
/s/ signature 
      Mayor Larry Gottlieb   /s/ signature 
      Stephanie Nye, Town Clerk   (SEAL) 
APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
/s/ signature 
      Sherry Caloia, Town Attorney   
CHAPTER 1 - General Provisions 
ARTICLE I - Code 

Sec. 1-1. - Adoption of Code. 
    The published code known as the Basalt Municipal Code , of which one (1) copy is now on file in the office of the Town Clerk and may be inspected during regular business hours, is enacted and adopted by reference as a primary code and incorporated herein as if set out at length. This primary code has been promulgated by the Town of Basalt, Colorado, as a codification of all the ordinances of the Town of Basalt, of a general and permanent nature through Ordinance No. 22, for the purpose of providing an up-to-date code of ordinances, properly organized and indexed, in published form for the use of the citizens and officers of the Town. 
(Prior code 1-6; Ord. 22 §1, 1991) 
Sec. 1-2. - Title and scope. 
    This Code constitutes a compilation, revision and codification of all the ordinances of the Town of Basalt, of a general and permanent nature, and shall be known as the Basalt Municipal Code . 
(Ord. 22 §1, 1991) 
Sec. 1-3. - Purpose and construction. 
    The provisions of this Code and all proceedings under it shall be construed with a view toward effecting the objectives of this Code and promoting justice. 
(Prior code 1-4) 
Sec. 1-4. - Adoption of codes by reference. 
    Codes may be adopted by reference, as provided by state law. 
(Ord. 22 §1, 1991) 
Sec. 1-5. - Repeal of ordinances not contained in Code. 
    All ordinances and parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Town Council, and in force on the date of the adoption of this Code and not contained in the Code, are hereby repealed as of the effective date of the adopting ordinance, except as hereinafter provided. 
(Prior code 1-9; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 1-6. - Matters not affected by repeal. 
    The repeal of ordinances and parts of ordinances of a permanent and general nature by Section 1-5 above shall not affect any offense committed or act done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract, right or obligation established prior to the time when said ordinances and parts of ordinances are repealed. 
(Prior code 1-10) 
Sec. 1-7. - Ordinances saved from repeal. 
    The continuance in effect of temporary and/or special ordinances and parts of ordinances, although omitted from this Code, shall not be affected by such omission therefrom, and the adoption of this Code shall not repeal or amend any such ordinance or parts or part of any such ordinance. Among the temporary and/or special ordinances not repealed or amended by the adoption of this Code are ordinances: 
(1)  Creating, opening, dedicating, vacating or closing specific streets, alleys or other public ways. 
(2)  Naming or changing the names of specific streets and other public ways. 
(3)  Establishing the grades of specific streets and other public ways. 
(4)  Establishing the grade or lines of specific sidewalks. 
(5)  Authorizing or relating to specific issuances of general obligation bonds. 
(6)  Creating specific sewer and paving districts and other local improvements districts. 
(7)  Authorizing the issuance of specific improvement district bonds. 
(8)  Making special assessments for local improvements and authorizing refunds from specific local improvement district and bond proceeds. 
(9)  Annexing territory to or excluding territory from the Town. 
(10)  Dedicating or accepting any specific plat or subdivision. 
(11)  Calling or providing for a specific election. 
(12)  Authorizing specific contracts for purchase of beneficial use of water by the Town. 
(13)  Approving or authorizing specific contracts with the State or with others. 
(14)  Authorizing a specific lease, sale or purchase of property. 
(15)  Granting rights-of-way or other rights and privileges to specific railroad companies and other public carriers. 
(16)  Granting a specific gas company or other public utility the right or privilege of constructing lines in the streets and alleys or of otherwise using the streets and alleys. 
(17)  Granting a franchise to a specific public utility company, or establishing rates for and otherwise regulating a specific public utility company. 
(18)  Appropriating money. 
(19)  Levying a temporary tax or fixing a temporary tax rate. 
(20)  Relating to salaries. 
(Prior code 1-11) 
Sec. 1-8. - Code supersedes prior ordinances. 
    This Code shall supersede all other general and permanent ordinances and parts of ordinances passed by the Town Council prior to the enactment of this Code, except such ordinances as are expressly saved from repeal or continued in full force and effect, shall hereafter be set forth by reference. 
(Prior code 1-7; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 1-9. - Changes in previously adopted ordinances. 
    In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the Town for adoption and revision as part of the Code, certain grammatical changes and other minor changes were made in one (1) or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Town Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to read as such. 
(Prior code 1-13; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 1-10. - When effective. 
    All provisions of this Code shall be in full force and effect on and after the effective date of this ordinance. 
(Prior code 1-8) 
Secs. 1-11-1-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II - Definitions and Usage 

Sec. 1-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the Town of Basalt, and/or any codification of the same, shall be construed as defined in this Section, unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases: 
    Charter means the Home Rule Charter of the Town of Basalt, Colorado, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
    Code means the Basalt Municipal Code. 
    Computation of time means the time within which an act is to be done. It shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day; and if the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. 
    County means the County of Eagle, Colorado, or the County of Pitkin, Colorado, as the case may require, recognizing that the Town is located in both counties herein mentioned. 
    C.R.S. means Colorado Revised Statutes. 
    Law denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the State of Colorado, the ordinances of the Town and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder. 
    May is permissive. 
    Month means a calendar month. 
    Must is mandatory; shall is mandatory. 
    Oath includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words swear and sworn shall be equivalent to the words affirm and affirmed. 
    Ordinance means a permanent law of the Town. Action required by the Charter to be in the form of an ordinance shall be taken only by ordinance. A temporary or special law, administrative action, order or directive, statement of policy or declaration of intent may be in the form of a resolution or motion. 
    Owner , as applied to land or a building, includes any part owner, joint owners, tenants in common or joint tenants of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
    Person means natural person, a joint venture, joint-stock company, partnership, association, firm, club, company, corporation, business, trust or organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them. 
    Personal property includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt. 
    Preceding and following mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property includes real and personal property. 
    Real property includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    State means the State of Colorado. 
    Street includes streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs or other public ways in the Town which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and opened to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this State. 
    Tenant and occupant , applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
    Title, title of office, officer, office, board, etc. The use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the Town or his or her designated representative. 
    Town means the Town of Basalt, Colorado, and such territorial limits of the Town of Basalt, and such territory outside the Town over which the Town has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision. 
    Town Council means the Town Council, consisting of one (1) Mayor and six (6) Councilors, of the Town of Basalt. All its members or all Council members means the total number on the Council entitled to vote in any particular circumstance upon any question, as provided by the general laws of the State of Colorado. 
    Written or in writing means any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year means a calendar year. 
(Prior code 1-1; Ord. 22 §1, 1991; Ord. 33, §§B1, B2(1), 2003) 
Sec. 1-32. - Usage of terms. 
    All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
(Ord. 22 §1, 1991) 
Sec. 1-33. - Interpretation and usage. 
    The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the Town: 
(1)  Gender. The use of one (1) gender shall be interpreted to include any other gender unless the context clearly requires another interpretation. 
(2)  Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
(3)  Words used in the present tense include the past and future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. 
(Prior code 1-2) 
Secs. 1-34-1-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III - General 

Sec. 1-51. - Titles and headings not part of ordinances. 
    Chapter and Article titles and headings, and titles of sections and other divisions of the Code, or in supplements made to the Code, are inserted for the convenience of users of the Code and are not a part of the ordinances. 
(Prior code 1-14) 
Sec. 1-52. - Authorized acts. 
(a)  Whenever a provision appears requiring an officer of the Town to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
(b)  The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; but if the time for an act to be done shall fall on Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, the act shall be done upon the next regular business day following such Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
(Ord. 22 §1, 1991) 
Sec. 1-53. - Prohibited acts. 
    Whenever in Town ordinances any act or omission is made unlawful, it includes causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
(Ord. 22 §1, 1991) 
Sec. 1-54. - Acts by agents, representatives. 
    When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent or representative as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by any authorized agent or representative. 
(Ord. 22 §1, 1991) 
Sec. 1-55. - Repeal of ordinances. 
    The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of such ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. 
(Ord. 22 §1, 1991) 
Sec. 1-56. - Publication of ordinances. 
    All ordinances, as soon as may be after their passage, shall be recorded in a book kept for that purpose and authenticated by the signatures of the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem and Town Clerk or Deputy Town Clerk. All ordinances shall be published in accordance with the requirements of the Charter. 
(Ord. 22 §1, 1991; Ord. 33 §B2(2), 2003) 
Sec. 1-57. - Severability of Code provisions. 
    If any sections, section, subsection or provision of this Code, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, is declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any competent court, such invalidity shall not affect the other sections, subsections, provisions or applications of this Code if they can be given effect without the invalid sections, section, subsection, provision or application. 
(Prior code 1-21) 
Sec. 1-58. - Amendments to Code. 
    Ordinances and parts of ordinances of a permanent and general nature passed or adopted after the adoption of this Code may be passed or adopted either in the form of amendments to the Code adopted by this ordinance or without specific reference to said Code. But in either case, all such ordinances and parts of ordinances shall be deemed amendments to said Code, and all of the substantive, permanent and general parts of such ordinances and changes made thereby in the Code shall be inserted and made in the Code as provided in Section 1-62. 
(Prior code 1-18) 
Sec. 1-59. - Examination of Code. 
    The Mayor and Town Clerk shall carefully examine at least one (1) copy of the Code adopted by this ordinance to see that it is a true and correct copy of the Code. Similarly, after each supplement has been prepared, printed and inserted in the Code, the Mayor and Town Clerk shall carefully examine at least one (1) copy of the Code as supplemented. The copy of the Code as originally adopted or amended shall constitute the permanent and general ordinances of the Town and shall be so accepted by the courts of law, administrative tribunals and all others concerned. 
(Prior code 1-16) 
Sec. 1-60. - Copy of Code on file. 
    At least one (1) copy of the Code shall be kept in the office of the Town Clerk at all times, and such Code may be inspected by any interested person at any time during regular office hours, but may not be removed from the Town Clerk's office except upon proper order of a court of law. 
(Prior code 1-17) 
Sec. 1-61. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  The Town Clerk shall cause supplementation of the Code to be prepared and printed from time to time as he or she may see fit. All substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the Town Council or adopted by initiative and referendum, and all amendments and changes in ordinances or other measures included in the Code since the previous supplementation, shall be included. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk, or someone authorized and directed by the Town Clerk, to keep up to date the copy of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Town Clerk for the use of the public. 
(Prior code 1-19) 
Sec. 1-62. - Sale of Code books; supplementation. 
    Copies of this Code and any supplements thereto may be purchased from the Town Clerk upon the payment of a fee in an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. 
(Prior code 1-20; Ord. 12 §B3, 2003) 
Sec. 1-63. - Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation. 
    Any person, firm or corporation who shall alter, change or amend this Code except in the manner prescribed in this Article, or who shall alter or tamper with the Code in any manner so as to cause the ordinances of the Town to be misrepresented thereby shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided by Section 1-82. 
(Prior code 1-23) 
Secs. 1-64-1-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV - General Penalty 

Sec. 1-81. - Violations. 
    It is a violation of this Code for any person to do any act which is forbidden or declared to be unlawful, or to fail to do or perform any act required, in this Code. 
(Ord. 22 §1, 1991) 
Sec. 1-82. - General penalty for violations. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, any person violating any provision or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of the ordinances of the Town shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the ordinances of the Town shall be punished by a fine in an amount set forth on the fee schedule for such fines adopted by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq . Further, any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the ordinances of the Town may be punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment except as hereinafter provided in Section 1-83. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the ordinances of the Town is committed, continued or permitted by any such person, and he or she shall be punished accordingly. In the event the Town shall incur court costs and/or attorney fees to prosecute a person for a violation of a Town ordinance, a person convicted of violation of a Town ordinance shall pay to the Town all attorney fees and costs reasonably incurred by the Town in such matter. 
(Prior code 1-5; Ord. 12 §B4, 2003) 
Sec. 1-83. - Application of penalties to juveniles and to convictions of lesser offense. 
    Every person who, at the time of commission of the offense, was at least ten (10) but not yet eighteen (18) years of age, and who is subsequently convicted of or pleads guilty or nolo contendere to a violation of any provision of this Code, shall be punished by a fine in an amount set forth on the fee schedules for such fines adopted by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. Any voluntary plea of guilty or nolo contendere to the original charge or to a lesser or substituted charge shall subject the person so pleading to all fines and/or penalties applicable to the original charge. 
(Ord. 22 §1, 1991; Ord. 12 §B5, 2003) 
Sec. 1-84. - Penalty for violations of ordinances adopted after adoption of Code. 
    Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of any ordinance of a permanent and general nature passed or adopted after adoption of this Code, either before or after it has been inserted in the Code by a supplement, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided by Section 1-82, unless another penalty is specifically provided for the violation. 
(Ord. 22 §1, 1991) 
Sec. 1-85. - Interpretation of unlawful acts. 
    Whenever in this Code any act or omission is made unlawful, it is also unlawful to cause, allow, permit, aid, abet or suffer such unlawful act or omission. Concealing or in any manner aiding in the concealing of any unlawful act or omission is similarly unlawful. 
(Prior Code 1-3) 
Secs. 1-86-1-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V - Inspections 

Sec. 1-101. - Inspections by authorized officials. 
    Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any ordinance or resolution, or whenever there is reasonable cause to believe there exists an ordinance or resolution violation in any building or upon any premises within the jurisdiction of the Town, any authorized official of the Town may, upon presentation of the proper credentials, enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon him or her by ordinance; provided that, except in emergency situations, the authorized official shall give the owner and/or occupant, if they can be located after reasonable effort, twenty-four (24) hours' written notice of the authorized official's intention to inspect. In the event that the owner and/or occupant refuses entry, the official is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
(Prior code 10-4) 
Sec. 1-102. - Authority to enter premises under emergency. 
    Law enforcement officers, members of the Fire Department, other fire departments operating under a mutual assistance agreement or automatic aid agreement with the Town, certified emergency medical technicians and paramedics during the course of employment with a governmental agency are hereby granted the authority to enter private residences within the Town without invitation from the occupant or occupants of the residence at any time such person has reasonable grounds to believe a medical emergency is in progress within the subject premises and the occupant or occupants of such premises are incapable of consenting to the entry because of such medical emergency. 
(Ord. 22 §1, 1991) 
Secs. 1-103-1-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI - Seal 

Sec. 1-121. - Corporate seal. 
    There is hereby established and declared to be a seal for the Town of Basalt, the impression of which shall be as follows: in the center the word "SEAL," and around the outer edge the words "Town of Basalt, Colorado." 
(Prior code 2-37) 
Secs. 1-122-1-140. - Reserved. 
CHAPTER 2 - Administration and Personnel 
ARTICLE II - Mayor and Town Council 

Sec. 2-21. - Corporate authority; appointment of other officers; compensation of Mayor and Councilors. 
    The corporate authority of the Town is vested in a Town Council, consisting of one (1) Mayor and six (6) Councilors. The Town Council shall have the power to appoint such other officers and officials as provided in the Charter. The Mayor of the Town and each member of the Town Council shall receive compensation as established in the annual budget. 
(Prior code 2-1; Ord. 2, 2000; Ord. 33 §B2(3), 2003) 
Sec. 2-22. - Regular meetings. 
    The Town Council shall hold regular meetings on the second and fourth Tuesdays in each and every month at a time as set forth on the agenda for the meeting; provided, however, that when the date fixed for any regular meeting of the Town Council falls on a day designated by law as a legal or national holiday, the Town Council may, by resolution passed at the next preceding meeting, vacate the meeting date which falls on a holiday and may designate some other date upon which the meeting shall be held. All regular meetings of the Town Council will be held in the Town Hall unless posted on the agenda as to another location. 
(Ord. 03, 2005) 
Secs. 2-23-2-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III - Officers and Employees 

Sec. 2-51. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-52. - Town Clerk; oath and bond. 
    Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, the Town Clerk shall take an oath of office and furnish a surety bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), conditioned upon the faithful discharge of his or her duties as Town Clerk. 
(Prior code 2-11; Ord. 33 §B2(6), 2003) 
Sec. 2-53. - Duties of Town Clerk. 
    The Town Clerk shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Be the Clerk of the Town Council, attend all meetings of the Town Council and keep a permanent journal of its proceedings. The journal of the proceedings shall reflect the names of all Councilors who vote against or abstain from voting on any particular motion. 
(2)  Be the custodian of all of the Town's records, and such records shall be kept open at all reasonable times for inspection by electors of the Town. 
(3)  Attest by his or her signature all ordinances and resolutions enacted or passed by the Town Council. 
(4)  Provide and maintain in his or her office a supply of forms for all petitions required to be filed for any purposes provided by the Town Council. 
(5)  Be the custodian of all bonds of all officers and employees of the Town. 
(6)  Manage the Town Clerk's office and supervise and direct the work of all other employees in that office. 
(7)  Maintain a direct and close working relationship with the Town Council, the Mayor, Town Manager and other administrative and executive personnel. 
(8)  Regularly use discretion and independent judgment to carry out the policies and objectives of the Town Council and other executive and administrative officers. 
(9)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by laws of the State, the Town Council or the Code. 
(Prior code 2-12; Ord. 5 §1, 1991; Ord. 05 §1, 2004; Ord. 33 §§B1, B2(6), 2003) 
Sec. 2-54. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-55. - Finance Director; oath and bond. 
    Before entering upon the duties of the office, the Finance Director shall take an oath of office and furnish a surety bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), to be approved by the Town Council, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his or her duties as Finance Director. When he or she shall vacate such office, the Finance Director shall turn over and deliver to his or her successor all money, books, papers, property or things belonging to the Town and remaining in his or her charge as Finance Director. 
(Prior code 2-14; Ord. 33 §§B1, B2(6), 2003) 
Sec. 2-56. - Duties of Finance Director. 
    The Finance Director shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Receive all money belonging to the Town and give receipts therefor, keep his or her books and accounts in such manner as may be prescribed by the Town Council or by state statute, keep a separate account of each fund or appropriation and of the debts and credits belonging thereto, and report to the Town Council at each regular monthly meeting thereof the state of the treasury at the date of such account and the balance of money in the treasury. The Finance Director shall also accompany such statement of accounts with a statement of all monies received in the treasury and on what account during the preceding month, together with all warrants redeemed and paid by him or her, and their supporting vouchers shall be delivered and filed in the Town Clerk's office upon every day of such statement. All books and accounts of the Finance Director shall always be subject to inspection by any member of the Town Council. 
(2)  Annually, within ten (10) days after the close of the fiscal year, make out and file with the Town Clerk a full and detailed account of all receipts and expenditures of the Town and of all his or her transactions as Finance Director during the preceding fiscal year, and show in such account the state of the treasury at the close of the fiscal year. The Town Clerk shall immediately make available such account to the public. 
(3)  If there shall be no funds in his or her hands for the payment of any Town warrant presented to him or her for such payment, register such warrants in a book to be kept by him or her for such purpose, and endorse upon all such warrants so presented to him or her the time and date of such registry. Whenever he or she shall pay such warrants, he or she shall enter the payment and the amount of interest allowed or paid on such warrant in the registry. 
(4)  Manage the Finance Director's office and supervise and direct the work of all other employees in that office. 
(5)  Maintain a direct and close-working relationship with the Town Council, the Mayor, the Town Manager and other administrative and executive personnel. 
(6)  Regularly use discretion and independent judgment to carry out the policies and objectives of the Town Council and other executive and administrative officers. 
(7)  Serve as Assistant Budget Officer and prepare a budget annually. 
(8)  Perform all other duties, keep all records and make all reports that are required by the provisions of this Code or by the state laws. 
(Prior code 2-15, Ord. 5 §2, 1991, Ord. 11 §1, 1991; Ord. 33 §§B1, B2(6), 2003) 
Sec. 2-57. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-58. - Duties of Town Attorney. 
    The Town Attorney shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Act as legal advisor to and be attorney and counsel for the Town Council, and be responsible solely to the Town Council. The Town Attorney shall advise any officer or department head of the Town in matters relating to his or her official duties when so requested by the Town Council and file with the Town Clerk a copy of all written opinions given by him or her. 
(2)  Prosecute ordinance violations and conduct cases for the Town in Municipal Court. He or she shall file with the Municipal Court Clerk copies of such records and files pertaining thereto. 
(3)  Prepare or review all ordinances, contracts, bonds or other written instruments which are submitted to him or her by the Town Council, and promptly give his or her opinion as to the legal consequences thereof. 
(4)  Call to the attention of the Town Council all matters of law and changes or developments therein affecting the Town. 
(5)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him or her by the Town Council. 
(Prior code 2-17; Ord. 33 §§B1, B2(6), 2003) 
Sec. 2-59. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-60. - Acting Town Manager. 
    The Town Council, by majority vote, may appoint an Acting Town Manager during the period of each vacancy in the office or during the absence or disability of the Town Manager. Such Acting Town Manager shall, while he or she is in such office, have all the responsibilities, duties, functions and authority of the Town Manager. 
(Prior code 3-2; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 2-61. - Town Manager - Powers and duties. 
    The Town Manager shall be responsible to the Town Council for the proper administration of all affairs of the Town placed in his or her charge, and to that end he or she shall have the power and duty and be required to: 
(1)  Be responsible for the enforcement of the laws and ordinances of the Town. 
(2)  Cause a proposed budget to be prepared annually by the Assistant Budget Officer and submit it to the Town Council and be responsible for the administration of the budget after its adoption. 
(3)  Prepare and submit to the Town Council, as of the end of the fiscal year, a complete report on the administrative activities of the Town for the preceding year and, upon request of the Town Council, make written or verbal reports at any time concerning the affairs of the Town under his or her supervision. 
(4)  Keep the Town Council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the Town and make such recommendations to the Town Council for adoption as he or she may deem necessary or expedient. 
(5)  Except as limited by the Charter, exercise supervision and control over all executive and administrative departments, including the consolidation or abolishment of administrative departments, the creation or abolishment of positions within existing or new departments and the hiring and firing of all personnel. The Town Manager may change the title or responsibilities of any employee or with regard to any position of employment in the Town as long as the Town Manager assures that all of the duties and responsibilities that are outlined for that position below and throughout this Code are assigned to an employee and/or contractor of the Town. The Town Manager shall be responsible for ensuring that each employee of the Town is informed of his or her responsibilities under the Charter or this Code. 
(6)  Be responsible for the enforcement of all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the Town in any contract or public utility franchise and, upon knowledge of any violation thereof, report the same to the Town Council for such action and proceedings as may be necessary to enforce the same. 
(7)  Attend Town Council meetings and participate in discussions with the Town Council in an advisory capacity. 
(8)  Provide for engineering, architectural, maintenance and construction services required by the Town at the direction of the Town Council. 
(9)  Perform the duties of Building Inspector and Zoning Enforcement Officer in whatever functions that may be required in these capacities. 
(10)  Perform such other duties as may be required of him or her by the Town Council which are not inconsistent with this job. 
(Prior code 3-3, Ord. 11 §2, 1991; Ord. 33 §§B1, B2(6), (7), 2003; Ord. 09 §2, 2013) 
Sec. 2-62. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-63. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-64. - Appointment of Building Inspector; term. 
    The Town Manager may appoint, at any time after this Article becomes effective, a qualified person as a Building Inspector. The Building Inspector shall serve until the next regular election or until his or her successor is appointed. 
(Prior code 10-1; Ord. 33 §B2(8), 2003) 
Sec. 2-65. - Powers and duties; Building Inspector. 
    The Building Inspector shall be the chief enforcement officer for all building regulations, zoning regulations and subdivision regulations. He or she shall have all powers of inspection and all other powers granted by ordinance and allowed by law. He or she shall issue applications for permits in accordance with the above regulations, and perform all other duties as the Town Council may direct or as are compelled by law. 
(Prior code 10-2; Ord. 33 §§B1, B2(6), 2003) 
Sec. 2-66. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-67. - Town Planner. 
    The Town Manager shall appoint a Town Planner. It shall be the duty of the Town Planner to: 
(1)  Advise the Planning and Zoning Commission, Board of Adjustment and Town employees on all matters relating to planning and zoning within the Town. 
(2)  Review all plans and proposals by Town employees or private individuals which concern planning and zoning matters, to determine whether such plans and proposals conform to the master plan and the rules and regulations of the Town and the laws of the State. 
(3)  Manage the Town Planner's office and supervise and direct the work of all other employees in that office. 
(4)  Maintain a direct and close-working relationship with the Town Council, the Mayor, the Town Manager and other administrative and executive personnel. 
(5)  Regularly use discretion and independent judgment to carry out the policies and objectives of the Town Council and other executive and administrative officers. 
(6)  Carry out such other duties, and prepare such other records and reports as prescribed by the Town Council, this Code or state law. 
(Ord. 5 §4, 1991; Ord. 33 §§B1, B2(9), 2003) 
Sec. 2-68. - Public Works Director. 
    The Town Manager shall appoint a Public Works Director. It shall be the duty of the Public Works Director to: 
(1)  Oversee and act as chief administrator of the Maintenance and Building Inspection Departments. 
(2)  Manage the Town Public Works office and supervise and direct the work of all other employees in that office. 
(3)  Maintain a direct and close-working relationship with the Town Council, the Mayor, the Town Manager and other administrative and executive personnel. 
(4)  Regularly use discretion and independent judgment to carry out the policies and objectives of the Town Council and other executive and administrative officers. 
(5)  Undertake such other duties and responsibilities as the Town Council or this Code shall prescribe. 
(Ord. 5 §5, 1991; Ord. 33 §§B1, B2(10), 2003) 
Sec. 2-69. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-70. - Oaths of office. 
    Whenever it is required that an officer or other appointee under this Code shall be required to take an oath before entering upon the duties of such office and no oath is specifically prescribed, such oath shall be in substantially the following form: 
"I, ......................., do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of the United State of America and the State of Colorado and that I will well and faithfully perform the duties of the office of ....................... of the Town of Basalt, Colorado, upon which I am about to enter." 
(Prior code 2-30; Ord. 22 §1, 1991) 
Sec. 2-71. - Personnel Review Board. 
(a)  There is hereby created a Personnel Review Board consisting of six (6) regular members and three (3) alternates, appointed by the Town Council. The members of the regular Personnel Review Board shall be as follows: two (2) members from the Town Council; two (2) members from the Town staff; and two (2) members from the citizenry of the Town, other than Town staff or Town Council members. The initial terms of office of one (1) member from the Town Council, one (1) member from the Town staff and one (1) member from the citizenry shall expire on December 31, 1980; and terms of office of the remaining three (3) Board members shall expire on December 31, 1981. After these initial terms, the regular terms of membership shall be for two (2) years. The Town Council shall select three (3) alternate members from the citizenry, who may or may not be members of the Town Council or of the Town staff, who shall serve for two-year terms but whose initial terms shall expire December 31, 1980. 
(b)  Upon the resignation or discharge of a member of the Personnel Review Board, a successor shall be chosen to serve out the remaining term. 
(c)  If a regular member of the Personnel Review Board fails to attend, without being excused by the Chairman, three (3) consecutive meetings or five (5) meetings within any twelve-month period, the member shall be discharged by the Chairman of the Personnel Review Board. 
(d)  The Personnel Review Board may adopt, upon the prior approval of the Town Council, rules and regulations governing its procedures, which shall not be inconsistent with this Code or with the Personnel Code. The rules and regulations shall provide, among other things, that the Personnel Review Board shall elect a Chairman and a Secretary, shall meet at least quarterly and shall submit minutes of its meetings to the Town Manager and, upon request, to the Town Council. 
(e)  If a regular member cannot attend a meeting, an alternate member selected by the Chairman shall take his or her place, and the alternate member shall have at such meeting all the duties and privileges of the absent regular member. 
(Prior code 2-31; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 2-72. - Discharge or suspension of Town employees. 
(a)  No employee or officer of the Town shall be deemed to have a vested or property right to continued employment with the Town. Any employee may be discharged, demoted or suspended for not more than thirty (30) working days without pay if the Town Manager determines at any time, with or without the recommendations of the Personnel Review Board after appeal, that the employee committed any of the following: 
(1)  Any unlawful conduct which affects, interrupts or interferes with the employee's performance of his or her job duties. 
(2)  Willful, reckless or negligent failure to perform the employee's job duty. 
(3)  Refusal or repeated inability to follow orders of superiors relating to the performance of job duty. 
(4)  Repeated inefficiencies or incompetency in performing job duties or in following orders of superiors relating to the performance of job duties. 
(5)  Violation of department regulations of the department in which the employee works. 
(6)  Conviction of any act constituting a felony or a misdemeanor, or involving dishonesty or other moral turpitude. 
(7)  Working while under the influence of or impaired by intoxicating liquor. 
(8)  Appearing for scheduled work under the influence of or impaired by intoxicating liquor. 
(9)  Appearing for work or working under the influence or consuming during work narcotic drugs or dangerous drugs without a valid doctor's prescription. 
(10)  Working in violation of the orders of the employee's physician which direct the employee not to work. 
(11)  Willful, reckless or negligent destruction of the Town's property. 
(12)  Excessive tardiness. 
(13)  Refusal to accept and comply with any promotion, demotion or other job reassignment. 
(14)  Incurring a physical or mental condition which renders the employee unfit or unable to perform his or her job duties. 
(15)  Making or allowing any false statement in the employee's application for employment. 
(16)  Being absent from work without authorized vacation leave or emergency leave. 
(b)  The choice of ordering demotion, discipline or discharge shall be the Town Manager's, who shall select a choice which in his or her opinion is suited to the gravity of the situation. 
(Prior code 2-31.3; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 2-73. - Disciplinary action. 
    Discipline may include suspension without pay for not more than thirty (30) workdays, private reprimand, public reprimand, removal of merit increase for not more than twelve (12) months, demotion, reassignment, requiring further job training and requiring the employee to pay for damages caused. 
(Prior code 2-31.4) 
Sec. 2-74. - Discipline of officer. 
    If the Town Manager or a majority of the members of the Town Council determines that one (1) or more of the grounds for discharge or discipline set forth in Section 2-72 has been committed by the Chief of Police, the Town Clerk or the Finance Director, the Town Council shall hold a hearing within seven (7) days' notice to the officer involved. At the hearing, the officer may present evidence and witnesses on his or her own behalf, be represented by counsel and cross-examine witnesses. Such officer may be discharged by the Town Council if the Council finds that such officer committed one (1) or more of those acts set forth in Section 2-72 above. 
(Prior code 2-31.5; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 2-75. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-76. - Personnel Code. 
    The Town Council shall enact by resolution a Personnel Code for all the Town's officers and employees, except the Town Manager, Town Attorney and Municipal Judge. The Personnel Code shall establish rules and regulations for the employment relationship between such persons and the Town and shall include, among other things, provisions for hiring, probationary employees, part-time employees, job position designations, pay rates, overtime, holidays, vacations and any other provisions convenient or necessary to assist, direct and manage the employees of the Town. To the extent there is any inconsistency or conflict between the Personnel Code and sections 2-71 through 2-74 above, the Personnel Code shall govern and control. 
(Prior code 2-31.7; Ord. 33 §B2(11), 2003) 
Secs. 2-77-2-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV - Social Security 

Sec. 2-91. - Benefit of insurance to both personnel and Town. 
    It is the opinion of the Town Council that the extension of the social security system to certain employees and officers of the Town will benefit said employees by allowing them to participate in the provisions of the Old Age and Survivor's Insurance System and will benefit the Town. However, it is the opinion of the Town Council that the social security system should not be extended to police officers and the Chief of Police, or to extend the social security system or provide Old Age and Survivor's Insurance System benefits to police officers or the Chief of Police. Nothing in this Article shall be deemed to refer to or include police officers or the Chief of Police, or to extend the social security system or provide Old Age and Survivor's Insurance System benefits to police officers or the Chief of Police. 
(Prior code 2-32; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 2-92. - Enabling act; authorization of plan and agreement. 
    The 38th General Assembly of the State of Colorado, in regular session, enacted a statute, known as "House Bill No. 291," which is the enabling Act provided for in Section 218 of Public Law 734, 81st Congress, which designated the Department of Employment Security, State of Colorado, to act as the department to implement the coverage of employees and officers under said Old Age and Survivor's Insurance System. The Town is hereby authorized to execute and deliver to the Department of Employment Security a plan or plans, and agreement, required under Section 5 of said enabling Act and the Social Security Act, to extend coverage to employees and officers under the Old Age and Survivor's Insurance System. 
(Prior code 2-33) 
Sec. 2-93. - Authorization to establish payroll deduction system. 
    The Finance Director is hereby authorized to establish a system of payroll deduction, to be matched by payments by the Town, to be paid into the Contribution Fund of the State through the Department of Employment Security, and to make charges of this tax to the funds from which wage or salary payments are issued to employees of the Town. Such payments are to be made, in accordance with the provisions of Sections 1400 and 1410 of the Federal Insurance Contribution Act, on all services which constitute employment within the meaning of that Act. Payments made to the Department of Employment Security shall be due and payable on or before the 18th day of the month immediately following the completed calendar quarter, and such payments which are delinquent shall bear interest at the rate of one-half of one percent (.5%) per month until such time as payments are made. 
(Prior code 2-34; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 2-94. - Appropriation. 
    Appropriation is hereby made from the proper fund or funds of the Town in the necessary amount to pay into the Contribution Fund as provided in Section 5(c)(1) of the enabling Act and in accordance with the plan or plans and agreement. 
(Prior code 2-35) 
Sec. 2-95. - Authority to enter into agreement. 
    Authority is given to the Mayor and the Town Clerk to enter into an agreement with the Department of Employment Security, which agreement shall be in accordance with House Bill No. 291 and with Paragraph 218 of the Social Security Act. Such plan and agreement shall provide that the participation of the Town shall be in effect as of July 1, 1966. 
(Prior code 2-36) 
Secs. 2-96-2-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V - Police Department 

Sec. 2-111. - Creation; composition. 
    There is hereby created a Police Department for the Town, which shall consist of one (1) Chief of Police and as many police officers as may from time to time be deemed necessary for the safety and good order of the Town. 
(Prior code 2-18) 
Sec. 2-112. - Departmental rules and regulations. 
    The Police Department shall be operated and managed in accordance with such departmental rules and regulations as may from time to time be adopted by the Town Council. 
(Prior code 2-19; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 2-113. - Chief of Police: appointment; powers and duties; oath and bond. 
(a)  The Town Manager, with the approval of the Town Council, shall appoint a Chief of Police, who shall be the head of the Police Department. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to: 
(1)  See that the ordinances of the Town are duly enforced and the rules and regulations of the Police Department obeyed, and perform such duties as may be required by the Town Council. 
(2)  Direct the operations of the Police Department, subject to the rules and regulations thereof, and supervise the work of all the other employees in that department. 
(3)  Arrest any person violating any of the Town ordinances and take such violator before the Municipal Court for trial. 
(4)  Take charge of the Town jail and all prisoners confined therein, and all those who are sentenced to labor on the streets or public works of the Town, and see that orders and sentences with reference to such are fully executed and complied with. 
(5)  Render such accounts of the Police Department, his or her duties and receipts as may be required by the Town Council, and keep the records of his or her office open to the inspection of the Town Council at any time. 
(6)  Act as the town disaster coordinator and his or her department shall act as the municipal disaster agency. The salary of the Police Chief shall not be increased by reason of his or her performing the duties of disaster coordinator, as such responsibilities are deemed to be incidental to the office. 
(c)  Before entering upon the duties of such office, the Chief of Police shall take and subscribe to an oath that he or she will support the Constitution and laws of the State, the Constitution of the United States and the ordinances of the Town, and that he or she will faithfully perform the duties of the office upon which he or she is about to enter. He or she shall furnish a surety bond, to be approved by the Town Council, in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), conditioned upon the faithful discharge of the duties of his or her office. 
(Prior code 2-20, Ord. 5 §3, 1991; Ord. 05 §2, 2004; Ord. 33 §§B1, B2(12), 2003) 
Sec. 2-114. - Duties of police officers. 
    All members of the Police Department shall have powers and duties as follows: 
(1)  Perform all duties required bythe Chief of Police. 
(2)  Suppress all riots, disturbances and breaches of the peace, apprehend all disorderly persons in the Town, and pursue and arrest any person fleeing from justice in any part of the State. 
(3)  Be the enforcement officers of the Town and see that the provisions of this Code and the laws of the State are complied with. They shall arrest without process all persons engaged in the violation in their presence of any provision of this Code or the laws of the State. Upon such arrest they shall forthwith convey such offenders before the proper officer, to be dealt with according to the law; provided, however, that they may incarcerate any person whom they shall arrest at a late or unusual hour of the night until the following morning; and provided further that, in special cases relating to traffic offenses, they may release the arrested person upon his or her promise to appear in court. 
(4)  Report such offenses as may come to their knowledge to the proper Town official or report the same to the Municipal Judge, securing a warrant for the arrest of offenders when desirable. 
(5)  Execute and return all writs and processes directed to them by the Municipal Judge in any case arising out of a Town ordinance, and may serve the same in any part of the County in which the Town is situated. 
(6)  Observe the conditions of the streets, sidewalks and alleys of the Town, and of any obstruction, nuisance or impediments therein, and shall take necessary measures to remove or abate the same. 
(Prior code 2-21) 
Sec. 2-115. - Uniforms. 
    Every police officer shall wear at all times while on duty a uniform of the type and quality prescribed by the Town Council. 
(Prior code 2-24; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 2-116. - Extraterritorial duty. 
    The Chief of Police may, in his or her discretion, upon the request of the chief of police or person exercising the functions thereof in any other jurisdiction, assign police officers under his or her control, together with such equipment as he or she shall deem proper, to perform temporary duty in the requesting jurisdiction. 
(Prior code 2-26) 
Secs. 2-117-2-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI - Municipal Court 

Sec. 2-131. - Creation of Municipal Court. 
    A qualified Municipal Court of record in and for the Town is hereby created and established pursuant to and governed by the provisions of state law. 
(Prior code 6-1; Ord. 22 §1, 1991) 
Sec. 2-132. - Jurisdiction. 
    The Municipal Court shall have exclusive original jurisdiction to hear, try and determine all causes arising under this Code or any of the ordinances of the Town. 
(Prior code 6-8) 
Sec. 2-133. - Procedure governed by Colorado Municipal Court Rules and the Court. 
    The procedure, unless otherwise provided in this Article, in the Municipal Court shall be governed by Colorado Municipal Court Rules. The Municipal Judge may make rules for procedures which are not inconsistent with such Colorado Municipal Court Rules, including powers incident to compelling attendance of witnesses, punishment for contempt, and enforcement of orders of Court. 
(Prior code 6-9) 
Sec. 2-134. - Record of proceedings. 
    It shall be a further duty of the Court Clerk to keep and maintain a verbatim record of all proceedings and evidence at trials, by either electric devices or stenographic means. 
(Ord. 22 §1, 1991) 
Sec. 2-135. - Sessions. 
    There shall be regular sessions of Court for the hearing of cases. The Municipal Judge may hold a special session of Court at any time. All sessions of Court shall be open to the public. Where the nature of the case is such that it would be in the best interests of justice to exclude persons not directly connected with the proceeding, the Municipal Judge may order that the courtroom be cleared. 
(Prior code 6-3) 
Sec. 2-136. - Municipal Judges: appointment, oath, salary, powers. 
(a)  The Court shall be presided over by a Municipal Judge appointed for the term of two (2) years at the first regular Town Council meeting following each biennial election. Additional Judges may be appointed as may be needed to transact the business of the Court. If the Municipal Judge shall find it necessary to disqualify himself or herself in a given case, or should he or she be unable to serve for any reason, including vacation or illness, the Town Council may, by resolution, appoint a Judge to hear cases for such time as the presiding Judge is absent. A vacancy in the office of Municipal Judge shall be filled by appointment by the Town Council of the Town for the remainder of the unexpired term. In order for a person to be qualified for the office of Municipal Judge, such person shall be admitted to and be currently licensed in the practice of law in the State. 
(b)  Compensation of the Municipal Judge shall be an annual salary in an amount to be set by the Town Council and shall be payable as other salaries to the municipal employees are paid. The annual salary of the Municipal Judge may not be decreased during his or her term of office. 
(c)  Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, the Municipal Judge shall take an oath by affirmation that he or she will support the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the State and the ordinances of the Town and that he or she will faithfully perform the duties of his or her office. 
(d)  In addition to other powers, the Municipal Judge shall have full power and authority to make and adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of the business of the Municipal Court, consistent with the Municipal Court Rules of Procedure promulgated by the Colorado Supreme Court. 
(Prior code 6-4; Ord. 22 §1, 1991; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 2-137. - Court Clerk: duties and reports, bond. 
(a)  The presiding Municipal Judge shall act as ex officio Clerk of the Court. The Municipal Judge, in his or her capacity as ex officio Court Clerk, shall file monthly reports with the Finance Director of all monies collected, and on the last day of each month shall pay to the Finance Director all monies then in the hands of the Court. 
(b)  The Municipal Judge shall, as ex officio Clerk, execute a performance bond in the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), payable to the Town, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his or her duties and the faithful accounting for and payment of all funds deposited with or received by the Court. Such bond shall be approved by the Town Council prior to the time the Municipal Judge takes office. 
(Prior code 6-5; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 2-138. - Appropriations. 
    The Town Council shall, on an annual basis, budget and appropriate funds to pay the annual salary of the Municipal Judge, together with such other expenses as many be necessary for the proper operation of a Municipal Court. 
(Prior code 6-6) 
Sec. 2-139. - Imposition of Court costs. 
    The Municipal Judge is empowered, in his or her discretion, to assess the following costs against any defendant who is found guilty of violating any provision of this Code or any of the ordinances of the Town or against any defendant who is granted deferred prosecution or deferred sentence: 
(1)  Court costs. Court costs in an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. Penalty assessment or traffic infraction citations postmarked or received by the Municipal Court more than twenty (20) days after the date issued shall be be assessed court costs; 
(2)  Bench warrant fee. A bench warrant fee in an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq., plus any costs incurred for transporting the defendant from his or her place of arrest to the Town; 
(3)  Probationary, incarceration or other services. Actual costs incurred either by the Town or the defendant for probationary or treatment services for the defendant, incarceration or useful public service by the defendant as such may be ordered by the Court; 
(4)  Letter fee. A letter fee in an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq., for any letter sent to a defendant where the defendant has failed to respond to a written notice of court or a summons. Such letter fee shall not limit the Court's ability to fine or sentence a defendant for contempt for such failure to respond. 
(5)  VALE surcharge. Victims and Witnesses Assistance. A surcharge equal to a percentage of the fine imposed for violation of municipal ordinances, including violations under the Model Traffic Code, in the amount of twenty-five percent (25%) shall be charged. All calculated surcharge amounts resulting in dollars and cents shall be rounded to the nearest whole dollar. In the event a portion of the fine is suspended, the surcharge levied shall be computed based upon the original fine, regardless of whether a portion of said fine has been suspended. Said surcharge shall be paid to the Clerk of the Court by the Defendant, and said Clerk shall deposit the money so received in the Victims and Witnesses Assistance Fund. Disbursement of funds shall be in accordance with the guidelines set forth in Section 2-362(d). 
(6)  Police training surcharge. A surcharge equal to a percentage of the fine imposed for a violation of municipal ordinances, including violations under the Model Traffic Code, in the amount of twenty-five percent (25%) shall be charged. All calculated surcharge amounts resulting in dollars and cents shall be rounded to the nearest whole dollar. In the event a portion of the fine is suspended, the surcharge levied shall be computed based upon the original fine, regardless of whether a portion of said fine has been suspended. Said surcharge shall be paid to the Clerk of the Court by the Defendant, and said Clerk shall deposit the money so received in a separate fund allocated for Town of Basalt police officer training. 
(Prior code 6-10; Ord. 10 §1, 1992; Ord. 23 §1, 1996; Ord. 17 §2, 2001; Ord. 12 §§B6-B9, 2003; Ord. 23 §1, 2013) 
Sec. 2-140. - Restitution. 
    The Municipal Judge is empowered to order a defendant who is found guilty of violating any provision of this Code or any of the ordinances of the Town or who is granted a deferred prosecution or deferred sentence to make restitution or reparation, or both, to the victim of the defendant's conduct for the damage or injury which was sustained. 
(Prior code 6-11) 
Sec. 2-141. - Failure to appear unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor offense for any person to fail to appear in Municipal Court when directed to do so by a summons or when ordered to do so by the Municipal Court. Upon conviction of a violation of this Section, such person shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1, Article IV of this Code. 
(Prior code 6-12; Ord. 18 §1, 1997; Ord. 22 §1, 1998) 
Sec. 2-142. - Appearance by counsel acceptable. 
    A written promise to appear in the Municipal Court may be complied with by an appearance by counsel. 
(Prior code 6-13) 
Secs. 2-143-2-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII - Planning and Zoning Commission 

Sec. 2-161. - Creation; composition. 
(a)  Creation. There is hereby created and established a Planning and Zoning Commission in and for the Town. 
(b)  Composition. 
(1)  Regular Members. Such Commission shall consist of seven (7) members to be appointed by the Town Council, five (5) of whom shall be citizens at large and two (2) of whom may be either citizens at large or incumbent Councilors. The citizen-at-large members shall be bona fide residents of the Town, having maintained their primary place of residency within the Town for a minimum of six (6) months, and shall hold no paid office or position in the Town staff. 
(2)  Any member who is no longer a bona fide resident of the Town, no longer maintaining his or her primary place of residency within the Town, shall be removed from the Commission by the Town Council. 
(3)  Alternate Members. The Town Council may appoint one (1) or two (2) alternate members to the Commission. The alternate member or members shall sit with the Planning and Zoning Commission in all hearings and may participate in all discussions as a regular member. An alternate member may vote only in the event a regular Commission member is unable to vote because of absence, illness, conflict of interest or any other reason. Alternate members shall serve for a term of three (3) years. If there is more than one (1) alternate member, then at meetings where only one (1) alternate member's vote is needed, the alternate members shall rotate with one (1) alternate member voting for all votes taken at a Commission meeting and the other alternate member voting in all votes taken at the next Commission meeting where a single alternate member vote is needed. 
(c)  Terms. 
(1)  Citizen-at-large members shall have overlapping three-year terms. At the end of each such member's term, the Town shall advertise and seek applicants for a vacancy on the Commission. Any member whose term is expiring may apply for reappointment to the Commission. Any appointment or reappointment shall be at the discretion of the Town Council pursuant to Subsection (b) of this Section. 
(2)  The term of an incumbent Councilor appointed to the Commission before or during his or her tenure as a Councilor shall be concurrent with his or her term as Councilor. Incumbent Council members appointed during their tenure as Councilor shall continue as a member so long as they remain a Councilor, including any term as Councilor to which they are reelected. Upon expiration of the term of a Councilor appointed to the Commission prior to said person becoming a Councilor, the position occupied by the incumbent Councilor shall be filled by a citizen at large. 
(3)  The term of a citizen-at-large Commissioner elected to the Town Council shall expire with the completion of the Commission term. However, such Commissioner/Councilor shall be eligible for reappointment to the Commission by the Town Council as an incumbent Councilor Commissioner. 
(4)  Any Planning and Zoning Commission member who fails to attend three (3) consecutive regularly scheduled meetings without excuse from the Commission may be removed from the Commission by the Town Council upon recommendation of the Commission. The Commission may excuse the absence of any Commissioners for just cause. 
(5)  Upon the resignation or discharge of a regular citizen-at-large member of the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Councilors shall appoint a new regular member as provided in Subsection (b) of this Section. 
(d)  Officers. 
(1)  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall, at the regular annual meeting in May, organize and elect from among the appointed regular members a chairperson and vice chairperson. Such officers shall serve one-year terms and shall be eligible for reelection. 
(2)  The chairperson shall preside at all meetings and public hearings of the Planning and Zoning Commission, shall decide all points of order or procedure and shall certify plans and transmit reports and recommendations of the Commission to the Town Council. 
(3)  Town staff shall act as the recording secretary, carry on all routine correspondence of the Planning and Zoning Commission, maintain the Commission's files and present, before the next meeting, a copy of the minutes of the Commission's preceding meeting. 
(e)  Meetings. 
(1)  Regular meetings of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be held the first Tuesday of each month at a time to be determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission or Town Planner. Additional or special meetings may be held as necessary either on the third Tuesday of each month or on any other date at a time as determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission or Town Planner. 
(2)  Special meetings of the Planning and Zoning Commission may be called at such times and places, upon such request, and with such notice as required by state statutes and the ordinances of the Town, provided that such special meetings are preceded with a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours' advance notice posted on the east door of the Town Hall. 
(3)  A quorum shall consist of four (4) members. 
(4)  All plans, reports and recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission must be approved by a majority vote of the members present, unless otherwise provided for by state statute. 
(5)  All meetings and records of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be open to the public. 
(Prior code 2-27; Ord. 11 §§1, 2, 1992; Ord. 22 §1, 1992; Ord. 13 §1, 1994; Ord. 24 §§1-4, 1995; Ord. 14 §2, 1997; Ord. 8 §1, 1998; Ord. 19 §1, 2000; Ord. 31 §§2, 3, 2000; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 2-162. - Powers; duties and functions. 
(a)  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall exercise the functions and powers and perform the duties assigned to it by the ordinances of the Town and by state statutes. 
(b)  It shall prepare and adopt a master plan for the physical development of the Town and such areas outside the boundaries of the Town as are proper under state statutes. 
(c)  It shall submit to the Town Council a zoning plan for the Town, with recommendations thereon. 
(d)  All plats or proposed subdivisions shall be submitted to it for its recommendations and approval or disapproval before being presented to the Town Council. 
(e)  It shall hold hearings relative to zoning and changes in zoning ordinances, and it shall make recommendations thereon to the Town Council. 
(f)  It shall have the primary responsibility for investigating and making recommendations to the Town Council on all planning-related issues. 
(g)  The Commission may establish such committees as it deems advisable and assign each committee specific duties or functions. 
(h)  With the consent of the Town Council, the Commission may contract with the Town Planner, engineers and architects and other consultants for such services as it may require, with appropriations by the Town Council. 
(Prior code 2-28; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Secs. 2-163-2-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII - Town Code of Ethics 

Sec. 2-200. - Citation. 
    This Article shall be known as the Basalt Town Code of Ethics. 
(Ord. 7 §1, 1998) 
Sec. 2-210. - Declaration of policy. 
    The proper operation of a democratic government requires that public officers and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that government decisions and policy be made within the proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, a code of ethics for all Town officers and employees is adopted. The purpose of this code is to establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officers and employees by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interest of the Town, and by directing disclosure by such officers and employees of private financial or other interests in matters affecting the Town. 
(Ord. 7 §1, 1998) 
Sec. 2-220. - Effect of common law. 
    This Chapter shall supersede and override the common law as to the subject matter of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 7 §1, 1998) 
Sec. 2-230. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Chapter, unless the context requires otherwise: 
    Business means any corporation, limited liability company, partnership, entity, sole proprietorship, trust, foundation or other individual or organization carrying on a business, whether or not operated for profit. 
    Confidential information means all information, whether transmitted orally or in writing, which is of such a nature that it is not, at that time, a matter of public record or public knowledge. This includes attorney/ client communications and any information that is discussed at an executive session of the Town Council. 
    Council or Town Council means the Town Council of the Town of Basalt, Colorado. 
    Council member means any member of the Town Council. 
    Employee means any person holding a position by appointment or employment in the service of the Town, whether paid or unpaid, part time or full time, including the members of the Planning and Zoning Commission and the members of any other Town board, committee or commission. The term employee shall not include independent contractors. 
    Financial interest means a substantial interest in a business held by an individual which is: 
a.  An ownership interest; 
b.  A creditor interest in an insolvent business; 
c.  An ownership interest in real or personal property; 
d.  A loan or any other debtor or creditor interest; 
e.  A directorship or officership; or 
f.  An employment or prospective employment relationship for which negotiations have begun. 
A Town officer or employee shall be presumed to have a substantial financial interest in any of the above-mentioned interests owned, held or controlled by such officer's or employee's spouse or dependent children. 
    Officer or o fficial means any person holding a position by election in the service of the municipality, whether paid or unpaid, including the members of the Town Council. 
    Official act or official action means any vote, decision, recommendation, approval, disapproval or other action, including inaction, which involves the use of discretionary authority. 
(Ord. 7 §1, 1998; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 2-240. - Principles of conduct. 
    The principles in this Section are intended as guides for conduct and failure to comply with any principle does not constitute a violation of the public trust of office or employment in the Town. A Town official or employee should not: 
(1)  Acquire or hold an interest in any business or undertaking which such officer or employee has reason to believe may be directly and substantially affected to its economic benefit by official action to be taken by the agency over which he or she has substantive authority. 
(2)  Within six (6) months following the termination of his or her office or employment, obtain employment in which he or she will take direct advantage, unavailable to others, of matters with which he or she was directly involved during his or her term of employment. These matters include rules, other than rules of general application, which he or she actively helped to formulate and applications, claims or contested cases in the consideration of which he or she was an active participant. 
(3)  Perform an official act directly and substantially affecting a business or other undertaking to its economic detriment when the official has a substantial financial interest in a competing firm or undertaking. 
(4)  Be involved in, make or accept any ex parte communication or contact concerning a matter which is to be determined after a public hearing without making the contents of such communication or contact a part of the record of such public hearing. 
(5)  Appear on behalf of any private person, business or entity, other than himself or herself, or his or her spouse or minor children, before the Town Council, any Town Board or Commission, the Technical Review Committee, individual Town staff members or the Municipal Court. 
(Ord. 7 §1, 1998; Ord. 13 §1, 2000; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 2-250. - Rules of conduct. 
    A Town officer or Town employee shall not: 
(1)  Disclose or use confidential information acquired in the course of such officer's or employee's duties in order to further substantially their personal financial interest. 
(2)  Engage in a substantial financial transaction involving Town business for his or her private business purposes with a person whom such officer or employee inspects or supervises in the course of his or her official duties. 
(3)  Perform an official act directly and substantially affecting to its economic benefit a business or other undertaking in which such officer or employee has a substantial financial interest or is engaged as counsel, consultant, representative or agent. 
(4)  Accept a gift of substantial value or a substantial economic benefit tantamount to a gift of substantial value: 
a.  Which would tend improperly to influence a reasonable person in their position to depart from the faithful and impartial discharge of their public duties; or 
b.  Which the Town officer or employee knows or which a reasonable person in their position should know under the circumstances is primarily for the purpose of rewarding that officer or employee for official actions they have taken or will take. 
(5)  An economic benefit tantamount to a gift of substantial value includes without limitation a loan at a rate of interest substantially lower than the commercial rate then currently prevalent for similar loans and compensation received for private services rendered at a rate substantially exceeding the fair market value of such services. 
(Ord. 7 §1, 1998) 
Sec. 2-260. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of Section 2-250 shall not prohibit an officer or employee from: 
(1)  Accepting or receiving a benefit as an indirect consequence of the performance of an official act. 
(2)  Taking official action when such officer or employee is similarly situated to other Town residents, such as adopting general land use regulations, owning property within a special or local improvement district, voting for taxes or bonds, adopting ordinances of general applicability or otherwise acting upon matters involving the common public interest. 
(3)  Soliciting or accepting gifts or loans which are: 
a.  Campaign contributions and contributions in kind reported as required by law; 
b.  An occasional nonpecuniary gift, insignificant in value; 
c.  A nonpecuniary award publicly presented by a nonprofit organization in recognition of public service; 
d.  Payment of or reimbursement for actual and necessary expenditures for travel and subsistence for attendance at a convention or other meeting at which such board member or employee is scheduled to participate; 
e.  Reimbursement for or acceptance of an opportunity to participate in a social function or meeting which is offered to such board member or employee which is not extraordinary when viewed in light of the position held by such board member or employee; 
f.  Items of perishable or nonpermanent value, including, but not limited to, meals, lodging, travel expenses or tickets to sporting, recreational, educational or cultural events; 
g.  Payments for speeches, appearances or publications reported pursuant to Section 2-310(1)d of this Article and Section 24-6-203, C.R.S.; or 
h.  Receiving such compensation for his or her services to the Town as may be fixed by ordinance, pay plan, budget or other similar official action. 
Certain of the exempted items in this Section 2-260 shall be reported in accordance with Section 2-310 of this Article. 
(Ord. 7 §1, 1998) 
Sec. 2-270. - Disclosure of personal interest in legislative action. 
    Any member of the Town Council who has a personal or private interest in any matter proposed or pending before the Town Council shall disclose such interest to the Town Council and, except as provided in Section 2-280, shall not vote thereon and shall refrain from attempting to influence the decisions of the other members of the governing body in voting on the matter. The Council member shall leave the room during the Council's discussion and action on the subject, and shall return only when the Council has taken up the next agenda item. 
(Ord. 7 §1, 1998; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 2-280. - When Council member with personal interest may vote. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 2-270, a Council member may vote upon a matter in which he or she has a personal or private interest if his or her participation is necessary to obtain a quorum or to otherwise enable the Council to act, and if he or she complies with the disclosure provisions of Section 2-290. 
(Ord. 7 §1, 1998; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 2-290. - Disclosure to Secretary of State and Town Council. 
    An officer or employee shall, at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to acting in a manner which may impinge on his or her fiduciary duty and the public trust, disclose the nature of his or her private interest. Such officer or employee shall make the disclosure in writing to the Secretary of State and to the Town Council, listing the amount of the private financial interest, if any, the purpose and duration of the personal services rendered, if any, and the compensation received for the services or such other information as is necessary to describe his or her interest. If he or she then performs the official act involved, the officer or employee shall state for the record the fact and summary nature of the interest disclosed at the time of performing the act. 
(Ord. 7 §1, 1998; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 2-300. - Public contracts. 
(a)  Except as provided in Subsection (b) of this Section 2-300, no officer or employee shall have an interest in any contract made by the Town. 
(b)  The provisions of Subsection (a) shall not apply to: 
(1)  Contracts awarded to the lowest responsible bidder based on competitive bidding procedures. 
(2)  Merchandise sold to the highest bidder at public auctions. 
(3)  Investments or deposits in financial institutions which are in the business of loaning or receiving moneys. 
(4)  A contract between the Town and an officer or employee if, because of geographic restrictions, the Town could not otherwise reasonably afford itself of the subject of the contract. It shall be presumed that the Town could not otherwise reasonably afford itself of the subject of a contract if the additional cost to the Town is greater than ten percent (10%) of a contract with an interested party or if the contract is for services that must be performed within a limited time period and no other contractor can provide those services within that time period. 
(5)  A contract with respect to which the officer or employee has disclosed his or her personal or financial interest to the Town Council and has not voted thereon, or with respect to which the Council member has voted thereon in accordance with Section 2-280. 
(c)  No Town official shall be a purchaser or vendor in connection with any sale or purchase made by them in their official capacity. The provisions of this Subsection (c) shall not apply to those contracts described in Subsection (b) of this Section 2-300. 
(Ord. 7 §1, 1998; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 2-310. - Reporting by incumbents and officers. 
    Every incumbent in or candidate elected to public office who receives from any other person any item described in Subsection (1) of this Section 2-310 in connection with the incumbent's or elected candidate's public service shall file with the Town Manager, on or before January 15 of each year, a report for the preceding calendar year. Such report shall be on forms provided by the Secretary of State and shall contain, at a minimum, the name of the person from whom the item was received and the amount or value of the item and the date of receipt. 
(1)  Such report shall include the following: 
a.  Any money including, but not limited to, a loan, pledge or advance of money or a guarantee of a loan of money, with a value of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or more; 
b.  Any gift of any item of real or personal property, other than money, with a value of fifty dollars ($50.00) or more; 
c.  Any loan of any item of real or personal property, other than money, if the value of the loan is fifty dollars ($50.00) or more. For such purpose, the value of the loan means the cost saved or avoided by the incumbent or elected candidate by not borrowing, leasing or purchasing comparable property from a source available to the general public; 
d.  Any payment for a speech, appearance or publication; 
e.  Tickets to sporting, recreational, educational or cultural events with a value of fifty dollars ($50.00) or more for any single event or a series of such tickets with a total value of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more; 
f.  Payment of or reimbursement for actual and necessary expenditures for travel and lodging for attendance at a convention or other meeting at which the incumbent or elected candidate is scheduled to participate, unless the payment of or reimbursement for such expenditures is made from public funds, from a joint government agency or from the funds of any association of public officials or public entities whose membership includes the incumbent's or elected candidate's office or the governmental entity in which such office is held. 
(2)  The report required by this Section 2-310 need not include the following: 
a.  A contribution or contribution in kind that has already been reported pursuant to Section 1-45-108, C.R.S.; 
b.  Any item of perishable or nonpermanent value including, but not limited to, meals, unless such item is required to be reported under Subsection (1)d of this Section; 
c.  A nonpecuniary award publicly presented by an organization in recognition of public service; 
d.  Payment of salary from employment, including other government employment. 
(3)  Any person who provides an incumbent or elected candidate with any item required to be reported by the incumbent or elected candidate pursuant to this Section shall, at the time the item is provided, furnish the recipient with a written statement and dollar value of the item. 
(Ord. 7 §1, 1998; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 2-320. - Limitation on subsequent employment. 
    A former Town employee may not, within six (6) months following the termination of his or her office or employment with the Town, contract with or be employed by an employer who contracts with the Town involving matters with which such employee was directly involved during the term of employment with the Town. 
(Ord. 7 §1, 1998) 
Sec. 2-330. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The Town Council shall have the primary responsibility for the enforcement of this Article VIII. It shall have the power to investigate any complaint, to initiate any suit and to prosecute any criminal or civil action on behalf of the Town wherein it believes such action is appropriate. 
(b)  The Town Council may direct the Town Attorney to investigate or prosecute any apparent violation of this Article or the Council may employ or appoint any qualified attorney to investigate or prosecute any violation or series of violations by one (1) or more persons of the provisions of this Article. 
(c)  Any person who believes that a violation of any portion of this Article has occurred may file a complaint with the Town Council, which shall promptly investigate such complaint and take such action thereon as the Council shall deem to be appropriate. However, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent complainants from instituting direct legal action through the appropriate judicial authority. 
(Ord. 7 §1, 1998; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 2-340. - Penalties and remedies. 
(a)  Any person convicted of willfully and knowingly violating any provision of this Article VIII shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article IV of this Code. Additionally, upon conviction such person shall be liable to the Town for such damages as may have been suffered or incurred as a result of such violation. 
(b)  Upon conviction for any violation of this Article, such officer or employee shall immediately forfeit his or her office or position. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to prohibit such public officer or employee from being reelected, reappointed or otherwise rehired to any position forfeited under the provisions of this Article. 
(c)  Any court of competent jurisdiction called upon to enforce the provisions of this Article may, with the consent of the Town Council, exempt from the provisions of this Article any conduct of a Town officer or employee upon the finding that the enforcement of this Article with respect to such officer's or employee's conduct would not be in the public interest. 
(Ord. 7 §1, 1998) 
Sec. 2-350. - Distribution of Code of Ethics. 
    The Town Clerk shall cause a copy of this Code of Ethics to be distributed to every public officer and employee of the Town within thirty (30) days after enactment of the ordinance adopting this Article VIII. Each public officer and employee elected, appointed or engaged thereafter shall be furnished a copy before entering upon the duties of his or her office or employment. 
(Ord. 7 §1, 1998) 
Secs. 2-351-2-360. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX - Victims and Witnesses Assistance and Law Enforcement Board 

Sec. 2-361. - Creation; composition. 
(a)  Creation. There is hereby created and established the Town of Basalt's Victims and Witnesses Assistance and Law Enforcement Board, hereinafter referred to as the "VALE Board." 
(b)  Composition. Such Board shall consist of five (5) members to be appointed by the Town Council, two (2) of whom shall be citizens at large, two (2) of whom will be incumbent Councilors, and the Chief of Police. 
(Ord. 17 §1 (part), 2001; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 2-362. - Powers; duties and functions. 
(a)  The Board shall designate one (1) of its members as chairman, shall establish rules of procedure and order, and shall hold meetings as it might deem necessary. 
(b)  A surcharge of a percentage of the fine imposed for violation of all municipal ordinances, including ordinance violations under the Model Traffic Code, is hereby levied on each Municipal Court action resulting in a conviction, plea of guilty or no contest, or in a deferred judgment and sentence, which municipal ordinance violation is charged pursuant to the Town ordinances. The percentage surcharge shall be in a percentage approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. All calculated surcharge amounts resulting in dollars and cents shall be rounded to the nearest whole dollar. In the event a portion of the fine is suspended, the surcharge levied shall be computed based upon the original fine, regardless of whether a portion of said fine has been suspended. Said surcharges shall be paid to the Town by the Defendant, and the Town shall deposit the money so received in the fund hereinafter created. 
(c)  The Victims and Witnesses Assistance and Law Enforcement Fund, hereinafter referred to as the "Fund," consists of all monies paid as a surcharge as provided in Subsection (b) above. All monies deposited in the Fund shall be deposited in an interest-bearing account, and all interest earned by monies in the Fund shall be credited to the Fund. The Town Manager, by and through the Finance Director, shall be responsible for establishing a separate fund for purposes of accounting for the revenues and expenditures. At the conclusion of each fiscal year, all monies remaining in the Fund shall remain in the fund for allocation as hereinafter set forth. 
(d)  During the initial three (3) months of the Fund's existence, no money shall be allocated from such fund except for Board expenses. After said Fund is in existence, the Board shall disburse monies from the Fund in the following manner and order: 
(1)  First, to the payment of all reasonable and necessary expenses and costs incurred by the Board in the performance of its duties, including, but not limited to, professional fees, office supplies and meeting expenses. 
(2)  Second, not less than thirty-five percent (35%) of the monies remaining in the fund after the deduction of reasonable expenses and costs shall be allocated for the purchase of victims and witnesses services and reimbursements, as hereinafter set forth. No funds shall be paid except in those specific instances where a formal summons and complaint has been filed by the Police Department in the Municipal Court. 
(3)  Third, any remaining monies may be allocated to the Police Department for the following purposes, including, but not limited to, purchase of equipment, training programs and additional personnel. Such funds shall not be used by the Police Department for defraying the costs of routine and ongoing operation expenses. No disbursement of more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) within this category of expenditures shall be made without the approval of the Town Council following a written recommendation by the Board. 
(e)  Disbursement of funds by the Board on behalf of victims and witnesses assistance services may be used for the following purposes: 
(1)  Provision of services for early crisis intervention. 
(2)  Provision of telephone lines for victims and witnesses assistance. 
(3)  Referral of victims to appropriate social service and victim compensation programs and assistance in filling out forms for compensation. 
(4)  Assistance programs for victims and their families. 
(5)  Education of victims and witnesses about the operation of the criminal justice system. 
(6)  Assistance in prompt return of the victims' property. 
(7)  Notification to the victim of the progress of the investigation, the defendant's arrest, subsequent bail determinations and the status of the case. 
(8)  Intercession with the employers or creditors of victims or witnesses. 
(9)  Assistance to the elderly and to persons with disabilities in arranging transportation to and from court. 
(10)  Provision of translator services. 
(11)  Coordination of efforts to assure that victims have a secure place to wait before testifying. 
(12)  Provision of counseling or assistance during court appearances when appropriate. 
(13)  Protection from threats of harm and other forms of intimidation. 
(14)  Special advocate services. 
(f)  The Board is authorized to accept and evaluate all applications for disbursement of funds, whether emanating from victims, witnesses or law enforcement agencies. Applications for disbursement shall be made upon forms prescribed by the Board, and made available by the Municipal Court and the Police Department. The Board shall establish its own criteria for evaluating applications for disbursement, and nothing herein contained shall obligate the Board to make disbursement of any funds available to it. Upon a finding by the Board that a disbursement shall be made from the Fund, the Board shall submit a written request for payment to the Finance Department, which shall then remit payment in accordance with the request. 
(g)  The Board is required to submit minutes of its meetings to the Town Council at the next regular Town Council meeting following the Board's meeting. 
(Ord. 17 §1 (part), 2001; Ord. 12 §B10, 2003; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Secs. 2-363-2-380. - Reserved 
ARTICLE X - Fines, Penalties and Administrative Fees 

Sec. 2-381. - Fines, penalties and administrative fees. 
    On a regular basis, the Town Council shall set fines, penalties and administrative fees for the Town by ordinance adopted by a majority vote of the Town Council approving a schedule of such fines, penalties and administrative fees ("fee schedules"). The fines, penalties and administrative fees will include, but shall not be limited to, fees for miscellaneous services, license fees, fines and penalties for violations of this Code, business license fees, miscellaneous charges for copies and materials, rates for equipment operation by the Public Works Department, rates for Town personnel to be reimbursed, Municipal Court costs and charges, cemetery fees, animal control fines and fees, miscellaneous permit fees, special assessments, building and development review fees, penalties and fines for traffic infractions. The purposes of fines and penalties are to be a deterrent from violating this Code and to ensure that the cost of enforcing this Code is borne by the person violating the Code, so as to not deplete the resources otherwise available to the Town to protect the health, safety, welfare and quality of life for the citizens of the Town. The purpose of the fees is to ensure that the cost of the service provided is borne by the recipient of the service rather than the taxpayers at large. The amount of revenue generated from fees should cover both the direct and indirect costs of the services provided. The amount of estimated revenue to be generated by each such fee should not exceed the estimated cost of providing the service or facility for which such fee is charged. In setting fines, penalties and administrative fees, the Town Council may consider the fees, fines and penalties assessed by other jurisdictions in Colorado and by persons providing similar services in the private sector. Any distinctions made among feepayers, in terms of the amounts to be paid by such feepayers for the use of a particular service or facility, shall be reasonably related to a legitimate municipal purpose. Such distinctions may include, without limitation, reduced rates for senior citizens, youths, lower income residents and disabled persons. In determining the extent to which the total cost of a particular service or facility should be recovered through the imposition of fees, the Town Council may consider, without limitation: the nature of the facilities or services; the nature and extent of the benefit to the feepayers; the level of demand for a particular service or facility; and ease of collection. 
(Ord. 12 §B2, 2003) 
Sec. 2-382. - Amendment procedure. 
    On a regular basis as determined by Town staff, the head of each department of the Town shall submit to the Town Manager for consideration a schedule for fines, penalties and fees ("fee schedule") associated with that department. On a regular basis, the Town Manager shall submit recommendations for fines, penalties and fees to the Town Council based on the criteria described in Section 2-381 above. The Town Council will approve all fee schedules. If the Town Council fails to or refuses to approve a proposed fee schedule, the last approved fee schedule shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 12 §B2, 2003) 
Sec. 2-383. - Fee schedules available. 
    The Town Clerk shall retain a copy of all fee schedules at Town Hall available for members of the public upon request. Until modified by ordinance approved by the Town Council, the last approved fee schedule for each department shall remain in full force and effect. Until a fee schedule has been approved pursuant to Section 2-381 above, for a particular fine, penalty or fee, then the fine, penalty or fee in effect at the time of the approval of the ordinance codified herein shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 12 §B2, 2003) 
Secs. 2-384-2-400. - Reserved. 
CHAPTER 4 - Revenue and Finance 
ARTICLE I - Fiscal Year 
Sec. 4-1. - Fiscal year established. 
    The fiscal year of the Town shall commence on January 1 of each year and shall extend through December 31 of the same year. 
(Ord. 22 §1, 1991) 

Secs. 4-2-4-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II - General Fund 

Sec. 4-21. - General Fund created. 
    There is hereby created a fund, to be known as the General Fund, which shall consist of the following: All cash balances and fixed assets of the Town not specifically belonging to any special fund of the Town or of an Enterprise fund of the Town. The Finance Director shall separately account for restricted funds that are held in an account with the General Fund. 
(Ord. 22 §1, 1991; Ord. 33 §B2(13), 2003) 
Secs. 4-22-4-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III - Special Funds 

Sec. 4-41. - Special funds created. 
    Conservation Trust Fund. There is hereby created a special fund, to be known as the Conservation Trust Fund. 
(Ord. 22 §1, 1991) 
Sec. 4-42. - Custody and management of funds. 
    Moneys in the funds herein created shall be in the custody of and managed by the Finance Director. The Finance Director shall maintain accounting records and account for all of said moneys as provided by law. Moneys in the funds of the Town shall be invested or deposited by the Finance Director in accordance with the provisions of law. All income from the assets of any fund shall become a part of the fund from which derived and shall be used for the purpose for which such fund was created; provided that, except as otherwise provided in this Article or by other ordinances or laws or by this Code, the Town Council may transfer out of any fund any amount at any time to be used for such purpose as the Town Council may direct. 
(Ord. 22 §1, 1991; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Secs. 4-43-4-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV - Sales Tax 

Sec. 4-61. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to impose a sales tax on the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail or the furnishing of certain services upon every retailer in the Town pursuant to the authority granted by the Charter. 
(Prior code 60-1; Ord. 6 §1, 1991; Ord. 33 §B2(14), 2003) 
Sec. 4-62. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Article, the definitions of words herein contained shall be as defined in Section 39-26-102, C.R.S., and said definitions are incorporated herein by this reference. 
(Prior code 60-2; Ord. 6 §2, 1991) 
Sec. 4-63. - Licenses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail or to furnish certain services, as herein specified, without first obtaining a license therefor. Such license shall be granted and issued by the Town Clerk and shall be in force and effect until December 31 of the year in which it is issued, unless sooner revoked. 
(b)  Such license shall be granted and renewed only upon application stating the name and address of the person desiring such a license, the name and location of such business and such other facts as the Town Clerk may require. 
(c)  For each license issued under the provisions of this Section, a fee in an amount to be approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of each licensee, on or before January 1 of each year during which this Section remains in effect, to obtain a renewal thereof if the licensee remains in the retail business or is liable to account for the tax provided in this Article, but nothing herein contained shall be construed to empower the Town Clerk to refuse such renewal except revocation for cause of the licensee's prior license. 
(e)  In case business is transacted at more than one (1) separate premises by one (1) person, a separate license for each place of business shall be required. 
(f)  Any person engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail or the furnishing of certain services, as herein specified, in the Town without having secured a license therefor except as specifically provided herein, shall be guilty of a violation of this Article. 
(g)  Each license shall be numbered, shall show the name, residence, place and character of business of the licensee and shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the place of business for which it is issued. No license shall be transferable. 
(h)  No license shall be required for any person engaged exclusively in the business of selling commodities which are exempt from taxation under this Article. 
(Prior code 60-3; Ord. 6 §§3-5, 1991; Ord. 12 §B11, 2003) 
Sec. 4-64. - Exemptions; disputes; credits or refunds. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided herein, the provisions of Section 39-26-114, C.R.S., shall be deemed applicable and incorporated into this Article by this reference. 
(b)  The amount subject to tax under this Article shall not include the state sales and use tax imposed by Article 26, Title 39, C.R.S. 
(c)  For the purposes of this Article, all retail sales shall be considered consummated at the place of business of the retailer, unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to a destination outside the limits of the Town or to a common carrier for delivery to a destination outside the limits of the Town. 
(d)  The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax imposed by Article 26 of Title 39, C.R.S., regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(e)  In the event that a retailer has no permanent place of business in the Town, or more than one (1) place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated, for the purpose of this sales tax, shall be determined by the provisions of Article 26 of Title 39, C.R.S., and by rules and regulations promulgated by the State Department of Revenue. 
(f)  For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the Town's sales tax shall not apply to the sale of construction and building materials, as the term is used in Section 29-2-109, C.R.S., if such materials are picked up by the purchaser and if the purchaser of such materials presents to the retailer a building permit or other documentation acceptable to the Town evidencing that a local use tax has been paid or is required to be paid. 
(g)  For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the Town's sales tax shall not apply to the sale of tangible personal property at retail or the furnishing of services if the transaction was previously subjected to a sales or use tax lawfully imposed on the purchaser or user by another statutory or home rule municipality equal to or in excess of two percent (2%). A credit shall be granted against the Town's sales tax with respect to such transaction equal in amount to the lawfully imposed local sales or use tax previously paid by the purchaser or user to the previous statutory or home rule municipality. The amount of the credit shall not exceed two percent (2%). 
(h)  All sales of personal property on which a specific ownership tax has been paid or is payable shall be exempt from the Town's sales tax when such sales meet both of the following conditions: 
(1)  The purchaser is a nonresident of or has his or her principal place of business outside the Town; and 
(2)  Such personal property is registered or required to be registered outside the limits of the Town under the laws of the State. 
(i)  No sales or use tax shall apply to the sale of food purchased with food stamps. For the purposes of this paragraph, food shall have the same meaning as provided in 7 U.S.C. §2012(g), as such section exists on October 1, 1987, or is thereafter amended. 
(j)  No sales or use tax shall apply to the sale of food purchased with funds provided by the special supplemental food program for women, infants and children, 42 U.S.C. §1786. For the purposes of this paragraph, food shall have the same meaning as provided in 42 U.S.C. §1786, as such section exists on October 1, 1987, or is thereafter amended. 
(k)  The tangible personal property and services taxable pursuant to this Article shall be the same as the tangible personal property and services taxable pursuant to Section 39-26-104, C.R.S., and are subject to the same exemptions as those specified in Section 39-26-114, C.R.S., except the exemption allowed by Section 39-26-114(11), C.R.S., for purchases of machinery or machine tools, and except the exemption of sales and purchases of those items in Section 39-26-114(1)(a)(XX), C.R.S., unless otherwise specifically exempted under this Article. 
(Prior code 60-4; Ord. 6 §§6-10, 1991) 
Sec. 4-65. - Schedule of tax. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed upon all sales of commodities and services specified in Subsection (b) below, a tax at the rate of three percent (3%) of the amount of the sale, to be computed in accordance with schedules or systems approved by the Executive Director of the State Department of Revenue or by separate ordinance of the Town. The funds generated by the one percent (1%) increase in the sales tax rate approved in 2006, shall be used to fund capital improvement projects to be approved by the Town Council for parks, open space acquisition, and trail projects, except that not more than twenty percent (20%) of that amount may be used to fund the maintenance of parks, open space, and trails. 
(b)  There is hereby levied and there shall be collected and paid a tax, in the amount stated in Subsection (a) above, on the following sales and transactions: 
(1)  On the purchase price paid or charged upon all sales and purchases of tangible personal property at retail; 
(2)  In the case of retail sales involving the exchange of property, on the purchase price paid or charged, including the fair market value of the property exchanged at the time and place of the exchange, excluding, however, from the consideration or purchase price, the fair market value of the exchanged property if: 
a.  Such exchanged property is to be sold thereafter in the usual course of the retailer's business; or 
b.  Such exchanged property is a vehicle and is exchanged for another vehicle and both vehicles are subject to licensing, registration or certification under the laws of the State, including, but not limited to, vehicles operating upon public highways, off-highway recreation vehicles, watercraft and aircraft. 
(3)  The exchange of three (3) or more vehicles of the same type by any person in any calendar year in transactions subject to the provisions of this Article shall be prima facie evidence that such person is engaged in the business of selling vehicles of the type involved in such transactions and that he or she is thereby subject to any licensing requirements necessary to engage in such activity. 
(4)  Upon telephone and telegraph services, whether furnished by public or private corporations or enterprises, for all intrastate telephone and telegraph services. 
(5)  For gas and electric service, whether furnished by municipal, public or private corporations or enterprises, for gas and electricity furnished and sold for domestic and commercial consumption and not for resale; upon steam when consumed or used by the purchaser and not resold in original form, whether furnished or sold by municipal, public or private corporations or enterprises. 
(6)  Upon the amount paid for food or drink served or furnished in or by restaurants, cafes, lunch counters, cafeterias, hotels, drugstores, social clubs, nightclubs, cabarets, resorts, snack bars, caterers, carryout shops, and other like places of business at which prepared food or drink is regularly sold, including sales from pushcarts, motor vehicles and other mobile facilities. Cover charges shall be included as part of the amount paid for such food or drink. However, meals provided to employees of the places mentioned in this paragraph at no charge or at a reduced charge and which are considered as part of their salary, wages or income shall be exempt from taxation under the provisions of this Article. 
(7)  On the entire amount charged to any person or persons for rooms or accommodations as designated in Section 39-26-102(11), C.R.S. 
(Prior code 60-5; Ord. 6 §§11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 1991; Ord. 9 §1, 2006; Ord. 12 §1, 2013; Ord. 22 §7(1), 2016) 
Sec. 4-66. - Collection, administration and enforcement. 
(a)  The collection, administration and enforcement of this sales tax shall be performed by the Executive Director of the State Department of Revenue in the same manner as the collection, administration and enforcement of the state sales tax. Unless otherwise provided in Article 2 of Title 29, C.R.S., the provisions of Article 26 of Title 39, C.R.S., and all applicable rules and regulations promulgated by the Executive Director of the Department of Revenue shall govern the collection, administration and enforcement of the sales tax imposed by this Article. 
(b)  Any retailer who, under the provisions of Article 26 of Title 39, C.R.S., is required to collect sales tax and make returns thereof, or who is required to do so by this Article, shall be allowed to deduct from the sum remitted to the Town an amount equivalent to three and one-third percent (3 1/3 %) of the sum so remitted for the purpose of covering his or her expenses in collection and remittance of the tax; but if any such retailer is delinquent in remitting said tax, other than in unusual circumstances shown to the satisfaction of the Executive Director of the Department of Revenue, the retailer shall not be allowed to retain any amounts to cover his or her expense in collecting or remitting said tax, and an amount equivalent to the full two percent (2%) shall be remitted by any such delinquent retailer. 
(c)  One percent (1%) of the amount collected pursuant to this Article shall be used exclusively for capital improvement projects approved by the Town Council for parks, open space acquisition and trail projects. 
(d)  The funds generated by the one percent (1%) increase in the sales tax rate approved in 2006, shall be used to fund capital improvement projects to be approved by the Town Council for parks, open space acquisition, and trail projects, except that not more than twenty percent (20%) of that amount (.083% of the total revenues generated) may be used to fund the maintenance of parks, open space and trails. 
(Prior code 60-6; Ord. 6 §17, 18, 1991; Ord. 9 §2, 2006; Ord. 12 §2, 2013; Ord. 22 §7(2), 2016) 
Sec. 4-67. - Referendum; amendments. 
    The Town Council may amend, alter or change this Article, except as to the two percent (2%) rate of tax herein imposed, subsequent to adoption, by a majority vote of the Town Council. Such amendment, alteration or change need not be submitted to the electors of the Town for their approval. 
(Prior code 60-7; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 4-68. - Effective date. 
    This Article shall take effect at 12:01 a.m., January 1, 1971. 
(Prior code 60-8) 
Secs. 4-69-4-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V - Sale of Surplus Property 

Sec. 4-81. - Identification of property. 
    All personal property originally purchased by the Town for one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more may be declared surplus by the Town Council, and all other property may be declared surplus by the Town Manager or by the Town Council. 
(Prior code 15-1; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 4-82. - Procedure. 
(a)  Surplus property may be sold as follows: 
(1)  The Town Manager may advertise for bids in the official newspaper of the Town and give notice to such persons or entities as he or she deems necessary to reach a representative sample of interested prospective buyers. All bids shall be sealed and shall be opened in public at a designated time and place no sooner than ten (10) days after publication of notice in the newspaper; or 
(2)  The Town Manager may conduct an auction at a designated time and place after first giving at least ten (10) days' notice in the official newspaper of the Town and such other notice as he or she deems appropriate. At the auction, surplus property will be sold to the highest responsible bidder for cash, but the Town Manager may establish minimum sales prices. 
(b)  At an auction or at a bid opening, the Town Manager may reject all bids and advertise or give notice again for another auction or bid opening. If at an auction or bid opening no one offers to purchase an item of personal property, the Town Manager may donate the item to any person or entity; or, if the item appears to have little or no value, he or she may dispose of it in any way he or she deems fit. 
(c)  In the absence of the Town Manager, or if the Town Manager fails or refuses to identify, sell or dispose of surplus property set forth above, the Town Council may do so and may perform all of the functions assigned above to the Town Manager. 
(Prior code 15-2; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Secs. 4-83-4-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI - Unclaimed Property 

Sec. 4-101. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to provide for the administration and disposition of unclaimed property which is in the possession of or under the control of the Town. 
(Ord. 19 §1, 1992) 
Sec. 4-102. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Article, the following words shall be construed to have the meanings defined below: 
    Unclaimed property means any tangible or intangible property, including any income or increment derived therefrom, less any lawful charges, that is held by or under the control of the Town and which has not been claimed by its owner for a period of one (1) year if the value is fifty dollars ($50.00) or more or forty-five (45) days if the value of the property is under fifty dollars ($50.00), after it became payable or distributable. 
    Intangible property means moneys, checks, drafts, deposits, interest, dividends, income, credit balances, customer overpayments, gift certificates, refunds, credit memos, unidentified remittances, stocks, intangible ownership interests in business associations, moneys deposited to redeem stocks, bonds, coupons, securities, security deposits, unpaid wages, unused airline tickets, amounts distributable from a trust or custodial fund established under a plan to provide health, welfare, pension, vacation, severance, retirement, death, stock purchase, profit sharing, employee savings, supplemental unemployment insurance or similar benefits, and amounts due and payable under the terms of insurance policies. 
    Owner means a person or entity, including a corporation, partnership, association, governmental entity other than the Town or a duly authorized legal representative or successor in interest of same, which owns unclaimed property held by the Town. 
(Ord. 19 §1, 1992) 
Sec. 4-103. - Notice required prior to disposition of property. 
(a)  Prior to disposition of any unclaimed property having an estimated value of fifty dollars ($50.00) or more, the Town Manager, or his or her designee, shall send a written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address, if any, of any owner of unclaimed property. The last known address of the owner shall be the last address of the owner as shown by the records of the Town department or agency holding the property. The notice shall include a description of the property, the amount or estimated value of the property, and when available, the purpose for which the property was deposited or otherwise held. The notice shall state where the owner may make inquiry or claim the property. If the owner does not claim such property within sixty (60) days, the Town Manager shall then cause a notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the Town one (1) time. Such notice shall have the same requirements of the notice mailed. The newspaper notice shall also state that if the owner fails to provide the Town Manager with a written claim for the return of the property within sixty (60) days of the date of the published notice, the property shall become the sole property of the Town and any claim of the owner to such property shall be deemed forfeited. 
(b)  Prior to the disposition of any unclaimed property having an estimated value of less than fifty dollars ($50.00), the Director or his or her designee shall send a written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address, if any, of any owner of unclaimed property. The last known address of the owner shall be the last address of the owner as shown by the records of the Town department or agency holding the property. The notice shall include a description of the property, the amount or estimated value of the property, and when available, the purpose for which the property was deposited or otherwise held. The notice shall state where the owner may make inquiry of or claim the property. The notice shall also state that if the owner fails to provide the Town Manager with a written claim for the return of the property within sixty (60) days of the date of the notice, the property shall become the sole property of the Town and any claim of the owner to such property shall be deemed forfeited. 
(Ord. 19 §1, 1992; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 4-104. - Procedures for disposition of property. 
(a)  If a written claim has been received by the Town Manager, the Town Manager shall evaluate the claim and give written notice to the claimant within ninety (90) days thereof that the claim has been accepted or denied in whole or in part. The Town Manager may investigate the validity of a claim and may request further supporting documentation from the claimant prior to disbursing or refusing to disburse the property. 
(1)  If the Town Manager accepts the claim, the property shall be returned to the claimant within thirty (30) days at the claimant's sole expense. 
(2)  If the Town Manager denies the claim, the claimant may file an appeal in a court with competent jurisdiction in accordance with state statutes. If the claim is denied by the court, then such property becomes the sole property of the Town and any claim to such property shall be deemed forfeited. 
(b)  If more than one (1) written claim is received by the Town Manager, the Town Manager may, in his or her sole discretion, resolve said claims or resolve such claims by depositing the disputed property with the registry of the District Court in an interpleader action. 
(c)  If no written claim is received by the Town Manager, the unclaimed property becomes the sole property of the Town which may dispose of such property as follows: 
(1)  If unclaimed property was found property, such property can be turned over to the finder upon receipt of a written request from such finder. Any property found within the Town by a Town employee during his or her working hours shall be delivered to the Police Department and shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of this Article. Any such employee shall have no rights as a finder to claim such property. 
(2)  If unclaimed property is not requested by a finder, the Town Manager may dispose of such property by the means prescribed in Section 4-82 of this Code. 
(3)  If unclaimed property is deemed to have a minimal value, is not suitable for sale and can be used for the public's benefit, it may be donated to a recognized charitable institution, if directed by the Town Manager. Such items may include but are not limited to toys, clothing, bedding and personal care items. 
(d)  The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to the sale of abandoned automobiles as addressed in the state statutes or the disposition of lost or stray animals or to the disposition of any property which is governed by the terms of any specific ordinance or applicable statute. 
(Ord. 19 §1, 1992; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 4-105. - Reports required. 
    Each department head is responsible for submitting a quarterly report to the Town Manager itemizing any unclaimed property held by that department. Such reports are due January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1 of each calendar year. 
(Ord. 19 §1, 1992; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Secs. 4-106-4-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII - Lodging Tax 

Sec. 4-121. - Intent. 
    The Town Council declares that the enactment of a two percent (2.0%) lodging tax and the expenditure of the receipts of such a tax for the promotion of tourism through a Chamber of Commerce and for the acquisition, operation, maintenance and repair of Town parks will serve a public purpose and will promote the health, safety, prosperity, security and general welfare of the inhabitants and visitors of the Town. It is the intent of the Town to impose a lodging tax upon the leasing or renting of rooms or other accommodations in commercial lodging accommodations by transient persons. The person to whom the accommodations are rented shall pay the tax and the person from whom the accommodations are rented shall be required to collect the tax and remit the proceeds to the Town. 
(Ord. 01 §1, 2004) 
Sec. 4-122. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Article, unless the context requires otherwise, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
    Accommodation means the providing of a room, space, lodging service or other accommodations at a taxable premises to any person who, for consideration, uses or possesses such room, space, lodging service or other accommodation for a total continuous duration of less than thirty (30) consecutive calendar days. The renting of a residential dwelling or portion thereof for less than thirty (30) days in accordance with Section 16-203(c) is considered an accommodation for purposes of applying the lodging tax established in this Article. 
    Fund means a restricted accounting fund within the General Fund called the Lodging Tax Fund to be created by and accounted for by the Finance Director. 
    Guest means any natural person or legal entity to whom accommodations are provided. 
    Rent means the consideration received, or compensation charged, for the providing of accommodations. 
    Taxable premises means any hotel, apartment-hotel, motel, guest home, condominium, townhouse, townhome, suite, timeshare unit, fractional ownership unit, lodge, motor lodge, trailer court, campground, bed and breakfast or similar establishment. 
    Tourism means the guidance, management, promotion, encouragement or accommodation of tourists. 
    Vendor means any natural person or business entity that provides accommodations for rent at a taxable premises. 
(Ord. 01 §1, 2004; Ord. 07 §2(Exh. B), 2012) 
Sec. 4-123. - Imposition of lodging tax. 
    There is hereby imposed a lodging tax of two percent (2.0%) upon the rent paid or charged for accommodations provided by a vendor to a guest for a term of less than thirty (30) consecutive calendar days at a taxable premises. The vendor of the accommodations shall be responsible for the collection of the lodging tax and remitting such monies to the Town as provided in this Article. In the event of any failure by such vendor to collect the lodging tax as provided in this Article, the vendor of such accommodations shall be responsible for payment and remittance to the Town of the amount owed despite such failure to collect the tax. 
    There is hereby imposed an additional two percent (2.0%) lodging tax on the leasing or renting of rooms in lodging facilities or other accommodations and dwellings used for short-term rental by short-term visitors and guests (for a maximum of a four percent (4.0%) lodging tax) whereby a commercial hotel making capital improvements in 2014 and after would receive the revenues generated by the additional tax at that hotel for their commercial hotel for up to ten (10) years subject to Town approval, and after ten (10) years, the additional tax funds would be reserved to the Town's use. The Town would allocate the additional tax funds not used for approved capital improvements for marketing of hotels, short-term lodging and the Basalt area. 
(Ord. 01 §1, 2004; Res. 31, 2014 ) 
Sec. 4-124. - Lodging Tax Fund. 
(a)  There is hereby created a restricted fund within the General Fund to be known as the Lodging Tax Fund. The Fund shall be accounted for as a restricted fund distinct from any other funds or accounts used or maintained by the Town for any other purposes. The monies of the Fund shall be expended only for the purposes set forth herein and no others. For convenience purposes only, but not for accounting or actual expenditure, the monies in the Fund may be held in the same account with the General Fund. 
(b)  The Fund shall consist of: 
(1)  All monies deposited or transferred thereto in accordance with Section 4-122 of this Article; 
(2)  Contributions of money, property or services received for use in carrying out the purposes of the Fund from any person, corporation or association; and 
(3)  All monies otherwise made available to the Fund from whatever source. 
(c)  Any monies not appropriated shall remain in the Fund and shall not be transferred to or revert to the General Fund of the Town at the end of any fiscal year. Any interest earned on the investment or deposit of monies of the Fund shall remain in the Fund and shall not be credited to the General Fund of the Town. 
(d)  Fifty percent (50%) of all monies in the Fund shall be appropriated for a Chamber of Commerce in the Town at intervals as determined by the Town Council, and fifty percent (50%) of all monies in the Fund shall be appropriated for acquisition, operation, maintenance and repair of parks within the Town at intervals as determined by the Town Council. All appropriations of monies from the Fund shall be made by the Town Council and only in accordance with the above-described dedication of those funds. 
(Ord. 01 §1, 2004) 
Sec. 4-125. - Administration. 
    The administration of this Article is hereby vested in the Finance Director. The Finance Director shall prescribe forms and administrative procedures for the ascertainment, assessment and collection of the lodging tax not inconsistent with this Article, and for the enforcement of this Article. 
(Ord. 01 §1, 2004) 
Sec. 4-126. - Civil action for recovery of tax due. 
    The Town shall have the right to recover all sums due under the terms of this Article by judgment and execution thereon in a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction. Such remedies shall be cumulative with all other remedies provided herein for the enforcement of this Article. 
(Ord. 01 §1, 2004) 
Sec. 4-127. - Violation; penalty. 
    Failure to comply with the terms of this Article by payment of lodging taxes, filing of a return and otherwise complying with the terms of this Article shall constitute an offense in violation thereof, punishable, upon conviction, by a fine, imprisonment or both, as determined by the Town Council in accordance with Section 2-381 et seq. of this Code. 
(Ord. 01 §1, 2004) 
Secs. 4-128-4-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII - Public Arts Program 

Sec. 4-131. - Intent. 
    The purpose of this Article is to establish a public art program, provide for its funding and establish responsibilities relating to administering the Town's public art program. 
    The Town of Basalt recognizes and accepts responsibility for public art in public areas. The Town Council has found that such enhancement adds greatly to the enhancement of the quality of life of Basalt's citizens, attracts tourism, and provides incentives to business to locate in the Town, thereby expanding Basalt's economic base. 
( Ord. 03 §1, 2016) 
Sec. 4-132. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Basalt Public Art Commission (PAC) is a Commission created in 2015 by the Town of Basalt as a standing Town Commission designated to review, advocate and develop public art projects in the public domain for the Town of Basalt. It will develop a formal structure in which to create, develop, acquire, and maintain public art as well as further public accessibility to the arts. 
    Construction cost is the contracted sum for construction of the designated project including any change orders. Construction costs do not include costs such as professional fees, cost of land, and rights-of-way. 
    Construction project means any capital improvement project paid wholly or in part by the Town of Basalt to construct or remodel any public or Town building, structure, park or any portion thereof. 
    Maintenance is the periodic work on a facility required to maintain its original functionality. 
    Public art includes murals, paintings, glass, fiber, fountains, arches, frescoes, mosaics, mobiles, photographs, drawings, prints, crafts, sculpture, memorials, integrated-architectural or landscape-architectural work, community art, digital new media, and performances and festivals. It can take a wide range of forms, sizes, and scales, and can be temporary or permanent. It may be created in response to this place and community, interpreting the history of the place, its people, and perhaps addressing a social or environmental issue. Free and accessible to everyone, it may be created in collaboration with the community. 
    Public art trust fund is a funding mechanism that aggregates portions of the individual private, site-specific One Percent for Art requirement and redistributes these funds to promote, finance and maintain public art projects throughout the Town. This money is limited to not more than twenty percent (20%) of the original one percent (1%) per project allocation unless this is waived by the Town Council for small projects. 
    Remodel is work required to substantially change or enhance the functionality of a facility. 
    Town is the Town of Basalt. 
( Ord. 03 §1, 2016) 
Sec. 4-133. - Imposition of One Percent Public Arts requirement. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Town of Basalt to allocate one percent (1%) of eligible construction costs of Town capital improvement projects paid wholly or in part by the Town of Basalt to construct or remodel any public or Town building, structure, park or any portion thereof to be allocated for public art. No less than eighty percent (80%) of this one percent (1%) will be used for public art. No more than twenty percent (20%) will be deposited in a Public Art Trust Fund used for maintenance and administration of public art. 
    The Town Council may reduce or eliminate the requirement that one percent (1%) of eligible construction costs of Town capital improvement projects be allocated for public art when it approves a specific project if the Town Manager demonstrates to the Council's satisfaction that the capital project is only feasible without the set aside or portion thereof. 
( Ord. 03 §1, 2016) 
Sec. 4-134. - One Percent for Art Program established. 
    There is hereby established a One Percent for Art Program. The Town Manager is responsible for implementing the program. The Town Council is responsible for appropriating the funds after advice and recommendation from the Basalt Public Arts Commission. 
    The One Percent for Art Program focuses on the outside and the inside of new and remodeled Town owned public spaces. The art may serve a function, express a theme, or commemorate an important person. It may underscore or provide a counterpoint to the architecture and surrounding site. It may serve as a landmark that adds definition to the Town of Basalt. 
    The One Percent for Art Program shall be implemented without discrimination based on race, religion, gender, sexual orientation, marital status, color, national origin, ancestry, or creed. 
( Ord. 03 §1, 2016) 
Sec. 4-135. - Exemptions from the One Percent for Art Program. 
    Public repair and maintenance projects are exempt from the One Percent for Art requirements. However, this exemption does not preclude the Town from proposing and including funding for art as part of these types of projects. 
( Ord. 03 §1, 2016) 
Secs. 4-136-4-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX - Marijuana Tax[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Exhibit A of Ord. 24 , adopted Aug. 26, 2014, passed Nov. 4, 2014, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as Art. VIII, § 4-141 was at the discretion of the editor.  Subsequently, Ord. 03 , adopted Jan. 26, 2016, enacted new provisions designated as Art. VIII. In order to avoid duplication of Articles, former Art. VIII has been redesignated as Art. IX at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 4-141. - Intent. 
    The Town of Basalt, Colorado, acting through its Town Council, beginning January 1, 2015, is authorized to impose an additional municipal sales tax of five percent (5.0%) on the sales of retail marijuana and marijuana products with the resulting sales tax rate capable of being lowered or revoked in the sole discretion of the Basalt Town Council, with the resulting tax revenues to be collected and spent to pay direct and indirect expenses related to the licensing and regulation of the retail marijuana industry, enforcement of marijuana laws in general, education and public health programs to mitigate any negative consequences associated with the consumption of marijuana and marijuana products, programs to prevent the illegal diversion of retail marijuana and retail marijuana products to persons under the age of twenty-one (21); and to otherwise pay the expenses of operating and improving the town and its facilities. 
( Ord. 24 , Exh. A, 2014) 
CHAPTER 5 - Franchises and Communication Systems 
ARTICLE IV - Telephone Utility Tax 

Sec. 5-101. - Levy of tax. 
    There is hereby levied on and against each telephone utility company operating within the Town a tax on the occupation and business of maintaining a telephone exchange and lines connected therewith in the Town and of supplying local exchange telephone service to the inhabitants of the Town. The amount of the tax levied hereby shall be: 
(1)  For the portion of 1981 remaining after the date upon which the tax begins to accrue as provided in Section 5-102: six dollars ($6.00) per telephone account for which the local exchange telephone service is provided within the corporate limits of the Town on said date. 
(2)  For each subsequent calendar year: twenty-four dollars ($24.00) per telephone account per year for which the local exchange telephone service is provided within the corporate limits of the Town. 
(Prior code 60-16) 
Sec. 5-102. - Payment of tax. 
    The tax levied by this Article shall begin to accrue on the first day of October 1981, and shall be due and payable in one (1) installment for the remaining portion of 1981 and in four (4) equal quarterly installment for years subsequent to 1981, to be paid within fifteen (15) days of the commencement of each quarter. 
(Prior code 60-17) 
Sec. 5-103. - Filing of telephone accounts with Town Clerk. 
    Within thirty (30) days after the date on which the tax begins to accrue as provided in Section 5-102, each telephone utility company subject to this Article shall file with the Town Clerk, in such form as the Town Clerk may require, a statement showing the total telephone accounts for which local exchange telephone service was provided within the corporate limits of the Town on said date. Such statement shall be filed within thirty (30) days after each anniversary of the date on which the tax begins to accrue, showing such accounts on the anniversary date. 
(Prior code 60-18) 
Sec. 5-104. - Failure to pay. 
    If any telephone company subject to the provisions of this Article shall fail to pay the taxes as herein provided, the full amount thereof shall be due and collected from such company, and the same, together with an addition of fifteen percent (15%) of the amount of taxes, shall be and hereby is declared to be a debt due and owing from such company to the Town. The Town Attorney, upon direction of the Town Council, shall commence and prosecute to final judgment and determination in any court of competent jurisdiction an action at law to collect the said debt. 
(Prior code 60-19; Ord. 33 § B1, 2003) 
Sec. 5-105. - Violations and penalties. 
    If any officer, agent or manager of a telephone utility company which is subject to the provisions of this Article shall fail, neglect or refuse to make or file the annual statement of accounts provided in Section 5-103, said officer, agent, manager or person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in this Code. 
(Prior code 60-20) 
Sec. 5-106. - Inspection of records. 
    The Town, its officers, agents or representatives shall have the right at all reasonable hours and times to examine the books and records of the telephone utility companies which are subject to the provisions of this Article and to make copies of the entries or contents thereof. 
(Prior code 60-21) 
Sec. 5-107. - Local application. 
    The tax herein provided is upon occupations and businesses in the performance of local functions and is not a tax upon those functions relating to interstate commerce. It is expressly understood that none of the terms of this Article are construed to mean that any telephone utility company is issued a franchise by the Town. 
(Prior code 60-22) 
Sec. 5-108. - Scope of tax. 
    The tax herein provided shall be in lieu of all other occupation taxes or taxes on the privilege of doing business in the Town on any telephone utility company subject to the provisions of this Article and, in addition, shall be in lieu of any free service furnished the Town by any said telephone utility. However, all telephone utility companies shall comply with and pay all fees required by this Code applicable generally to persons and firms operating in the Town. 
(Prior code 60-23) 
Secs. 5-109-5-120. - Reserved. 
CHAPTER 6 - Business Licenses and Regulations 
ARTICLE I - Business Licenses 

Sec. 6-1. - Purpose. 
    It is the express intent and purpose of the business license fee to cover the cost of processing such license. The express purpose of the requirement for obtaining a business license is for the Town to have an accurate record of all business activity being performed within the Town limits. 
(Prior code 60-9a) 
Sec. 6-2. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation either as a principal, agent, clerk, employee or otherwise to commence or carry on any kind of business, profession or occupation without first having procured a license from the Town to do so as hereinafter provided. 
(Prior code 60-9b) 
Sec. 6-3. - Application for license. 
    Any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation now engaged in any business, profession or occupation within the corporate limits of the Town shall on or before January 31, 1986, and annually thereafter, so long as such person, firm, association, partnership or corporation comes within the purview of this Article , apply to the Town Clerk for a license therefor, which application shall be in writing stating the name of the applicant, the business address, the kind or type of occupation, business, vocation or profession and such other information as may be required by the Town Clerk. 
(Prior code 60-9c) 
Sec. 6-4. - License fee. 
    The license fee to be paid hereunder by each such person, firm, association, partnership, corporation or other entity shall be in an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq., payable at the time of filing said application with the Town Clerk. Such license shall be granted and issued by the Town Clerk and shall be in force and effect until January 30 of the year following its issuance, unless sooner revoked. No rebate or credit shall be given for licenses used or issued for fractions or portions of a year; nor shall such license be assignable or transferable as to person, but it may be transferred as to place at the discretion of the Town Clerk. A separate license shall be required for each separated establishment or place of business. Furthermore, any retail business license pursuant to Chapter 4, Article IV of this Code shall receive a credit towards payment of the business license fee in an amount equal to the fee paid pursuant to Section 4-63, as said Section may be amended. 
(Prior code 60-9d; Ord. 12 §B12, 2003) 
Sec. 6-5. - Application for renewal not required. 
    All licenses issued hereunder shall be signed by the Town Clerk on behalf of the Town, and no new application need be filed for any renewal or reissue except at the discretion of the Town Clerk; provided, however, that the license to be so reissued is for the same person, firm, association, partnership or corporation to whom the original license was issued. 
(Prior code 60-9e) 
Sec. 6-6. - Exemptions. 
    All businesses located or performed within the Town shall be subject to this business license fee as levied under this Article, except as follows: 
(1)  Day care centers are hereby exempted from the terms of this Article. 
(2)  Schools are hereby exempted from the terms of this Article. 
(3)  Occupations carried on in a person's permanent place of residence are hereby exempted from the terms of this Article. 
(4)  Licensed contractors are hereby exempted from the terms of this Article. 
(5)  Nonprofit Colorado corporations are hereby exempted from the terms of this Article. 
(Prior code 60-9f; Ord. 12 §B13, 2003) 
Sec. 6-7. - Multiple locations. 
    In cases where a business is operated as separate units in different locations, under the same owner, even though similar in nature, each such separate unit shall be subject to a separate and full license fee under this Article. 
(Prior code 60-9g) 
Sec. 6-8. - Term of license. 
    All licenses shall cover a period of one (1) year beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of that year, inclusive. 
(Prior code 60-9h) 
Sec. 6-9. - Notification for renewal. 
    The Town Clerk shall be charged with the administration and collection of all license fees authorized under this Article. It shall be his or her duty to notify every known business, trade, occupation and professional enterprise in operation within the Town of the fact that such license fee is due prior to January 31 of each year. Said notification shall include full instructions as to procedures for remittance of the license fee due, and penalties provided. Lack of receipt of such notification in any year shall not relieve any person engaging in business within the Town from the liability of paying such license fee and complying with all other requirements of this Article. 
(Prior code 60-9i) 
Sec. 6-10. - Delinquent charges. 
    Any person failing to pay any license fee levied under this Article by January 31 shall thereafter be deemed delinquent and the license deemed expired. To renew the license, the licensee shall be subject to a delinquent fee in an amount to be approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq., for each full month for which said fee is delinquent, assessed on the first day of the month, in addition to any other penalty which may be imposed for the violation of this Code. 
(Prior code 60-9j; Ord. 22 §1, 1991; Ord. 12 §B14, 2003) 
Sec. 6-11. - Issuance of license certificate. 
    Upon receipt of a license fee payment due under this Article, the Town Clerk shall issue a certificate which shall indicate that said license fee has been paid for the specified year. 
(Prior code 60-9k) 
Sec. 6-12. - Display of license certificate. 
    Each license certificate issued under this Article shall at all times while in force be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business and shall be removed after expiration thereof. 
(Prior code 60-9l) 
Sec. 6-13. - Temporary vendors. 
(a)  Temporary vendors are persons who sell goods or products within the Town but do not have a permanent, physical building from which they conduct regular business. A temporary vendor may travel from place to place within the Town utilizing the public streets and rights-of-way as a point from which to sell items from a cart, trailer or vehicle. 
(b)  Temporary vendors may obtain a business license upon approval by the Town Manager. The Town Manager may authorize the issuance of a business and sales tax license to an applicant upon the following findings: 
(1)  The proposed business and location will not interfere with the intended use of the public space or right-of-way or adjacent uses; 
(2)  The merchandise is not offensive or harmful to the community or general public. 
(3)  The Town Manager deems the business and location will not interfere with, or create an extensive financial burden on, the conduct of an existing permanent local business; and 
(4)  The Town Manager determines the application and appropriate fees have been paid. 
(c)  Temporary vendors who conduct business only during River Days, who obtain a Basalt sales tax license, are exempt from the business license requirements of this Section. 
(d)  The Town Manager may require a deposit for the use of the public property or right-of-way if he or she determines that the placement of a tent, trailer, cart, vehicle or other structure could damage the public property or right-of-way. 
(e)  With appropriate approvals from the Town (see Section 6-14), a temporary vendor may be authorized to utilize a specific fixed location within the Town, such as a street corner or other public right-of-way, from which they may conduct their sales. 
(Ord. 07 §B, 2004) 
Sec. 6-14. - Temporary vendor use of public property and rights-of-way. 
(a)  The user of public property or public rights-of-way for the sale of goods must apply to the Town for a Town business license and sales tax license. 
(b)  Temporary vendors using public property or public rights-of-way shall be limited to use up to twelve (12) days per year. Exceptions from the above limitation may be granted by the Town Council upon approval of a resolution. 
(c)  The vendor must provide a copy of his or her Colorado sales tax license, and obtain a Town business license and sales tax license. If the vendor is selling prepared or ready-to-eat foods, a health department certificate is required. 
(d)  A temporary vendor utilizing public property must provide proof of liability insurance to the Town, indemnifying the Town of liability with the Town named as an additional insured. 
(e)  Temporary vendor licenses will be issued by the Town Clerk's office after approval by the Town Manager in accordance with policies and rules as may be adopted and/or amended from time to time by the Town Manager. The policies and rules may include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Dates and hours of operation. 
(2)  Location and/or placement of structures for display or sale of merchandise. 
(3)  Proximity to permanent and/or like businesses. 
(4)  Safety requirements for mitigation. 
(5)  Signage. 
(6)  Fees. 
(f)  Temporary vendors may utilize private property, that is zoned commercial and allows for retail sales, with written permission of the owner and proper licensing including, but not limited to, a Basalt business license, Basalt sales tax license and Colorado sales tax license. If the vendor is selling prepared or ready-to-eat foods, a health department certificate is required. 
(Ord. 07 §B2, 2004; Ord. 12 §1(Exh. A), 2014) 
Secs. 6-15-6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II - Alcoholic Beverages 

Sec. 6-31. - License fee to accompany application. 
    Each application for a retail liquor store license, drugstore liquor license, beer and wine license, hotel and restaurant license, tavern license, club license, racetrack license, fermented malt beverage license, transfer of location or ownership license, renewal license, optional premises or optional premises associated with a hotel and restaurant facility, or for renewal of any such license shall be paid in an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. 
(Prior code 18-10; Ord. 10 §3, 1999; Ord. 12 §B15, 2003) 
Sec. 6-32. - Fees in addition to those required by State. 
    Said application fees shall be paid to the Town in addition to the license fees paid to the Finance Director annually in advance as required by state statutes. 
(Prior code 18-11; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 6-33. - Conditions of license. 
(a)  Each holder of a retail liquor store license, liquor-licensed drugstore, beer and wine license, hotel and restaurant license, tavern license, club license, racetrack license or fermented malt beverage license ("liquor license") filed with the Town shall keep and have available for inspection on the premises for which the license is issued an updated copy of the State Liquor and Beer Codes as compiled and promulgated by the State Department of Revenue. The Town Clerk shall make copies of the compiled codes available to license holders at cost. 
(b)  Every owner and manager of a business possessing a liquor license as described in Subsection (a) above filed with the Town ("licensed business") shall ensure that every owner and manager, and employee responsible for the sale or serving of malt, vinous or spirituous liquors or fermented malt beverages has successfully completed an approved educational liquor seminar, except for certain holders of fermented malt beverage licenses which sales are of packaged 3.2 fermented malt beverages intended for off-premises consumption only. 
    An approved educational liquor seminar ("approved seminar") shall mean a program approved by the Town Council acting as the local licensing authority and the Chief of Police. An approved educational seminar shall include, but is not limited to, developing the awareness and training of individuals in the laws and responsibilities of liquor licensed establishments under the State Liquor and Beer Codes, teaching techniques to check the identification of patrons, recognizing illegal identification and handling of intoxicated individuals. 
    Every owner and manager of the licensed business and all employees of the licensed business responsible for the sale and/or serving of malt, vinous or spirituous liquors or fermented malt beverages ("alcoholic beverages") shall obtain a certificate evidencing successful completion of an approved seminar within six (6) months of the passage of the ordinance codified herein. Said persons shall reattend such seminar once every two (2) years thereafter. Persons newly hired after the passage of the ordinance codified herein shall obtain a certificate evidencing successful completion of an approved seminar within four (4) months of their hiring by the licensed business. The completion certifications for such approved seminar shall be valid for a period of two (2) years. Any holder of a liquor license required to obtain approved seminar completion certificates under this Section shall produce such certificates for each person for which such certification is required upon the request, oral and written, of the Town Clerk, the Chief of Police or other appropriate Town officials. 
(c)  Fermented malt beverage licensees selling 3.2 fermented malt beverages for consumption off premises shall ensure that every owner and/or manager responsible for the sale of such beverages shall successfully complete an approved educational liquor seminar. Said owner and/or manager shall provide information similar to that provided by the educational liquor seminar to all employees responsible for the sale of 3.2 fermented malt beverages. The local licensing authority may require the holder of a fermented malt beverage license to provide a plan detailing the training program designed to inform his or her employees of the information gathered at the approved educational liquor seminar. The local licensing authority may further require copies of records of those employee training programs conducted by said license holder. 
(d)  At the time a licensee files an application to renew or transfer a liquor license, to change the location of the licensed premises or to change the corporate structure of the licensed business, the licensee shall submit to the Town Clerk certificates evidencing successful completion of an approved seminar for each owner and manager of the licensed business and all employees of the licensed business responsible for the sale and/or serving of alcoholic beverages, provided that if the application for renewal, transfer or change in location or corporate structure is filed within six (6) months of the passage of the ordinance codified herein, said application for renewal, transfer or change may be granted subject to the provisions of Subsection (b) above. In all other cases, if the applicant for renewal, transfer, change in location or corporate structure cannot provide certificates evidencing successful completion of an approved seminar, then said application may nevertheless be approved upon the applicant's submission of a written plan for compliance with this Section to the Town Clerk, provided that said written plan of compliance must be approved by the Town Council as a condition to the granting of the application. 
(e)  The Town Clerk may waive the requirements of Subsection (b) for all special events license holders who, prior to the issuance of said special events license, have signed a written statement that the special events license holders and all other persons who will sell and/or serve alcoholic beverages at such special event have read and understand the provisions of the State Liquor and Beer Codes as compiled and promulgated by the State Department of Revenue. 
(f)  In accordance with the provisions of Section 12-47-313(d)(iii) of the State of Colorado Liquor and Beer Code, the distance requirements related to buffers around schools in which new malt, vinous, or spirituous liquor licenses cannot be issued in the Town of Basalt shall be measured as follows: 
(1)  By direct measurement from the nearest property line of the land used for a school to the nearest portion of the section of the building in which malt, vinous, or spirituous liquor is to be sold, using a route of direct pedestrian access. 
(2)  The above provisions shall not affect the renewal or reissuance of a license once granted by the Town, nor shall the provision apply to existing licensed premises on land owned by the state or apply to a license in effect and actively doing business before said school was constructed. 
(Prior code 18-12; Ord. 10 §1, 1993; Ord. 10 §1, 1994; Ord. 12 §4, 2015) 
Sec. 6-34. - Temporary alcoholic beverage permits. 
(a)  The Town Clerk shall have the authority to issue temporary alcoholic beverage permits in accordance with state law. There shall be two (2) types of temporary alcoholic beverage permits, a temporary permit for continued operation and a temporary permit pending transfer. 
(1)  Temporary permit for continued operation. A temporary alcoholic beverage permit for continued operation may be issued under the following circumstances: 
a.  The applicant's previous permanent annual alcoholic beverage permit expired within ninety (90) days of the application for a temporary permit; 
b.  The applicant's previous permanent annual alcoholic beverage permit expired as a result of the permittee's inadvertent failure to make a timely application for renewal, or as a result of any administrative error or mistake; 
c.  The applicant has applied to renew the expired permanent annual alcoholic beverage permit and has completed such application, supplying all information required; 
d.  The applicant has paid a temporary permit fee in an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq.; and 
e.  The applicant is in compliance with all requirements of applicable state and local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  Temporary Permit Pending Transfer. A temporary permit pending transfer may be issued under the following conditions: 
a.  The premises has a valid permit at the time of application for the transfer of ownership and request for issuance of a temporary permit. (If the transferor's permit expires after the application has been submitted, the applicant may still operate the business until the temporary permit expires.); 
b.  The applicant provides evidence of a current state sales tax license; 
c.  The applicant has filed an application for the transfer of the existing valid permit and has completed such application, including all information on such application as required by state statute and Town ordinance; 
d.  The application for a temporary permit is filed within thirty (30) days of the filing for a transfer of ownership; 
e.  The applicant has paid a temporary permit fee in an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq.; and 
f.  The applicant is in compliance with all requirements of applicable state and local laws or ordinances. 
(b)  Upon receipt of an application for a temporary alcoholic beverage permit, the Town Clerk shall determine whether the above enumerated requirements have been met. Upon determination that all the requirements have been met, the Town Clerk shall grant the temporary permit. Upon determination that the requirements have either not been met or the Town Clerk is unable to determine whether all requirements have been met, the Town Clerk shall either deny the application or refer the application to the Town Council for review and determination. The Clerk may request that the applicant supply any additional information he or she believes will assist in the determination of whether the requirements for issuance of a temporary permit have been met. 
(c)  Temporary permits shall be issued under the same terms and conditions as provided in the permittee's expired or transferor's permanent annual permit. A temporary permit shall be valid only until the permittee's application for a permanent annual permit has been fully acted upon, except that in no event shall a temporary permit be valid for more than one hundred twenty (120) days. In the case of a temporary permit pending transfer, the permit may be extended for an additional sixty (60) days if "good cause" is shown. 
(d)  A temporary permit may be cancelled, revoked or summarily suspended if the authority determines that there is probable cause to believe that the transferee or applicant has violated any provision of Article 46, Title 12, C.R.S., has violated any rule, regulation or ordinance of the state or local licensing authority or has failed to truthfully disclose those matters required pursuant to the application forms. 
(Ord. 16 §1, 1991; Ord. 12 §§B16-B18, 2003) 
Sec. 6-35. - Prohibition of certain displays or performances in commercial establishments serving and/or selling liquor. 
(a)  No retail licensee for on-premises consumption shall suffer or permit any person to appear on said licensed premises displaying specified anatomical areas or nonlive performance or entertainment exhibiting specified sexual activities as defined in Section 16-4 of this Code. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate any provision of this Section shall be guilty of an offense against the Town, punishable as provided in Section 6-105 of this Chapter. 
(c)  If the owner, operator, licensee, lessor, lessee, manager, employee or any other person participating in the operation of a commercial establishment located within the Town at which alcoholic beverages are offered for sale for consumption on the premises shall be convicted of any of the offenses herein, then the Town Clerk shall revoke the occupational license for said establishment after giving a reasonable notice thereof to the holder of said license and affording the holder an opportunity to be heard at the next Town Council meeting on as to why the revocation should not be issued. 
(Ord. 20 §8, 1996) 
Sec. 6-36. - Definitions. 
(a)  Hotel and restaurant license with optional premises means the premises specified in an application for a hotel and restaurant license with related outdoor sports and recreational facilities, for the convenience of the applicant's guests or general public located on or adjacent to the hotel or restaurant. 
(b)  Optional premises means: 
(1)  The premises specified in an application for a hotel and restaurant license under this Article with related outdoor sports and recreational facilities for the convenience of the applicant's guests or the general public located on or adjacent to the hotel or restaurant within which such applicant is authorized to sell or serve malt, vinous or spirituous liquors in accordance with the provisions of this Article; or 
(2)  The premises specified in an application for an optional premises license located on an applicant's outdoor sports and recreational facility. 
(Ord. 10 §1, 1999) 
Sec. 6-37. - Standards for optional premises license. 
    In addition to applicable requirements of the Colorado Liquor Code and regulations adopted thereunder, the following standards for issuance of an optional premises license or for an optional premises for a hotel and restaurant license are adopted: 
(1)  Issuance of an optional premises or optional premises for a hotel and restaurant license shall be limited to the following outdoor sports and recreational facilities: golf courses. 
(2)  Each licensee shall demonstrate to the Liquor Licensing Authority a need for the optional premises license. 
(3)  Submittal requirements. When submitting a request for the approval of an optional premises license, an applicant shall submit the following information: 
a.  A map or other drawing illustrating the outdoor sports or recreational facility boundaries and the approximate location of each optional premises requested. 
b.  A legal description of the approximate area within which the optional premises shall be located. 
c.  A description of the method which shall be used to identify the boundaries of the optional premises when it is in use. 
d.  A description of the provisions which have been made for storing malt, vinous and spirituous liquors in a secured area on or off the optional premises for the future use on the optional premises. 
e.  A description of the provisions that will be made to ensure the liquor laws of the State and Town are being adhered to, including but not limited to control of the premises, checking identification and carrying of alcohol onto the premises. 
(4)  Advance notification. Pursuant to Sections 12-47-310(3) and (4), C.R.S., no alcoholic beverages may be served on the optional premises until the licensee has provided written notice to state and local licensing authorities forty-eight (48) hours prior to serving alcoholic beverages on the optional premises. Such notice must contain the specific days and hours on which the optional premises are to be used. In this regard, there is no limitation on the number of days which a licensee may specify in each notice. However, no notice may specify any date of use which is more than one hundred eighty (180) days from the notice date. 
(5)  All optional premises licenses shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of issuance, unless revoked or suspended, and must be renewed annually thereafter. 
(6)  Due to the fact that an optional premises license or an optional premises for a hotel or restaurant license may involve greater contact between customers drinking alcoholic beverages and underage persons, the Liquor Licensing Authority shall apply the following additional standards prior to the initial issuance of a license or renewal thereof: 
a.  The Liquor Licensing Authority may require the licensee to post in one (1) or more prominent locations on the licensed premises, signs that are reasonably calculated to prohibit underage drinking on the premises. The language of the notices may be determined by the Liquor Licensing Authority. 
b.  The Liquor Licensing Authority shall determine whether advertisement for alcoholic beverages or malt liquors should be controlled or, alternatively, whether they should be prohibited entirely from the licensed premises. 
c.  An optional premises licensee shall have available for consumption on the premises during business hours sandwiches and light snacks and nonalcoholic beverages. 
d.  The Liquor Licensing Authority shall require that the licensee show evidence that all managers and servers employed on the premises meet the educational requirements set forth at Section 6-33 of this Code within four (4) months of issuance of the license and shall provide evidence of continuing compliance with such section for any renewal of such license. 
e.  The Liquor Licensing Authority in determining whether to initially issue or renew a license in accordance with this Section shall consider any evidence brought to its attention that the operation of the premises has had, or may have in the future, an adverse effect upon the public health, safety or welfare. The Liquor Licensing Authority may impose such additional requirements or conditions upon the licensee as it may deem reasonably necessary to protect the public's health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. 10 §2, 1999) 
Sec. 6-38. - Tastings. 
(a)  Definition. Tasting means the sampling of malt, vinous or spirituous liquors that may occur on the premises of a retail liquor store licensee or liquor-licensed drugstore licensee by adult patrons of the licensee pursuant to the provisions of Section 12-47-301(10), C.R.S. 
(b)  Authorization. The Town hereby authorizes tastings to be conducted by retail liquor store or liquor-licensed drugstore licensees in accordance with this Section and pursuant to Section 12-47-301(10)(a), C.R.S., and subject to approval by the Local Licensing Authority. It is unlawful for any person or licensee to conduct tastings without first having obtained a permit to do so in accordance with this Section. 
(c)  Application for permit. A retail liquor store or liquor-licensed drugstore licensee who wishes to conduct tastings shall submit an application for a permit to the Basalt Liquor Licensing Authority on forms supplied by the Town Clerk. Such application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable annual fee as set. 
(d)  Term. The tastings permit shall be valid for a period of one (1) year, and shall run and expire concurrently with the license of the retail liquor store or liquor-licensed drugstore; provided however, that the first tastings permit issued to a retail liquor store or liquor-licensed drugstore licensee shall be valid only until the expiration of the current liquor license. First-year tastings permits shall be prorated as to the permit fee based on an average of two (2) tastings events per week. 
(e)  Limitations. Tastings shall be subject to the limitations set forth in Section 12-47-301(10), C.R.S.; and tastings shall be subject to the limitations set forth by the Local Licensing Authority as may be created or amended from time to time. 
(Ord. 15 §B2, 2004) 
Sec. 6-39. - Reseal and removal. 
    In accordance with Section 12-47-411(3.5), C.R.S., a hotel or restaurant licensed pursuant to this Section may permit a customer of the hotel or restaurant to reseal and remove from the licensed premises one (1) opened container of partially consumed vinous liquor purchased on the premises so long as the original container did not contain more than seven hundred fifty (750) milliliters of vinous liquor. 
(Ord. 15 §B, 2004) 
Sec. 6-40. - Special event liquor permit. 
(a)  Pursuant to Section 12-48-107(5)(a), C.R.S., the Town Council, acting as the Local Liquor Licensing Authority, need not notify the State Licensing Authority to obtain state approval or disapproval of applications for special event liquor permits. 
(b)  Each application for a special event liquor permit shall be accompanied by an application fee in an amount equal to the maximum local fee allowed as established by Section 12-48-107(2), C.R.S. 
(c)  Upon receipt of an application for a special event liquor permit, the Town Clerk shall post the site of the proposed special event liquor permit for ten (10) days prior to review and approval by the Local Liquor Licensing Authority. 
(d)  In reviewing an application for a special event liquor permit, the Local Liquor Licensing Authority shall determine compliance with Section 12-48-101, et seq., C.R.S., including Section 12-48-105(3), C.R.S., limiting the special event liquor permits to any organization to fifteen (15) special event liquor permits per calendar year. 
(e)  The Local Liquor Licensing Authority may deny the issuance of a special event liquor permit upon the grounds that the issuance would be injurious to the public welfare because of the nature of the special event, its location within the community or the failure of the applicant in a past special event to conduct the event in compliance with applicable laws. 
(f)  Within ten (10) days after the Local Liquor Licensing Authority issues a special event liquor permit, the Town Clerk shall report to the Colorado Liquor Enforcement Division the name of the organization to which the permit was issued, the address of the permitted location and the permitted dates of alcohol beverage service. 
(Ord. 31 §1, 2011) 
Secs. 6-41-6-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III - Mobile Home Parks 

Sec. 6-51. - Mobile home park license. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate within the limits of the Town any mobile home park unless such person shall first obtain a license therefor. All mobile home parks in existence upon the effective date of this Article shall obtain such license and in all other respects comply fully with the requirements of this Chapter. 
(b)  The annual license fee for each mobile home park shall be in an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. 
(c)  Applications for a mobile home park license shall be filed with the Town Clerk and such license issued by the Town Council upon approval of the application by the Zoning Enforcement Officer; said applications shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The location and legal description of the mobile home park. 
(d)  Mobile home parks shall be located only on lots or parcels of land that have been zoned for business or commercial use, according to the Zoning Ordinance now in effect or in the future to be adopted by the Town. 
(Prior code 62-3; Ord. 22 §1, 1991; Ord. 12 §B17, 2003) 
Sec. 6-52. - Revocation of license. 
    The Town Council may, after a hearing, revoke any license to maintain and operate a mobile home park when the licensee has violated any rules or regulations of the Town or any provision of this Article. After such revocation, the licensee may have the license reissued by the Town Council if the circumstances causing such violation have been remedied or corrected. 
(Prior code 62-4; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 6-53. - Posting of license. 
    The license certificate shall be conspicuously posted in the office or on the premises of the mobile home park at all times. 
(Prior code 62-5) 
Secs. 6-54-6-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV - Adult Entertainment Establishments 

Sec. 6-71. - Adult entertainment establishment license provisions. 
(a)  Definitions. All relevant definitions are contained in Section 16-4 of this Code and are incorporated herein. 
(b)  License required. No adult entertainment establishment, as defined in Section 16-4 of this Code, shall be permitted to operate within the Town except as herein provided, and any said operation without a license is unlawful. It shall further be unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor offense if he or she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business and/or adult entertainment establishment and said person knows or reasonably should know that (1) the business does not have a sexually oriented business and/or adult entertainment establishment license; (2) the business has a license which is under suspension; (3) the business has a license which has been revoked; or (4) the business has a license which has expired. Further, any applicant must first obtain zoning approval prior to the issuance of a license, which zoning approval is subject to relevant zoning regulations contained in Chapter 16 of this Code, and said decision of the applicant's zoning request shall be processed in the same manner and course as any other zoning request. 
(c)  License for adult entertainment establishments. 
(1)  The licensing officer is responsible for granting, denying, revoking, renewing, suspending and canceling sexually oriented business licenses for proposed or existing sexually oriented businesses. 
(2)  The Zoning Administrator is responsible for ascertaining whether a proposed sexually oriented business for which a license application has been submitted complies with all locational requirements of Section 16-189 of this Code and for processing the zoning application request through special review pursuant to Section 16-22 and Section 16-44 of this Code; provided, however, that the Zoning Administrator, Planning and Zoning Commission and/or Town Council may not rely on the special review criteria outlined in Section 16-44(e)(1)c through f in rendering a decision to approve or deny the zoning request. 
(3)  The Police Department is responsible for providing information on whether an applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act during the time periods set forth in Section 6-72(a)(5). 
(4)  The Building Inspection Department is responsible for inspecting a proposed sexually oriented business in order to ascertain whether it is in compliance with applicable statutes and ordinances. 
(d)  No later than thirty (30) days after the effective date of the ordinance codified herein, all adult entertainment establishments lawfully operating within the Town on or before the effective date of the ordinance codified herein shall apply for an adult entertainment establishment license. If an application is not received within thirty (30) days of the passage of the ordinance codified herein, then such existing adult entertainment establishment must cease operations. Subject to Section 16-189(e), the applicant is permitted a six-month amortization period from the effective date of the ordinance codified herein. After the expiration of said amortization period, the licensing officer shall approve or deny the license subject to the provisions contained in this Article. 
(e)  The annual license fee for new adult entertainment establishments, for transfer of ownership and for renewal of licenses shall be in an amount to be approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. 
(f)  A license may be issued only for one (1) adult entertainment establishment located at a fixed and certain place. Any person, partnership or corporation which desires to operate more than one (1) adult entertainment establishment must have a license for each. 
(Ord. 20 §7, 1996; Ord. 12 §B18, 2003; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 6-72. - Application and conditions of license. 
(a)  The completed application shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents: 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name and any aliases and submit satisfactory proof that he or she is at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(2)  If the applicant is a legal entity, the application shall state its complete name; the date and place of its organization; evidence that it is in good standing under the laws of the state in which it is organized and, if it is organized under the laws of a state other than Colorado, that it is registered to do business in Colorado; the names and capacity of all officers, directors, managers and principal owners; and the name of the registered agent and the address of the registered office for service of process. 
(3)  If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, he or she must state the sexually oriented business's fictitious name. 
(4)  The applicant's driver's license number, social security number and his or her state or federally issued tax identification number. 
(5)  Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to Subsection (1) or (2) above has been convicted of a specified criminal activity for which: 
a.  Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the latter date, if the conviction is a misdemeanor offense; 
b.  Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the latter date, if the conviction is a felony offense; or 
c.  Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction and the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the latter date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses or a combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any twenty-four-month period. 
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant. 
(6)  Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to Subsection (1) or (2) above has had a previous license under this or other similar sexually oriented business ordinances from another town or county denied, suspended or revoked and, if so, the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the license was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation. 
(7)  Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to Subsection (1) or (2) above has been a principal owner of a legal entity whose license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked and, if so, the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the license was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation. 
(8)  Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to Subsection (1) or (2) above holds any other permits and/or licenses under this Chapter or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another town or county and, if so, the names and locations of such other permitted businesses. 
(9)  The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a legal description of the property, the name of the property owner (including the information required by Subsection (2) above if the property owner is a legal entity), street address and telephone number, if any, and a copy of any lease agreement or document evidencing the right to use the property for its intended purpose for the term of the license requested. 
(10)  The single adult entertainment establishment classification of license for which the applicant is filing. 
(11)  The mailing address and residential address of the applicant or any other individual listed pursuant to Subsection (1) or (2) above. 
(12)  A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. The licensing officer may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. If the sexually oriented business has or will have a peep booth or booths subject to the provisions of Section 6-90, the sketch shall show the locations of each manager's station and designate any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. 
(13)  A current certificate and straight-line drawing, prepared within thirty (30) days prior to an initial application, by a Colorado registered land surveyor depicting: (1) the property lines and the structures of the property to be certified; (2) the property lines of any residential zone district, church, public or private school, child care center, public community center, park, fairground, recreation center, any alcoholic beverage establishment located in the Town at which alcoholic beverages are offered for sale for consumption on the premises, any area designated as an urban renewal project area pursuant to Section 31-25-107, C.R.S., within five hundred (500) feet of the property to be certified; (3) the property lines of any arterial or major or collector roadway within two hundred (200) feet of the property to be certified; and (4) the property lines and structures of any other sexually oriented business within one thousand (1,000) feet of the property to be certified. For purposes of this Section, a use shall be considered existing or established if it is in existence at the time an application is submitted. 
(14)  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he or she must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each principal owner of the applicant must sign the application for a license as applicant. 
In the event that the licensing officer determines or learns at any time that the applicant has improperly or inaccurately completed the application for a proposed sexually oriented business, he or she shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and allow the applicant ten (10) days to properly or accurately complete the application. The time period for granting or denying a license shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is allowed an opportunity to properly complete the application. The failure to correct the application in a timely manner shall be grounds for denial. 
(b)  The fact that a person possesses other types of state or Town permits and/or licenses does not exempt him or her from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business license. 
(Ord. 20 §7, 1996) 
Sec. 6-73. - Duty to supplement application. 
    Applicants for a license under this Article shall have a continuing duty to promptly supplement application information required by that section in the event that said information changes in any way from what is stated on the application. The failure to comply with said continuing duty within thirty (30) days from the date of such change shall be grounds for suspension of a license. 
(Ord. 20 §7, 1996) 
Sec. 6-74. - Investigation and application. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application for a sexually oriented business license properly filed with the licensing officer and upon payment of the nonrefundable application fee, the licensing officer shall immediately stamp the application as received and send photocopies of the application to the Zoning Department, Police Department, Building Inspection Department and any other agency responsible under law for investigating compliance, such as health inspection services or Fire Department. Each department or agency shall promptly conduct an investigation of the applicant, application and the proposed sexually oriented business in accordance with its responsibilities under law. Said investigations shall be completed by the Zoning Department, Police Department, Building Inspection Department and any other agency within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the application by the licensing officer. At the conclusion of its investigation, each department or agency shall indicate on the photocopy of the application its approval or disapproval of the application, date it, sign it and, in the event it disapproves, state the reasons therefor. The Police Department shall only be required to provide the information specified herein and in Section 6-72 and shall not be required to approve or disapprove applications. 
(b)  The Building Inspector, Zoning Department or other agency shall disapprove an application if it finds that the proposed sexually oriented business will be in violation of any provision of any statute, code, ordinance, regulation or other law in effect in the Town. After its indication of approval or disapproval, each department or agency shall immediately return the photocopy of the application to the licensing officer. 
(Ord. 20 §7, 1996) 
Sec. 6-75. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  The licensing officer shall grant or deny an application for a license within sixty (60) days from the date of its proper filing. Upon the expiration of the sixtieth day, unless the applicant requests and is granted a reasonable extension of time, the application shall be deemed granted, unless the licensing officer notifies the applicant of a denial of the application in writing and states the reason for that denial. 
(b)  Grant of application for license. 
(1)  The licensing officer shall grant the application unless one (1) or more of the criteria set forth in Subsection (c) below is present. 
(2)  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it is granted, the expiration date and the address of the sexually oriented business. The license shall also indicate that sexually oriented businesses are subject to prohibitions against public indecency pursuant to Sections 18-7-208 and 18-7-301, C.R.S. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it can be easily read at any time. 
(c)  Denial of application for license. 
(1)  The licensing officer shall deny the application for any of the following reasons: 
a.  An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age. 
b.  An applicant is overdue on his or her payment to the Town of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against him or her or imposed upon him or her in relation to a sexually oriented business. 
c.  An applicant has failed to provide information required by this Section for the issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
d.  The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have been disapproved by an inspecting agency pursuant to the provisions of Sections 6-83 through 6-89. 
e.  The application or license fees have not been paid. 
f.  An applicant or the proposed business is in violation of, or is not in compliance with, any of the provisions of this Chapter or any pertinent provisions of this Code including, but not limited to, the zoning locational requirements for a sexually oriented business set forth in Section 16-189 of this Code. 
g.  The granting of the application would violate a statute, ordinance or court order. 
h.  The applicant has a license under this Chapter which has been suspended or revoked within the previous twelve (12) months. 
i.  An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act within the times set forth in Section 6-72(a)(5). 
j.  An applicant knowingly has in his or her employ an employee who does not have a valid license as required in this Article. 
k.  An applicant is not of good moral character, as good moral character is defined in Section 16-4 of this Code. 
l.  The applicant has not demonstrated a legal right to use the premises for the term of the proposed license. 
(2)  If the licensing officer denies the application, he or she shall notify the applicant of the denial and state the reason for the denial pursuant to the time periods set forth in Sections 6-74 and 6-75. 
(3)  Whenever an application is denied, the Town Clerk shall advise the applicant in writing of the reasons for such action. The applicant must appeal any adverse decision by a licensing officer by requesting a hearing before the Town Council within ten (10) days of receipt of notification of the denial if the applicant disagrees with the denial. A public hearing on said denial shall be held by the Town Council within fourteen (14) days thereafter or at the next Council meeting, whichever first occurs, unless the applicant agrees in writing to an extension of the time on said public hearing. 
(4)  Failure or refusal of the applicant to give any information relevant to the investigation of the application or his or her refusal or failure to appear at any reasonable time and place for examination under oath regarding said application, or his or her refusal to submit to or cooperate with any investigation required by this Article, shall constitute an admission by the applicant that he or she is ineligible for such license and shall be grounds for denial thereof by the licensing officer. 
(Ord. 20 §7, 1996; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 6-76. - Expiration of license. 
(a)  Each license shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance, unless suspended or revoked, and may be renewed only by making application as provided in this Article (for renewals, filing of original survey may be sufficient). Application for renewal of a license shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date of the license. If a renewal application is made fewer than thirty (30) days before the expiration date of a license, the expiration of the license will not be affected. 
(b)  If, subsequent to denial of renewal, the licensing officer finds that the basis for denial of the renewal of the license has been corrected, the applicant shall be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date denial became final. 
(Ord. 20 §7, 1996) 
Sec. 6-77. - Suspension of license. 
(a)  The licensing officer shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if he or she determines that a licensee, or an employee of a licensee, has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this Article or Section 16-189 of this Code; 
(2)  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this Article; 
(3)  Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of a building, fire, health or zoning statute, code, ordinance or regulation, whether federal, state or local, said determination being based on investigation by the division, department or agency charged with enforcing said rules or laws. In the event of such a statute, code, ordinance or regulation violation, the licensing officer shall promptly notify the licensee of the violation and shall allow the licensee a seven-day period in which to correct the violation. If the licensee fails to correct the violation before the expiration of the seven-day period, the licensing officer shall forthwith suspend the license and shall notify the licensee of the suspension; 
(4)  Engaged in a license transfer contrary to Section 6-79. In the event that the licensing officer suspends a license on the ground that a licensee engaged in a license transfer contrary to Section 6-79, the licensing officer shall forthwith notify the licensee of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect until the applicable section of this Chapter has been satisfied; or 
(5)  Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of the hours of operation provisions of Section 16-189(l). 
(b)  Where the licensing officer has reason to believe that a violation of this Article has occurred in a deliberate or willful manner, or that the public health, safety and welfare require immediate action on the part of the licensing officer, the licensing officer may summarily suspend the license of an adult use establishment or an adult use employee, and said notice of suspension shall contain notice that the adult use establishment or adult use employee may request a hearing to contest the suspension. Should the adult use establishment or the adult use employee, within ten (10) days after service of the suspension notice, request in writing a hearing on the suspension, the licensing officer shall set a hearing date within fourteen (14) days, or at the next Town Council's meeting, whichever first occurs. No suspension shall exceed thirty (30) days unless prior to expiration of the thirty-day suspension a revocation proceeding is commenced; or 
(c)  The licensing officer may impose a civil penalty against the licensee for any violations meriting a suspension or revocation, as provided in Section 6-103. If the licensee fails to pay the civil penalty, the licensing officer may provide that at the end of the period of suspension, if the civil penalty remaining at the time is still unpaid, the license shall be revoked. 
(d)  The suspension shall remain in effect until the violation of the statute, code, ordinance or regulation in question has been corrected. 
(Ord. 20 §7, 1996; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 6-78. - Revocation of license. 
(a)  The licensing officer shall revoke a sexually oriented business license upon determining that: 
(1)  A cause of suspension in Section 6-77 of this Article occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months; 
(2)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process that enhanced the applicant's opportunity to obtain a license; 
(3)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances (as defined in Part 3 of Article 22 of Title 12, C.R.S.) on the premises; 
(4)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(5)  A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
(6)  A licensee has been convicted of a specified criminal act for which the time period set forth in Section 6-72(a)(5) has not elapsed; 
(7)  On two (2) or more occasions within a twelve-month period, a person committed an offense, occurring in or on the licensed premises, constituting a specified criminal act for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license; 
(8)  A licensee is delinquent in payment to the Town or State for any taxes or fees; 
(9)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any specified sexual activity to occur in or on the licensed premises or personally engaged in the same; or 
(10)  The licensee has operated more than one (1) sexually oriented business within the same building, structure or portion thereof. 
(b)  When the licensing officer revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one (1) year, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one (1) year from the date revocation became effective. 
(Ord. 20 §7, 1996) 
Sec. 6-79. - Transfer of license. 
(a)  A licensee shall not operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application for license. 
(b)  A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another person unless and until such other person satisfies the following requirements: 
(1)  Obtains an amendment to the license from the licensing officer which provides that he or she is now the licensee, which amendment may be obtained only if he or she has completed and properly filed an application with the licensing officer, setting forth the information called for under Sections 6-72 through 6-75 in the application; and 
(2)  Pays a transfer fee of twenty percent (20%) of the annual license fee. 
(c)  No license may be transferred when the licensing officer has notified the licensee that suspension or revocation proceedings have been or will be brought against the licensee. 
(d)  A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another location. 
(e)  Any attempt to transfer a license either directly or indirectly in violation of this Section is hereby declared void, and the license shall be deemed revoked. 
(Ord. 20 §7, 1996) 
Sec. 6-80. - Judicial review of license denial, suspension or revocation. 
    After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application, or suspension or revocation of a license and a hearing before the Town Council as set forth in Section 6-75, the applicant may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 20 §7, 1996; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 6-81. - Sexually oriented business employees; general requirements. 
(a)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult use establishment shall be not less than eighteen (18) years of age. Every employee shall be of good moral character as defined in Section 16-4 of this Code. 
(b)  Approval for Employment. Before any person may work on a licensed premises, he or she shall first obtain a sexually oriented business employee license as set forth in Section 6-82. 
(c)  Prohibitions. Notwithstanding any other applicable prohibitions as set forth in Section 16-189 of this Code and this Article, employees shall not be permitted to mingle with patrons in a nude state and are prohibited from kissing or touching patrons. Further, it shall be unlawful for any employee of a sexually oriented business to receive tips from patrons other than through the receipt of such tips from one (1) or more tip boxes or other containers designed to receive said tips. All tips for such employee shall be placed by the patron of the sexually oriented business into the tip box. 
(d)  Violation of the provisions of this Code or the rules and regulations of the licensing officer shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of the employee's license. 
(Ord. 20 §7, 1996) 
Sec. 6-82. - Sexually oriented business employees; license required. 
    It shall be unlawful, and a person commits a misdemeanor, if he or she works as an employee of a sexually oriented business without first obtaining an employee's license. 
(Ord. 20 §7, 1996) 
Sec. 6-83. - Application for employee's license. 
(a)  An employee shall submit an application for an employee's license on a form to be provided by the licensing officer. The application shall contain the applicant's name, address, date of birth, phone number and the information required in Sections 6-72 through 6-75. 
(b)  The licensing officer shall refer the employee license application to the Police Department for investigation to be made of such information as is contained on the application. The application process shall be completed within ten (10) days from the date the completed application is filed. After the investigation, the licensing officer shall issue a license unless: 
(1)  The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a license, or in any report or record required to be filed with the Police Department or other department of the Town; 
(2)  The applicant is under age eighteen (18); 
(3)  The applicant has failed to provide the information required by this Section; 
(4)  The license fee has not been paid; 
(5)  The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act within the times set forth in Section 6-72(a)(5); 
(6)  The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule or regulation, or prohibited by particular provisions of this Article or Section 16-189 of this Code; 
(7)  The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee license revoked by the Town within two (2) years of the date of the current application. 
(c)  A license granted pursuant to this Section shall be subject to annual renewal by the licensing officer upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by the licensing officer and the Police Department that the applicant has not been convicted of any specified criminal act or committed any act during the existence of the previous license period which would be grounds to deny the initial permit application. 
(d)  The employee license and any renewal thereof shall be subject to a fee in an amount to be approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. 
(Ord. 20 §7, 1996; Ord. 12 §B19, 2003) 
Sec. 6-84. - Inspection. 
(a)  An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the Police Department, licensing officer, Building Inspection Department, Health Department and Fire Department to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business or at other times by mutual agreement. 
(b)  A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his or her agent commits a misdemeanor if he or she refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time that it is occupied or open for business. 
(Ord. 20 §7, 1996) 
Sec. 6-85. - Records and reports; authority to promulgate. 
(a)  Each licensee shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by the licensing officer and the Fire Chief of the Fire Department to implement this Article and carry out its purpose. By applying for a license under this Article, an individual, partnership or corporation shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this Article and to the exercise by the licensing officer of the powers given herein in the manner herein specified. 
(b)  The licensing officer is authorized to promulgate rules and regulations not inconsistent with this Article or this Code as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this Article. 
(Ord. 20 §7, 1996) 
Sec. 6-86. - General requirements. 
    In addition to the special requirements contained in Sections 16-4, 16-22(1) and 16-189 of this Code, each licensed premises shall: 
(1)  Conform to the requirements of the Uniform Building Code, unless a requirement in the Uniform Building Code conflicts with a special requirement contained within this Article. 
(2)  Conform to the requirements of the Uniform Fire Code, except to the extent that a requirement in the Uniform Fire Code conflicts with a special requirement contained in this Article. 
(3)  In all cases wherein the occupant capacity, as determined by the Fire Chief, is at least fifty (50) persons, exclusive of attendants and assistants, such structure shall have electric, battery-operated, emergency lights using reliable type storage batteries provided with suitable maintenance in properly charged condition, provided that dry batteries shall not be used, and further provided that electric storage batteries shall be approved by the Fire Chief for their intended use and shall comply with the National Electrical Code as adopted by the Town. 
(4)  Conform to the requirements of the comprehensive zoning ordinance of the Town. 
(5)  Conform to all other ordinances of the Town. 
For purposes of this Section, the Town staff, including any health, building or fire officials, shall render a decision regarding conformance to the general and special requirements noted in Sections 6-87 through 6-90 below, within forty-five (45) days of an application for a license. 
(Ord. 20 §7, 1996) 
Sec. 6-87. - Adult bookstore, adult novelty store and adult video store requirements. 
    In addition to the general requirements noted in Section 6-86, an adult bookstore, adult novelty store and adult video store shall observe the following special requirements: 
(1)  All materials and novelties shall be so displayed that they cannot be seen by anyone other than customers who have entered the licensed premises. 
(2)  If recordings are offered for sale or viewing on the premises and customers may listen to them while on the licensed premises, soundproof booths or rooms (peep booths) shall be available for use by customers who desire to listen or view such recordings, and each such booth or room on the premises are also subject to all requirements set forth in Section 6-90. 
(3)  It is unlawful for anyone to distribute for commercial purposes, sell or offer for sale any device, instrument or paraphernalia designed or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves or others. Such devices include but are not limited to phallic-shaped vibrators, dildos, muzzles, whips, chains, bather restraints, racks, nonmedical enema kits, body piercing implements (excluding earrings or other decorative jewelry) or other tools of sadomasochistic abuse. 
(Ord. 20 §7, 1996) 
Sec. 6-88. - Adult motion picture theater requirements. 
    In addition to the general requirements contained in Section 6-86, an adult motion picture theater shall observe the following special requirements, and any peep booths located on or in the premises of any adult motion picture theater are also subject to the requirements set forth in Section 6-90: 
(1)  An adult motion picture theater having only a hall or auditorium for the showing of film material shall be considered a "place of assembly" within the meaning of the Uniform Building Code and shall conform to the requirements therefor. 
(2)  An adult motion picture theater having both adult motion picture booths and a hall or auditorium shall conform to the special requirements for both facilities provided for in this Section and Section 6-90, provided that where the special requirements allow for common elements to be utilized or constructed, this may be done with the approval of the Building Inspector. 
(3)  There shall be provided within or adjacent to the common corridor, passageway or area in adult motion picture theaters having adult motion picture booths, adequate lavatories equipped with running water, hand-cleansing soap or detergent and sanitary towels or hand-drying devices; common towels are prohibited. 
(Ord. 20 §7, 1996) 
Sec. 6-89. - Adult cabaret, adult theater and adult motel requirements. 
    In addition to the general requirements contained in Section 6-86, an adult cabaret, adult theater and adult motel establishment shall observe the following special requirements: 
(1)  Any person employed or working in the licensed premises as a dancer shall, while dancing, perform upon a stage or similar structure specially designed for such dancing. Stages shall conform to the requirements of the Uniform Building Code and shall be a minimum of fifty (50) square feet in size, including the requirements for appurtenant rooms if such appurtenant rooms are used by the establishment, provided that the dancers shall be provided with a dressing room or rooms that are not part of or used by the public as rest rooms. 
(2)  Where a dancer performs upon a platform or other small structure designed to hold a small number of persons, which is not a stage nor equipped to be a stage for theatrical presentations, the platform shall be level and of sturdy construction and shall be securely fastened to the floor or wall during performances and shall be a minimum of seven (7) feet from patrons to be seated. Steps and handrails shall be provided so that the dancer may ascend to the top of the platform safely under the normal operating conditions of the establishment in all cases wherein the top of the platform is more than eight (8) inches from the surface upon which the platform rests. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any employee of a sexually oriented business to receive tips from patrons except as set forth herein. A licensee that desires to provide for tips from its patrons shall establish one (1) or more boxes or other containers to receive tips. All tips for such employees shall be placed by the patron of the sexually oriented business into the tip box. A sexually oriented business that provides tip boxes for its patrons as provided for in this Section shall post one (1) or more signs to be conspicuously visible to the patrons of the premises in letters at least one (1) inch high to read as follows: "All tips are to be placed in the tip box and not handed directly to employees. Any physical contact between a patron and employees is strictly prohibited." 
(Ord. 20 §7, 1996) 
Sec. 6-90. - Requirements pertaining to the exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos in peep booths. 
    In addition to the general and special requirements noted in Section 6-86 through 6-89, a person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business which exhibits on the premises in a peep booth a film, video cassette or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall comply with the requirements of this Article as follows: 
(1)  Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one (1) or more manager's stations, the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises at which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area with no dimension greater than eight (8) feet. The diagram shall also designate the place at which this license will be conspicuously posted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. The licensing officer may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(2)  At least one (1) employee must be on duty and situated at each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the Town or its designee. 
(4)  It is the duty of the owners and operators of the premises to ensure that at least one (1) employee is on duty and situated at each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding rest rooms. Rest rooms may not contain video display equipment. If the premises has two (2) or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one (1) of the manager's stations. The view required in this Subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. The view area shall remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times, and no patron shall be permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to Sections 6-73 through 6-75. 
(6)  No door, screen or other covering shall be placed or allowed to remain on any peep booth, and no holes or openings shall be placed or allowed to remain in the wall between any two (2) adjacent peep booths. The door or doors opening into the booth or room shall be incapable of being locked or otherwise fastened so that it or they will freely open from either side. Partitions between peep booths shall be considered nonbearing partitions, but they shall be so constructed as to have a fire-resistance rating of not less than one (1) hour, or shall have approved sprinklers. 
(7)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operators, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in Subsection (5) above remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials or person at all times and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has not been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to this Section. 
(8)  One (1) clear window, facing the major portion of the licensed premises, covering not less than one-fourth (1/4) of the wall area into which the window is set or a minimum size of two (2) feet by two (2) feet, whichever is greater, shall not be covered or obscured in any manner while the booth or room is in use. 
(9)  No peep booth may be occupied by more than one (1) person at any one (1) time. No holes shall be allowed in the walls or partitions which separate each viewing room from an adjoining viewing room or rest room. 
(10)  A person having a duty under this Section commits a misdemeanor if he or she knowingly fails to fulfill the duties imposed by this Section. 
(11)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to eliminate every place to which patrons are permitted access and an illumination of not less than two (2) foot-candles as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the owners and operators, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises, to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present on the premises. 
(Ord. 20 §7, 1996) 
Sec. 6-91. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for a licensee to admit or to permit the admission of minors under the age of eighteen (18) years within a licensed premises. 
(Ord. 20 §7, 1996) 
Sec. 6-92. - Sale to minors unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give, or to offer to sell, barter or give, to any minor any service, material or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor or adult dancing establishment, or other adult entertainment facility. 
(Ord. 20 §7, 1996) 
Sec. 6-93. - Cleaning of licensed premises requirements. 
    Each licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the licensed premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the licensed premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises, but shall be disposed of daily or as often as necessary. 
(Ord. 20 §7, 1996) 
Sec. 6-94. - Self-inspection of licensee to premises. 
    The licensee of a licensed premises, or his or her designated representative, shall make sanitary inspections of the licensed premises at least once a month, and shall record his or her findings on a form supplied by the licensing officer. Each licensed premises shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(Ord. 20 §7, 1996) 
Sec. 6-95. - Sealing of premises for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
    A licensed premises, or any part thereof, may be sealed by order of the licensing officer on his or her finding of a violation of this Article resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing, the licensing officer shall serve on the licensee, by personal service on him or her or by posting in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, a notice of the violation and an order to correct it within twenty-four (24) hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the licensing officer may physically seal that portion of the licensed premises causing the violation and order the discontinuance of use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seal removed by the licensing officer. The licensing officer shall affix to the sealed premises a conspicuous sign labeled "Unclean" or "Unsafe," as the case may be. 
(Ord. 20 §7, 1996) 
Sec. 6-96. - Abatement as sanitary nuisance. 
    A licensed premises, or any part thereof, may be abated as a sanitary nuisance. 
(Ord. 20 §7, 1996) 
Sec. 6-97. - Interference with inspectors. 
    No person shall interfere with or obstruct inspectors in the performance of their official duties. 
(Ord. 20 §7, 1996) 
Sec. 6-98. - Tampering with notices, etc. 
    No person shall mutilate, obstruct, tear down, remove or otherwise tamper with any official notice, seal or poster unless authorized to do so by the licensing officer by this Article. 
(Ord. 20 §7, 1996) 
Sec. 6-99. - False statements prohibited. 
    No person shall knowingly make, induce or cause to be made by another a false, untrue or misleading statement or a signature of another on a certificate, application, registration, report or other document required to be prepared pursuant to this Article. No person shall knowingly make a false, untrue or misleading oral statement to the licensing officer as to any matter investigated by the licensing officer. 
(Ord. 20 §7, 1996) 
Sec. 6-100. - Alterations prohibited. 
    No person shall reproduce or alter or cause to be reproduced or altered a license, report, certificate or other document issued by the licensing officer if the purpose of the reproduction or alteration is the evasion or violation of a provision of this Article or any other law. 
(Ord. 20 §7, 1996) 
Sec. 6-101. - Immunity from prosecution. 
    All officers and employees of the Town who are acting within the scope of their authority and duties under this Article shall be immune from prosecution, civil and criminal, for trespass upon real property. 
(Ord. 20 §7, 1996) 
Sec. 6-102. - Violations. 
    Any person who knowingly and willfully: 
(1)  Operates, or procures or acquiesces in the operation of, an unlicensed premises contrary to the relevant requirements of this Code; 
(2)  Admits, or procures or acquiesces in the admission of, a minor within a licensed premises; 
(3)  Sells, barters or gives or offers to sell, barter or give or in an offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult arcade, adult motion picture theater, massage parlor, adult theater or peep booth; 
(4)  Maintains, or procures or acquiesces in the maintaining of, a licensed premises in an unsanitary or unsafe condition contrary to the provisions of this Article; 
(5)  Having a duty to conduct the self-inspection required herein, fails or refuses, or procures or acquiesces in a failure or refusal to conduct said self-inspection; 
(6)  Interferes with, or procures or acquiesces in an interference with, an inspector contrary to relevant provisions of this Code; or 
(7)  Maintains, or procures or acquiesces in the maintenance of, a nuisance on a licensed premises; 
shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. For violations that are of a continuing nature, each day that the violation continues shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. 20 §7, 1996) 
Sec. 6-103. - Civil penalties. 
    In addition to or in lieu of the penalties that may be otherwise imposed, the licensing officer may assess the following civil penalties: 
(1)  A person who operates or attempts to operate an adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult arcade, massage parlor, adult motion picture theater, adult theater or peep booth without first obtaining a license under this Article may be assessed a penalty in an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. 
(2)  An applicant for a license under this Article, and any officer, director, partner, member, owner, agent or attorney of such an applicant, who knowingly makes a false statement or provides false information on any document or paper accompanying and forming a part of such application shall be assessed a penalty in an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. 
(3)  A licensee or employee who fails or refuses to renew his or her license within the period granted herein may be assessed a penalty in an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. 
(4)  A licensee, and any agent, officer, servant or employee of a licensee, who maintains a nuisance on the licensed premises or permits the licensed premises to be unsanitary or unsafe may be assessed a penalty in an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. 
(5)  A licensee who moves his or her licensed premises without approval by the licensing officer or who changes the name of his or her business without notifying the licensing officer may be assessed a penalty in an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. 
(6)  A licensee or employee who does not keep the records and make the reports required by any of the agencies herein may be assessed a penalty in an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. 
(7)  A licensee, or any agent, officer, servant or employee of the licensee, who fails to correct violations of the general and applicable special requirements for the licensed premises may be assessed a civil penalty for each violation observed and not corrected within the period prescribed by the licensing officer, the building official or the Fire Chief, as the case may be, in an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq . 
(8)  Any person who aids or participates in a violation for which a civil penalty may be assessed under this Article shall be considered a principal in the violation and may be assessed a civil penalty of up to the maximum amount prescribed for that violation. 
(9)  Nothing herein contained shall prevent or restrict the Town from taking such other lawful action in any court of competent jurisdiction as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation or noncompliance. Such other lawful actions shall include but shall not be limited to an equitable action for injunctive relief or an action at law for damages. All remedies and penalties provided for herein shall be cumulative and independently available to the Town, and the Town shall be authorized to pursue any and all remedies set forth in this Section to the full extent allowed by law. 
(Ord. 20 §7, 1996; Ord. 12 §B20, 2003) 
Sec. 6-104. - Assessment and recovery of civil penalty. 
    Civil penalties shall be assessed by the licensing officer, based upon findings certified by the Building Official, the Police Department, health inspection services or the Fire Chief. 
(Ord. 20 §7, 1996) 
Sec. 6-105. - Criminal penalties. 
    If any person fails or refuses to obey or comply with or violates any of the criminal provisions contained in this Article, such person, on conviction of such offense, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine or by imprisonment or both in the discretion of the Court in amounts and for periods as approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. Each violation shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. Further, each day of continued violation shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. 20 §7, 1996; Ord. 12 §B21, 2003) 
Secs. 6-106-6-118. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V - Medical Marijuana Centers and Retail Marijuana Stores[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. 17 , § B(Exh. A), adopted June 10, 2014, repealed former Art. V, §§ 6-119-6-138, which pertained to medical marijuana centers, and derived from Ord. 31 , § B(Exh. A), adopted Jan. 14, 2014; and Ord. 13, § B, adopted in 2009.   Ord. 24 Exh. B, 2014, authorized the imposition of a municipal sales tax of up to five percent (5%) upon the sale of retail marijuana and retail marijuana products, beginning January 1, 2015. 

Sec. 6-119. - Classes of licensing authorized. 
    For the purpose of regulating the cultivation, manufacture, distribution, offering for sale, and sale of marijuana or marijuana products, the Town only authorizes issuance of licenses to medical marijuana centers and retail marijuana stores, subject to the provisions provided in this Article V. No other classes of medical marijuana or retail marijuana facilities are authorized for licensing. 
( Ord. 17 § B(Exh. A), 2014) 
Sec. 6-120. - Relationship to state law. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, this Article V incorporates the requirements and procedures set forth in Sections 14 and 16(2) of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution, as well as in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, § 12-43.3-101 et. seq., C.R.S., ("CMMC"), as amended, 1 CCR 212-1, Permanent Rules Related to the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, Marijuana Enforcement Division, Colorado Department of Revenue, hereinafter referred to as "1 CCR 212-1," the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, § 12-43.4-103, C.R.S., ("CRMC:"), as amended, and 1 CCR 212-2, Permanent Rules Related to the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, Marijuana Enforcement Division, Colorado Department of Revenue, hereinafter referred to as "1 CCR 212-2," In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this Chapter and the provisions of the CMMC, 1 CCR 212-1, CRMC, or 1 CCR 212-2, or any other applicable state or local law, the more restrictive provision shall control. 
( Ord. 17 § B(Exh. A), 2014) 
Sec. 6-121. - Definitions. 
    The definitions set forth in Sections 14 and 16(2) of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution, as well as in the CMMC, 1 CCR 212-1, CRMC, or 1 CCR 212-2, as amended, shall apply equally to this Article V. All definitions contained in Chapter 16 of this Code are incorporated herein. In addition, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them: 
    Co-located refers to a medical marijuana center and a retail marijuana store that are side by side but with separate entrances. 
    Coterminous refers to a medical marijuana center and a retail marijuana store in a completely shared space. 
    Primary home means that home or place in which a person's habitation is fixed and to which the person, whenever absent, has the present intention of returning after a departure or absence therefrom, regardless of the duration of such absence. A primary home is a permanent building or part of a building and may include, by way of example, a house, condominium, apartment, room in a house, or manufactured housing. No rental property, vacant lot, vacant house or cabin, or other premises used solely for business purposes shall be considered a primary home. 
( Ord. 17 § B(Exh. A), 2014) 
Sec. 6-122. - Local licensing authority. 
    The Town Manager or his or her designee shall act as the licensing official. In the case of an application for a medical marijuana center or a retail marijuana store within the Town, no later than five (5) business days of the completion of the investigation of the application pursuant to Section 6-126, the Town Manager shall either notify the state licensing authority in writing that: 
(1)  The proposed licensed premises violates any zoning law or other restriction on location set forth in Town laws and that the application is disapproved by the Town. Any failure to make such a determination upon the initial review of a state license application shall not preclude the Town from later determining that proposed license is in violation of Town zoning laws or any other restriction on location set forth in Town laws, and disapprove the issuance of a state or Town license on this basis; or 
(2)  The application that is not disapproved as provided in paragraph (1) above, and the Town's ultimate decision to approve or deny the issuance of the state license in the Town is subject to the completion of the local licensing process as set forth in this Article V, after which the Town will notify the state licensing authority in writing of whether or not the medical marijuana center or retail marijuana store proposed in the application has or has not been approved by the Town. 
( Ord. 17 § B(Exh. A), 2014) 
Sec. 6-123. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. 25 § B(Exh. A.1), adopted Feb. 14, 2017, repealed former § 6-123 which pertained to transition provisions and derived from Ord. 17 § B(Exh. A), adopted in 2014. 
Sec. 6-124. - Application requirements. 
(a)  Complete application. The application for licensing of a medical marijuana center or retail marijuana store shall be comprised of a Town of Basalt Medical Marijuana Center application for all applications seeking licensure of medical marijuana centers, the Town of Basalt Retail Marijuana Store application for all applications seeking licensure of retail marijuana stores, a copy of all completed and executed forms and applications required to be submitted to the Marijuana Enforcement Division, Colorado Department of Revenue, and any additional information requested by the Town in order for the Town to fully investigate the application to demonstrate compliance with this Code. The failure to provide the information required by this section may be grounds for the denial of the application. 
(b)  Fees. Applicants must include payment in full of all non-refundable application fees. 
(c)  Residency. The applicant seeking licensure must provide the Town with the name of an owner or partial owner of the proposed medical marijuana center or retail marijuana store who shall have a primary home (as the term is defined in this Article V) within the following Colorado zip codes: 81611 - Aspen; 81615 - Snowmass Village; 81654 - Old Snowmass; 81656 - Woody Creek; 81642 - Meredith and Thomasville; 81621 - Basalt; 81623 - Basalt/Carbondale; and 81601 - Glenwood Springs. 
( Ord. 17 § B(Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 25 §B(Exh. A.2), 2016) 
Sec. 6-125. - Requirements for obtaining licensing of medical marijuana centers and retail marijuana stores. 
(a)  No more than two (2) medical marijuana centers and no more than two (2) retail marijuana stores shall be licensed within the Town limits. 
(b)  Any person, partnership, or corporation must have a separate license for each medical marijuana center or retail marijuana store, including those that are co-located or coterminous. 
(c)  Neither medical marijuana centers nor retail marijuana stores shall be permitted within any of the following locations: 
(1)  Two hundred (200) feet of the following major parks: Arbaney Park, Lions Park, Southside Park, Willis Linear Park, Willits Soccer Field; 
(2)  Five hundred (500) feet of a licensed child care facility; 
(3)  One thousand (1,000) feet of an elementary school, middle school or high school; 
(4)  In a building where the use would abut the following school routes: Two Rivers Road from Homestead Drive to Elk Run Drive; Southside Drive from the High School Property to Fiou Lane; Fiou Lane from Southside Drive to Basalt Avenue; Basalt Avenue from Fiou Lane to Two Rivers Road; or Cottonwood Drive from Two Rivers Road to Riverside Drive; or 
(5)  Any location that is not permitted by the CMMC or the CRMC. 
    The distances referred to in the above subparagraphs (a), (b), and (c) are to be computed by direct measurement from the nearest property line of the land used for a school, park, or child care facility to the nearest portion of the building in which medical or retail marijuana is to be sold, using a route of direct pedestrian access. The above provisions shall not affect the renewal or reissuance of a license once granted by the Town, nor shall the provision apply to an existing licensed premises on land owned by the state or apply to a license in effect and actively doing business before said facility listed above was constructed. 
( Ord. 17 § B(Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 12 §2, 2015; Ord. 30 §B(Exh. A), 2016) 
Sec. 6-126. - Investigation of application. 
    Upon receipt of an application for a medical marijuana center license or a retail marijuana store license properly filed with the Town and upon payment of the nonrefundable application fee, the local licensing official shall mark the application as received and send photocopies of the application to the Building and Zoning Department, Police Department, Town Clerk's office and any other agency responsible under law for investigating compliance, such as health inspection services or Fire Department. Each department or agency shall promptly conduct an investigation of the applicant, application, and the proposed medical marijuana center in accordance with its responsibilities under law. Said investigations shall be completed by the Building and Zoning Department, Police Department, Building Inspection Department and any other agency within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the application by the local licensing official. At the conclusion of its investigation, each department or agency shall indicate on the photocopy of the application its approval or disapproval of the application, date it, signs it and, in the event of disapproval, state the reasons therefor. In particular: 
(1)  The Police Department shall disapprove the application if it finds that the security measures are not in compliance with this Code, the CMMC, or the CRMC. 
(2)  The Zoning Department shall determine whether the proposed medical marijuana center ore retail marijuana store complies with all location and zoning requirements of this Code. 
(3)  The Town Clerk's office shall obtain information from the Colorado Bureau of Investigation to determine whether an applicant has been convicted of a crime. 
(4)  The Building Inspection Department shall inspect the proposed medical marijuana center or retail marijuana store in order to ascertain whether it is in compliance with applicable statutes and ordinances. 
( Ord. 17 § B(Exh. A), 2014) 
Sec. 6-127. - Procedure for granting or denying application. 
(a)  Scheduling of public hearing. Following the investigation of the application, pursuant to Section 6-126 above, the Town Manager shall schedule a public hearing to consider the application for licensing of the medical marijuana center or retail marijuana store. 
(b)  Public hearing. The following public hearing procedure applies when an application has been deemed complete and has been found to comply with all zoning laws and other restrictions set forth in Town laws. This public hearing procedure applies to any application for licensing renewal. 
(1)  Based on the results of the investigation of the application, pursuant to Section 6-126, Town staff shall submit its recommendations and comments to the Town Council for consideration. Copies of staff recommendations shall be available to the applicant prior to the public hearing. 
(2)  At a duly noticed public hearing, the Town Council shall consider the application and Town staff comments and recommendations. 
(3)  The Town Council must make a finding and determination as to the good moral character of the applicant. 
(4)  The Town Council may deny the application for licensing renewal if there is evidence that the licensed premises have been previously operated in a manner that adversely affects the public health, welfare, or safety of residents of the Town. 
(5)  The Town Council shall consider the facts and evidence adduced as a result of its investigation, as well as any other facts, the number, type, and availability of the same type of retail marijuana establishment in the Town, and any other pertinent matters affecting the qualifications of the applicant for the conduct of the type of business proposed. 
(6)  The Town Council has authority to refuse to issue any license for good cause, subject to judicial review. The term "good cause" means that the applicant has violated, does not meet, or has failed to comply with any of the terms, conditions, or provisions of the CMMC, the CRMC, or any rule and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, or this Article V or any rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this title. "Good cause" also means that the proposed licensed premise cannot be supported by the existing infrastructure of the Town. 
(7)  Any decision of the Town Council approving or denying an application shall be in writing stating the reasons there for, within thirty (30) days after the date of the public hearing, and the Town Clerk shall send a copy of such decision by certified mail to the state licensing authority and to applicant at the address shown in the application. The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or entity, to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the medical marijuana center or retail marijuana store. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the licensed premises so that it can be easily read at any time. 
( Ord. 17 § B(Exh. A), 2014) 
Sec. 6-128. - Operation of licensed medical marijuana centers and retail marijuana stores. 
    In addition to the requirements contained in this Code, the CMMC, the CRMC, 1 CCR 212-1, and 1 CCR 212-2, the following general requirements for medical marijuana centers and retail marijuana stores shall apply: 
(1)  Relevant zoning requirements are contained in Chapter 16 of this Code and are incorporated herein. Any applicant for a license under this article must obtain zoning approval prior to the issuance of a license. 
(2)  Hours of operation for medical marijuana centers and retail marijuana stores will be from 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m. Monday through Sunday. 
(3)  Marijuana clubs, businesses, or other places of assembly where customers, members, or the like, are invited for the purpose of using or consuming marijuana or marijuana products on-site are prohibited in the Town limits. 
(4)  The consumption, inhalation, or use of marijuana or marijuana products is not allowed on or within the licensed premises. 
(5)  All sales, distribution, and transfers of marijuana, marijuana products, or paraphernalia by a licensed medical marijuana center, retail marijuana store, or its employees or agents, shall occur only upon the licensed premises from within a permanent building. The licensee is prohibited from delivering marijuana, marijuana products, or associated paraphernalia to any person or business at any other location. 
(6)  No alcohol sales or consumption of alcohol shall be permitted in or upon the licensed premises. 
(7)  No medical marijuana center licensee or its employees and no retail marijuana stores shall permit individuals to loiter or stay in the licensed premises. Exceptions to this are granted for individuals conducting business with the medical marijuana center or retail marijuana store, their contractors, or individuals making deliveries to the license premises. 
(8)  The growing, cultivation, or processing of marijuana or marijuana products within the licensed premises of a medical marijuana center or retail marijuana store is prohibited. 
(9)  The licensed premises shall be monitored and secured twenty-four (24) hours a day including, at a minimum, the following security measures: 
a.  Installation and use of digital security cameras, capable of recording and duplicating color video and still images that are identifiable in all lighting conditions twenty-four (24) hours per day, to monitor all areas of the licensed premises where persons may gain or attempt to gain access to marijuana, marijuana products, paraphernalia, or monies maintained by the center or store. Security surveillance cameras shall also monitor the main entrance along the interior and exterior of the premises to discourage crime and to facilitate the reporting of criminal acts as well as nuisance activities. Security camera surveillance recordings, from all security cameras at the licensed premises, shall be preserved for at least one hundred eighty (180) days, by the business, and be made immediately available to law enforcement officers upon request in a format that can be viewed and duplicated by the Basalt Police Department. 
b.  Access to online web-based live monitoring of all video surveillance cameras shall be provided to the Police Department. 
c.  Exterior lighting shall illuminate all exterior windows and doors of the center or store which are accessible from the exterior of the building during non-daylight hours. All exterior lighting must be in compliance with the Town Code. This requirement may be waived upon concurrency by the Police Chief and Town Planner. 
d.  All exterior windows shall not be covered by window shades or other material and shall be of sufficient size to permit observation of the interior of the licensed premises by law enforcement officers standing outside the center or store. 
e.  Installation and use of a locking burglary safe for storage of all marijuana, marijuana products, and /or monies on the licensed premises during nonbusiness hours. The safe shall be incorporated into the building structure or securely attached thereto. Perishable edible products must be stored in a locking refrigerated container incorporated into the building structure or securely attached thereto. 
f.  Written documentation of security measures, video surveillance systems, and drawings of licensed premises shall be included with the application for a medical marijuana center license or retail marijuana store. 
(10)  Every owner and manager of a medical marijuana center or retail marijuana store shall ensure that every owner and manager, and all employees responsible for the sale of the product has successfully completed an approved educational seminar. 
( Ord. 17 § B(Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 12 §3, 2015; Ord. 25 §B(Exh. A.3, 4), 2016) 
Sec. 6-129. - Inspection and monitoring of licensed facilities. 
(a)  During all business hours, and other times of apparent activity, all licensed premises shall be subject to inspection by the Chief of Police, Building Official, local licensing official, Fire Department or their authorized representatives for the purpose of investigating and determining compliance with the provision of this article and any other applicable state or local law or regulation. Such inspection may include, but need not be limited to, the inspection of books, records, inventory, security measures, and video surveillance recordings. 
(b)  Where any part of the licensed premises consists of a locked or inaccessible area, such area shall be made available for inspection, without delay, upon request. 
(c)  The Police Department shall provide ongoing monitoring of the licensed premises to ensure compliance with all applicable security measures. 
( Ord. 17 § B(Exh. A), 2014) 
Sec. 6-130. - Immunity of Town. 
    By accepting a license issued pursuant to this Article, a licensee, jointly and severally if more than one (1), agrees to indemnify and defend the Town, its officers, elected officials, employees, attorneys, agents, insurers and self-insurance pool against all liability, claims and demands on account of injury, loss or damage, including without limitation, claims arising from bodily injury, personal injury, sickness, disease, death, property loss or damage or any other loss of any kind whatsoever, which arise out of or are in any manner connected with the operation of the medical marijuana center or retail marijuana store that is the subject of the license. The licensee further agrees to investigate, handle, respond to and provide defense for and defend against any such liability, claims or demands at its expense and to bear all other costs and expenses related thereto, including court costs and attorney fees. The Town Manager may require a licensee to execute a written instrument confirming the provisions of this section. 
( Ord. 17 § B(Exh. A), 2014) 
Sec. 6-131. - Unlawful acts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person: 
(1)  To operate any medical marijuana center in the Town without a license duly issue by the state licensing authority under the CMMC and in compliance with any and all applicable state laws; 
(2)  To operate any retail marijuana store in the Town without a license duly issued by the state licensing authority under the CRMC and in compliance with any and all applicable state laws; 
(3)  To operate any medical marijuana center or retail marijuana store in the Town without a license duly issued by the Town under this Article V. and in compliance with any and all applicable Town laws; 
(4)  To engage in any form of business or commerce involving the cultivation, processing, manufacturing, storage, sale, distribution or consumption of medical marijuana other than those forms that are expressly contemplated by Section 14 or 16 of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution, the CMMC, or the CRMC; 
(5)  To sell marijuana or marijuana products from marijuana plants possessed, grown, processed, or transported for personal use pursuant to Subsection 16(3) of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution; 
(6)  To work in the medical or retail marijuana industry without first obtaining occupational licensing through the Marijuana Enforcement Division of the State of Colorado; or 
(7)  Operating a medical marijuana center or retail marijuana store to refuse to permit any lawful inspection of the licensed premises. 
(8)  Violating any of the provisions contained in this Article. 
( Ord. 17 § B(Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 25 §B(Exh. A.5), 2016) 
Sec. 6-132. - Criminal penalties. 
    If any person fails or refuses to obey or comply with or violates any of the provisions contained in this Article, or a license issued pursuant thereto, such person, upon conviction of such offense, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine as shown on the Town's fee schedule. If no specific criminal penalty exists under this Section, the penalty shall be as shown under Section 1-82 of this Code for violations not otherwise specifically provided in this Code or the fee schedule. For violations that are of a continuing nature, each day that the violation continues to occur shall be a considered a separate offense. 
( Ord. 17 § B(Exh. A), 2014) 
Sec. 6-133. - Civil disciplinary actions. 
(a)  Any violation of the terms and conditions of a license for a medical marijuana center or retail marijuana store or any violation of the CMMC, 1 CCR 212-1, the CRMC, 1 CCR 212-2, or this Code may result in fines, suspension, or revocation of the license, in addition to any other fines or remedies available to the Town pursuant to other provisions of the Town Code. 
(b)  In lieu of any license suspension or revocation, the Town Council may assess a fine against the licensee not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation. Whether a fine should be assessed and the amount of such fine shall be determined by the Town Council in its discretion, based upon the nature of the offense, the licensee's record, whether the violation presents a threat to public health, safety or welfare, the duration of the violation, and any other mitigating or aggravating circumstances present. 
(c)  Procedures for investigation of license violations for suspension and revocation as a result of any such violation are provided in the CMMC, 1 CCR 212-1, the CRMC, 1 CCR 212-2. 
( Ord. 17 § B(Exh. A), 2014) 
Sec. 6-134. - Transfer of ownership. 
    Transfer of ownership of any local license issued pursuant to this Article V shall be governed by the standards and procedures set forth in the CMMC, 1 CCR 212-1, the CRMC, 1 CCR 212-2, and the Town Council shall administer transfers of local licenses in the same manner as the state licensing authority administers transfers of state licenses. In addition, the public hearing requirements from this Article V shall apply to all applications for transfer of ownership of any local license. 
( Ord. 17 § B(Exh. A), 2014) 
Sec. 6-135. - Change of location; modification of premises. 
    Any change of the location of any license or any modification of the licensed premises shall be governed by the standards and procedures set forth in the CMMC, 1 CCR 212-1, the CRMC, 1 CCR 212-2, and the Town Council shall administer applications to change location or modify premises in the same manner as the state licensing authority administers changes of location and modification of premises for state licenses. Any proposed modification and any new location to which an existing licensed business is transferred shall fully comply with spacing requirements as set forth in this Article V, as well as the zoning requirements set forth in Chapter 16 of the Town Code. 
( Ord. 17 § B(Exh. A), 2014) 
Sec. 6-136. - Term of licenses; renewals. 
    Any local license issued pursuant to this Article V shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of issuance. Application for renewal of a license shall be made at least forty-five (45) days before the expiration date of the current license. Any renewal of the license shall be governed by the standards and procedures set forth in the CMMC, 1 CCR 212-1, the CRMC, 1 CCR 212-2, subject to any additional restrictions as provided in this Article V. 
( Ord. 17 § B(Exh. A), 2014) 
Secs. 6-137-6-160. - Reserved. 
CHAPTER 7 - Health, Sanitation and Animals 
ARTICLE I - Administration and Abatement of Nuisances 

Sec. 7-1. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Abandoned vehicle means any automobile, truck, tractor, motorcycle or self-propelled vehicle or trailer that has been left with the intention not to retain possession of or assert ownership over it. The intent need not coincide with the act of leaving. It is prima facie evidence of the necessary intent that notice has been posted upon the vehicle, or the owner thereof has otherwise been notified by a law enforcement agency to remove the motor vehicle, and it has not been removed within three (3) days after such notice has been posted or received; and: 
a.  The motor vehicle has been left for more than seven (7) consecutive days unattended and unmoved; 
b.  The motor vehicle meets the definition of inoperable vehicle as defined in this Section; 
c.  License plates or other identifying marks have been removed from the motor vehicle. 
    Inoperable vehicle means any automobile, truck, tractor, motorcycle or self-propelled vehicle which is in a condition of being junked, wrecked, wholly or partially dismantled, discarded, abandoned or unable to perform the functions or purpose for which it was originally constructed. The existence of any of the following conditions shall raise the presumption that a vehicle is inoperable: 
a.  Absence of an effective registration plate or safety sticker upon such vehicle. 
b.  Placement of the vehicle or parts thereof upon jacks, blocks, chains or other supports. 
c.  Absence of one (1) or more parts of the vehicle necessary for the lawful operation of the vehicle upon the streets and highways. 
    Litter means the scattering or dropping of rubbish, trash or other matter, organic or mineral. 
    Noxious weed means a weed in the list of noxious weeds as described in Section 7-52 of this Chapter. 
    Rubbish means any type of debris, trash, waste or rejected matter. 
    Trash means any worn-out, broken up or used refuse, rubbish, toppings, twigs, leaves of trees or worthless matter or material. 
(Prior code 45-1; 45-19; Ord. 01 §1, 2007; Ord. 11 §1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-2. - Common law nuisances. 
    Any nuisance which has been declared to be such by state courts or statutes or known as such at common law shall constitute a nuisance in the Town, and any person, corporation or association causing or permitting any such nuisance shall be in violation of this Article. 
(Prior code 45-2) 
Sec. 7-3. - Author of nuisances. 
    Any state of things prohibited by this Article shall be deemed to be a nuisance, and any person who shall hereafter make or cause such nuisance to exist shall be deemed to be the author thereof. 
(Prior code 45-3) 
Sec. 7-4. - Prohibition of nuisances. 
    No person being the owner, agent or occupant, or having under his or her control any building, lot or premises or unimproved real estate within the limits of the Town, shall maintain or allow any nuisance to be or remain therein. 
(Prior code 45-5) 
Sec. 7-5. - Ascertaining nuisances. 
    Whenever the pursuit of any trade, business or manufacture or the maintenance of any substance or condition of things shall, upon investigation, be considered by the Town Manager, or his or her appointed deputies, dangerous to the health of any of the inhabitants of the Town, the same shall be considered a nuisance and shall be abated. 
(Prior code 45-6; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 7-6. - Constitution of separate offense. 
    In the case of any nuisance in or upon any street, alley or other public or private grounds, the author thereof shall be guilty of a separate offense for every period of forty-eight (48) hours' continuance thereof after notice given to abate the same. 
(Prior code 45-7) 
Sec. 7-7. - Filing complaint. 
    In addition to or in lieu of any procedure for abatement, a direct complaint may be filed by any person or police officer against any person who violates any provision of this Article. 
(Prior code 45-12) 
Sec. 7-8. - Abatement of nuisance. 
(a)  Should any such nuisance, within or upon any public or private premises or as aforesaid, not be abated forthwith after the notice herein provided shall be given, the Town Manager or his or her appointed deputies may declare the same to be a nuisance and order the Chief of Police or Police Department to abate the same, which order shall be executed without delay, and the Chief of Police shall have the authority to call for the necessary assistance therefor. 
(b)  In all cases where a nuisance shall be found in any building or upon any ground or other premises within the jurisdiction of the Town, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be given, in writing, signed by the Town Manager or his or her appointed deputies to the owner of said premises or the occupant or person in possession, charge or control of such building or other premises where he or she is known and can be found to remove such nuisance. 
(c)  In case of any such nuisance in or upon any street, avenue, alley, sidewalk, highway or public grounds in the Town, the Chief of Police or Superintendent of Streets may abate the same forthwith without such notice being given. 
(d)  Any officer who shall be duly authorized to abate any nuisance specified in this Article shall have the authority to engage the necessary assistance and incur the necessary expense therefor. 
(e)  The expense incurred by the Town in abating any nuisance may be recovered by proper action from the author thereof. 
(Prior code 45-13; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 7-9. - Right of entry. 
    The Town Manager, Chief of Police or any other person deputed as aforesaid may enter upon or into any lot, house or other building or premises, with the proper respect of the occupant's constitutional rights, to examine the same and to ascertain whether any such nuisance exists, and shall be free from any action of liability on account thereof. 
(Prior code 45-15; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 7-10. - Interference with officials prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, delay or obstruct any Town officer or Town employee in the discharge of any duty to regulate activities as set forth in this Chapter. The penalty for violation of this Section shall be as specified in Section 1-82. 
(Prior code 45-16; Ord. 22 §1, 1991) 
Secs. 7-11-7-17. - Reserved. 
Sec. 7-18. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Article shall be subject to the provisions of Section 1-82 of this Code. 
(Prior code 45-27) 
Secs. 7-19-7-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II - Nuisances 

Sec. 7-31. - Accumulation to constitute nuisances. 
    Whenever there shall be in or upon any lot or piece of ground within the limits of the Town any damaged merchandise, litter, trash, rubbish, garbage, wrecked car, inoperable cars or other wrecked vehicles or an accumulation of junk vehicles or junk of any type upon any private or public property, except in areas specifically zoned by the Zoning Ordinance of the Town for said purposes or otherwise designated by the Town for such purposes, the existence of any such material or items shall constitute a nuisance and shall be in violation of this Article. 
(Prior code 45-4) 
Sec. 7-32. - Discharge of nauseous liquids. 
    No person shall, himself or herself or by another in the Town, discharge out of or from or permit to flow from any house or place any foul or nauseous liquid or substance of any kind whatever into or upon any adjacent ground or lot or into any street, alley or public place. 
(Prior code 45-8) 
Sec. 7-33. - Littering. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or cause to be thrown or permit anyone in his or her employ to throw onto any public highway, thoroughfare, street, sidewalk, recycle container or other place any kind of wire or scrap paper; any ashes, cans or glass of any character; old clothes; cloth of any kind; boots; shoes; hats; leather; hair; straw or hay; animal, vegetable or any other substance whatever; or any type of advertising matter; or to distribute or cause to be distributed or permit anyone in his or her employ to distribute any type of advertising matter in such a manner so as to cause the littering of any public highway, thoroughfare, street, sidewalk or public place. It shall further be unlawful for any person to sweep or cause to be swept, or cause anyone in his or her employ to sweep, from any store, office, warehouse, factory, hotel or any other building, occupied in whole or in part for commercial purposes, any refuse or dirt from such building onto any public highway, thoroughfare, street, sidewalk or other public place in the Town. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation to drive, move or propel a vehicle or to allow a vehicle owned by such person, firm, association or corporation to be driven, moved or propelled in such a manner so as to cause to be spilled, dropped or jostled onto any street, highway, thoroughfare, sidewalk or other public place in the Town any trash or rubbish; or to load or allow a vehicle to be so loaded so that the contents or any portion of the contents of such vehicle shall be spilled, dropped or jostled from such vehicle. Vehicles, including trucks loaded with or transporting any construction material, dirt, earth, clay, stone, macadam, brick, cement, sand, fuel, coal, wood, refuse or garbage, shall be loaded and the vehicle shall be in such condition so that none of the contents shall be loosed or spilled along the route which the vehicle is traveling. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person operating a vehicle or being a passenger in any vehicle to throw or cause to be thrown from such vehicle onto any public highway, thoroughfare, street, sidewalk or other public place in the Town any rubbish or trash, fruit or fruit particles, wrappers, containers, paper, paper products, bottles, glass, cans, hulls, handbills, confetti, shavings, shells, stalks, animals, cloth or any other material of any kind which would render such public highway, thoroughfare, street, sidewalk or other public place unsightly, unsafe, unclean or unsanitary. 
(d)  The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter. No person shall throw or deposit litter on any private property in the Town, whether owned by such person or not; provided, however, that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for the deposit of rubbish or other waste materials in such a manner that waste materials will be prevented from being carried or deposited onto any public or private property. 
(Prior code 45-9) 
Sec. 7-34. - Use of property for dumping unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation to use any land, premises or property within the Town for the dumping or disposal of any garbage, trash, litter, rubbish, offal, filth, excrement, discarded building materials or combustible materials of any kind without first having made application for and receiving a permit to do so. The application therefor shall be filed with the Town Manager or the Town Clerk and shall state the location of the land, premises or property, the manner in which the dumping or disposal is to be accomplished and the means and methods by which the applicant proposes to secure the same against the danger of disease, fire and other menaces to the public health and to provide for the suppression of rodents, mosquitoes and other insects. Upon such investigation and a finding that the proposed dumping will not cause any danger to the public health, the Town Manager or Town Clerk shall issue a permit upon approval of the Town Council after the payment of the fee in an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381, et seq. 
(Prior code 45-10; Ord. 12 §B22, 2003) 
Sec. 7-35. - Nuisances enumerated. 
(a)  Stale matter. No person whatsoever shall keep, collect or use, or cause to be kept, collected or used, in the Town any stale, putrid or stinking fat or grease or other stale matter, other than normal weekly trash accumulation. 
(b)  Sewer inlet. No person shall, in the Town, deposit in or throw into any sewer (sanitary or storm), sewer inlet or privy vault that shall have a sewer connection any article whatever that might cause such sewer, sewer inlet or privy vault to become nauseous to others or injurious to public health. 
(c)  Transporting of garbage; manure. Every cart or vehicle used to transport manure, garbage, swill or offal in any street in the Town shall be fitted with a substantial tight box thereon so that no portion of such filth will be scattered or thrown into such street. 
(d)  Streets, streams and water supply. No person shall throw or deposit, or cause or permit to be thrown or deposited, any offal composed of animal or vegetable substances, or both, any dead animal, excrement, garbage or other offensive matter whatever upon any street, avenue, alley, sidewalk or public or private grounds. No person shall, in the Town, throw or deposit or cause or permit to be thrown or deposited anything specified in any foregoing part of this Section or any other substance that would tend to have a polluting effect into the water of any stream, ditch, pond, well, cistern, trough or other body of water, whether artificially or naturally created, or so near any such place as to be liable to pollute the water. 
(e)  Dead animal; removal. When any animal shall die in the Town, it shall be the duty of the owner or keeper thereof to remove the body of such animal forthwith to a distance of not less than five thousand (5,000) feet beyond the limits of the Town. If such body shall not forthwith be removed, the same shall be deemed a nuisance, and such owner or keeper will be the author of the nuisance. When the body of any such dead animal shall be in any street, highway or public grounds in the Town, it shall be the duty of the Town Manager to cause such body to be removed forthwith to a distance of not less than five thousand (5,000) feet beyond the limits of the Town. 
(f)  Abate noisemakers. The use of music, noisemakers or loudspeakers on the streets of the Town for the sale or vending of products, advertising or other commercial purposes is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited by the terms of this Chapter. 
(g)  Unused appliances. No person whatsoever shall keep any unused refrigerator, washer, dryer, freezer or other appliance within any accessible yard or lot, carport or residential garage within the Town limits without first removing the door of the same. 
(h)  Removal of inoperable vehicle. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, corporation or other agent, either as owner, lessee, tenant or occupant of any lot or land within the Town to park, store or deposit or permit to be parked, stored or deposited thereon an inoperable vehicle unless such vehicle is enclosed in a garage or other building. The provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to any person, partnership or corporation or their agent with one (1) vehicle inoperable for a period of less than thirty (30) consecutive days, or to any person, firm, corporation or their agent who is conducting a business enterprise in compliance with existing zoning regulations. 
(i)  Vacant residential dwellings. All broken windows in each vacant dwelling shall be replaced by the owner or agent within seventy-two (72) hours after notice is given by the Town Manager or his or her appointed deputies. 
(j)  Barking, yelping, howling or mewing by canine or feline. The keeping or harboring of any canine or feline which by loud, frequent or habitual barking, yelping, howling or mewing shall cause a serious annoyance to the neighborhood or to persons passing to and fro upon the streets or sidewalks is hereby declared a nuisance and is prohibited. 
(k)  Incinerators. Only dry, easily combustible materials may be burned in non-gas-fired incinerators from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Any material having burned in an incinerator which smolders shall be deemed a nuisance. Smoldering shall be defined as when the flame has subdivided to the point where smoke is being emitted and such smoldering shall be a nuisance when this condition prevails in excess of thirty (30) minutes. 
(l)  Stagnant ponds. The permitting of stagnant water on any lot or piece of ground within the Town limits is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and every owner or occupant of a lot or piece of ground within the Town is hereby required to drain or fill up said lot or piece of ground whenever the same is necessary so as to prevent stagnant water or other nuisance accumulating thereon, and it shall be unlawful for any such owner or occupant to permit or maintain any such nuisance. 
(m)  Unauthorized posting of handbills, posters and placards. Any handbill, poster, placard or painted or printed matter which shall be stuck, posted or pasted upon any public or private house, store or other building or upon any fence, power pole, telephone pole or other structure without the permission of the owner, agent or occupant of the house shall be deemed a nuisance and may be abated as provided in this Chapter. 
(n)  Unlawful to abandon vehicle. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, corporation or other agent to leave an abandoned vehicle upon a street, highway, right-of-way or any other public property without the express consent of the owner or person in lawful charge of that private property. 
(Prior code 45-11; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 1 §2, 2007) 
Secs. 7-36-7-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III - Noxious Weeds 

Sec. 7-51. - Regulation of noxious weeds and rubbish. 
    It shall be the duty of each and every person, corporation or association owning any lots, tracts or parcels of land within the Town to remove all noxious weeds as identified in Section 7-52 below and to remove all rubbish of any kind from the lots, tracts or parcels within the Town. 
(Prior code 45-17; Ord. 11 §3, 2011) 
Sec. 7-52. - Removal. 
    All such noxious weeds and rubbish shall, immediately upon being removed by the owners of said lots, be removed from the Town or otherwise entirely destroyed. 
(Prior code 45-18; Ord. 11 §3, 2011) 
Sec. 7-53. - Noxious weed management. 
(a)  Management of noxious weeds is designated by the Town, Eagle and Pitkin Counties and the State declares that there is a need to ensure that all the lands in the Town, whether in private or public ownership, are protected by and subject to the jurisdiction of the Town to manage undesirable plants. 
(b)  The Colorado Department of Agriculture has four (4) noxious weed lists, designated as "A," "B," "C" and the watch list. Species are assigned to one (1) of the four (4) state weed lists through the rule-making authority of the Department of Agriculture. In addition to the weeds designated on the State's A, B, C and the watch list, the Town has the authority to declare plants as noxious weeds if the plant meets one (1) or more statutorily defined criteria (Section 35-5.5-103(16), C.R.S.). The Town should declare those weed species and the weeds on the State's weed lists to be subject to integrated management within the Town. 
(1)  The Town's local list is subject to change as the State amends the A, B, C and the watch list and as the Town declares species not included on the State's lists as "noxious." The updated list, showing current state designations, is available at the Town Hall. 
(2)  The Town and property owners will be required to manage Town-, County- and State-listed noxious weeds in accordance with the Colorado Noxious Weed Act, Rules and Regulations Pertaining to the Administration and Enforcement of the Colorado Noxious Weed Act (8 CCR 1206-2) and the Colorado Department of Agriculture's state weed management plans and integrated weed management recommendations for individual species. 
(c)  Enforcement of this Section by the Public Works Department shall follow these guidelines: 
(1)  First contact : Notification by personal visit or phone to the property owner requesting removal of the identified noxious weeds and/or rubbish. The property owner will be given fourteen (14) days to remove identified noxious weeds or rubbish. In the event that the property owner cannot be reached by personal visit or phone, the Public Works Department, after first making this first attempt, shall send a letter to the property owner requesting the removal of the identified noxious weeds or rubbish. 
(2)  Additional contact : If compliance is not completed by the property owner within the above fourteen (14) days of first contact as described in Paragraph (1) above, the Public Works Department shall recontact the property owner by personal visit, phone or letter reminding him or her of the Town's regulations related to removal of noxious weeds and rubbish and asking him or her to remove the noxious weeds and rubbish within the next seven (7) days. 
(3)  Notice of violation : If compliance is not completed by the property owner within the time period allotted in Paragraph (2) above, the Public Works Department shall send a certified letter to the property owner reminding him or her of the Town's regulations related to removal of noxious weeds and rubbish within two (2) business days from receipt of the letter and identifying penalties for noncompliance as set forth in Section 1-82 of this Code. The Town Manager can extend the compliance time period if it is determined at the sole discretion of the Town Manager that there are special circumstances. By way of an example, special circumstances may include, but are not limited to, a property owner not being able to be contacted. 
(d)  All noxious weed removal shall be done in compliance with the State of Colorado Noxious Weed Act and Rules and Regulations Pertaining to the Administration and Enforcement of the Colorado Noxious Weed Act. 
(Ord. 11 §3, 2011) 
Secs. 7-54-7-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV - Intersection Triangle 

Sec. 7-71. - Intersection triangle. 
    Any affixed object which is not a primary structure on a lot, which has a height of thirty (30) inches above the elevation of a minor road at the apex of the sight triangle at the intersection of a thru street and minor road (stop or yield) shall be removed by the property owner within thirty (30) days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Section. Any obstruction of any nature whatsoever over thirty (30) inches in height shall not be allowed to be constructed, planted or grown within the sight triangle described herein at any time after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Section; except for trees with a height of seven (7) feet above the ground and open wire fencing that does not obscure sight more than ten percent (10%). The sight triangle described herein is found in Appendix A. 
(Ord. 22 §1, 1991) 
Secs. 7-72-7-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V - Trees 

Sec. 7-91. - Sale, import or planting prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to sell or import into the Town, or to plant or cause to be planted within the corporate limits of the Town, any female box elder tree ( Acer negundo ). 
(Prior code 63-1) 
Sec. 7-92. - Removal of new trees by owner required. 
    The owner of any property within the Town, upon which any female box elder tree has been planted after the effective date of this Article, shall cut and remove such tree from his or her property after being given two (2) days' written notice to do so by the Town. 
(Prior code 63-2) 
Sec. 7-93. - Removal by Town upon noncompliance. 
    In case of the failure of any owner of such property to cut and remove such box elder tree planted after the effective date of this Article, the Town shall cut and remove such box elder tree. 
(Prior code 63-3) 
Secs. 7-94-7-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI - Animals and Livestock 

Sec. 7-111. - Livestock. 
    No livestock shall be housed, penned, stabled, corralled, pastured or otherwise kept within the Town limits except with written authorization of the Animal Control Officer or Community Safety Officer after inspection as to the adequacy of the structure in which that livestock is kept and after evaluation of the effect of such livestock on the neighboring properties as to sight, smell and sound and consultation with the Technical Review Committee. The keeping of female chickens shall be subject to the licensing provisions and standards set forth in Section 7-113 below. The keeping of other types of fowl is not permitted. 
(Prior code 26-5.1; Ord. 21 §1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-112. - Certain animal traps and poisonous baits prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to set, use or allow to be set or used, "leg-hold" animal traps or snares upon any property, public or private, within the Town. For purposes of this Section, "leg-hold" traps and snares shall be defined as spring-operated or other types of metal-jawed animal traps which capture animals by closing on any part of an animal's body, and known by the names, among others, of "leg-hold," "steel-jawed," "conibear" and "spring-line" traps. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain or permit the use of poisonous baits upon any property, public or private, within the Town. For the purposes of this Section, poisonous baits are defined as substances attractive to animals as food, to which lethal poisons are added for the purpose of killing those animals which ingest them. 
(c)  Nothing in this Section shall prohibit the otherwise lawful trapping of any animal by use of animal traps which by their normal operation are intended to capture animals alive and unharmed, and which are known variously by the names, among others, of "cage trap," "cage-door trap" or "live trap." 
(d)  Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the otherwise lawful possession or use of standard mouse and/or rat traps for the purpose of controlling common mice and rats. 
(e)  Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the otherwise lawful possession or use of standard mouse or rat poison baits for the purpose of controlling common mice and rats. 
(f)  Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the Town Manager in a time of danger to the public health, welfare and safety caused by an animal disease, overpopulation or any other public safety problem from authorizing, by written permit, the use of any animal trap or poison bait on an emergency basis by Town police, animal control officers, officers of the Division of Wildlife, the Department of Agriculture or other persons authorized by such permit. 
(g)  The penalty for violation of this Section shall be as set forth in Section 7-149. 
(Prior code 26-21; Ord. 25 §1, 1990; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 7-113. - Standards for keeping of chickens. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to provide standards for the keeping of domesticated chickens. It is intended to allow for residents to keep a small number of female chickens on a noncommercial basis while limiting the potential impacts on the surrounding neighborhood. The Town recognizes that adverse neighborhood impacts may result from the keeping of domesticated chickens as a result of noise, odor, unsanitary animal living conditions, unsanitary waste storage and removal, the attraction of predators, rodents, insects or parasites and nonconfined animals leaving the owner's property. The standards below are intended to ensure that domesticated chickens do not adversely impact the neighborhood. 
(b)  Standards. Any keeping of chickens within the Town shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Annual permit. An annual permit is required for the keeping of any domesticated chickens in the Town limits. In order to obtain an annual permit, the resident wanting to keep chickens must make an appointment with the Community Safety Officer to inspect the enclosure in which chickens are proposed to be kept for compliance with the enclosure sufficiency standards identified in Paragraph (5) below. A sufficient enclosure shall be completed prior to applying for an annual permit. Homeowners' Association approval is required for annual permit requests to keep chickens on properties located within subdivisions that have Homeowners' Associations. 
(2)  Number of chickens. The maximum number of chickens allowed per residential property is six (6), regardless of how many dwelling units are on a property (a condominiumized duplex is considered one [1] property for the purposes of this requirement). The keeping of chickens is not permitted on properties containing multi-family buildings with three (3) or more residential units or mixed use buildings. 
(3)  Type of chickens. Only female chickens are permitted, and there is no restriction on chicken species. 
(4)  Noncommercial use. Chickens shall be kept as pets and for personal use only; no individual shall sell eggs, engage in chicken breeding or fertilizer production or slaughter chickens for commercial purposes. Raising chickens or other fowl for fighting purposes shall also be prohibited. 
(5)  Enclosure requirements. Chickens must be kept in enclosures or fenced areas at all times. During daylight hours, chickens may be allowed outside of their chicken enclosure in a securely fenced yard if supervised. The securely fenced yard must include a fence of at least six (6) feet tall that is also in compliance with the other fence requirements set forth in this Code. Chickens shall be secured in an enclosure meeting the following requirements during the non-daylight hours: 
a.  The enclosures shall be enclosed on all sides and shall have a roof and doors. Access doors must be able to be shut and locked at night. Opening windows and vents must be covered with predator- and bird-proof wire of less than one-quarter-inch openings. Electrified wire may be used, but shall be at most two (2) amps, one (1) joule and two thousand (2,000) volts. The electrified wire that may be used shall be fused and have a pulsing charge. Chargers for electrified wire shall be installed pursuant the manufacturer's specifications and shall include a ground rod. Electrified wire with a continuous charge is prohibited. Electrified wire is only permitted on chicken enclosures and is otherwise prohibited pursuant to Section 16-204(4) of this Code. 
b.  The enclosures shall be made of uniform materials throughout. For clarification, all of the shingles used on the roof shall be constructed of uniform material, all of the wire shall be of the same type and all of the exposed walls shall be constructed of uniform materials. This does not preclude the ability for the installation of solar panels on chicken enclosures. 
c.  The enclosures must be made of sturdy wire or fencing that shall be buried at least twelve (12) inches in the ground. The enclosures must be covered with sturdy wire. Use of standard chicken wire is not permitted. 
d.  The structural framing members of the enclosures shall be made of at least two-inch by four-inch nominal framing members. Roofs shall be sturdy and not have any gaps. 
e.  Enclosures shall require a building permit. 
f.  Infrared heating bulbs, including ceramic and fluorescent heating bulbs approved by the Building Official as to type and mounting may be permitted as long as the enclosure in which the heating bulb is being used is at least ten (10) feet from another structure or combustible fence and is at least five (5) feet from all property lines. Permitted infrared heating bulbs shall have a UL listing and shall be mounted in a manner to provide an eighteen-inch clearing from other combustible materials. All other types of heating devices are prohibited. Electricity for infrared heating bulbs shall not be supplied through an extension cord and instead shall be supplied through an electrical outlet in the enclosure that meets the adopted electrical code requirements in place at the time of installation. 
(6)  Siting of enclosures. Enclosures shall only be located behind the frontmost wall of a residence and at the time of installation shall not be any closer than twenty (20) feet from living space on a neighboring property. For clarification, when a neighboring property owner expands his or her residence into the required twenty-foot distance between an enclosure and the neighboring property owner's living space, the established enclosure shall not be considered nonconforming. Enclosures shall comply with the zoning requirements for accessory buildings as set forth in Chapter 16 of this Code. 
(7)  Odor impacts. Odors from chickens, chicken manure or chicken-related substances shall not be perceptible at the property boundaries. 
(8)  Lighting. All lighting associated with enclosures shall meet the Town's lighting code requirements set forth in Chapter 16 of this Code. 
(9)  Waste removal. Chicken enclosures and the surrounding area shall be kept free of trash and accumulated droppings. Uneaten feed shall also be removed in a timely manner. 
(10)  Denial, suspension or revocation of permit. 
a.  The Community Safety Officer shall deny a permit if the applicant has not demonstrated compliance with the provisions of this Section. 
b.  A permit to keep domesticated chickens may be suspended or revoked by the Community Safety Officer where there is risk to public health or safety or a violation of or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this Section or with the provisions of any other applicable ordinance or law. The Town may revoke a permit to keep chickens if the Town receives complaints about a specific situation. 
c.  Any denial, suspension or revocation of a permit shall be in writing and shall include notification of the right to and procedure for appeal. An individual not complying with the requirements established in this Section may be subject to penalties for noncompliance as set forth in Section 1-82 of this Code. 
(11)  Appeal. An individual appealing the issuance, denial, suspension or revocation of a permit by the Community Safety Officer may appeal to the Town Council within thirty (30) days of the issuance of the decision being appealed. 
(12)  Variation from enclosure standards. Requests to vary from the enclosure requirements established in Paragraph (5) above shall be reviewed by the Technical Review Committee. The Technical Review Committee may elect for review of a request for variation from the enclosure requirements to be elevated to the Town Council at a duly noticed public hearing. 
(Ord. 21 §2, 2011) 
Secs. 7-114-7-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII - Animals 

Sec. 7-131. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this Article, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Abandon(ed) means to deposit, leave, drop off or otherwise dispose of any living domestic animal without providing immediate humane care on any public or private property. 
    Animal means any living vertebrate creature, domestic or wild, including dogs but excluding estrayed animals as defined in Section 35-44-101(1), C.R.S. 
    Bite means to be seized with the teeth or jaws so that a person or animal has been nipped, gripped, wounded or the skin pierced. 
    Board means the Board of County Commissioners of Eagle County. 
    Control means physical restraint or influence over a dog by means of a leash, cord or chain no longer than ten (10) feet in length except when the dog is actually working livestock, locating or retrieving wild game in season for a licensed hunter, or assisting law enforcement officers, or while actually being trained for any of these specifically enumerated purposes. For purposes of this Article, control shall be construed to include authorization for the Animal Control Officer to secure the enforcement of the laws for the prevention of cruelty to animals in accordance with Section 7-159 herein. 
    Conviction means a finding of guilt by a court or acknowledgement of guilt by payment of fine pursuant to the penalty assessment procedure. 
    County means the County of Eagle, State of Colorado. 
    Cruelty occurs when a person knowingly or with criminal negligence overdrives, overloads, overworks, tortures, torments, deprives of necessary sustenance, unnecessarily or cruelly beats, needlessly mutilates, needlessly kills, carries in or upon any vehicles in a cruel manner, or otherwise mistreats or neglects any animal, or causes or procures it to be done, or, having the charge and custody of any animal, fails to provide it with proper food, drink, socialization or protection from the weather, or abandons it. 
    Damage means loss or harm resulting from injury to person or property. 
    Dangerous dog means any dog that, according to the records of the appropriate authority: 
a.  Has inflicted severe injury upon a human being without provocation on public or private property; 
b.  Has killed a domestic animal without provocation while off the owner's property; 
c.  Whose owner has been convicted of a violation of Section 7-147, or the equivalent in another jurisdiction; 
d.  Has been previously found to be potentially dangerous, the owner having received notice of such and the dog again bites, attacks or endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals; provided, however, that dogs shall not be declared dangerous if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the dog, was abusing or assaulting the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime; or 
e.  Has engaged in or been trained for animal fighting as described and prohibited in Section 18-9-204, C.R.S. 
    Dog refers to any animal of the canine species, regardless of sex, including dogs of wild extraction, and a dog that is of any hereditary part related to wild canines, such as but not limited to the wolf family ( canis lupus ) and the coyote family ( canis latrans ). 
    Dog, female means a dog of the female gender on which no alternative surgery (e.g., ovariectomy or ovariohysterectomy) has been performed. 
    Dog, male means a dog of the male gender which has not been castrated (intact). 
    Dog, neutered male means a male dog which has been castrated. 
    Dog owner is a person, or any parent, guardian or legal custodian of any unemancipated child under eighteen (18) years of age, who owns, co-owns, possesses, controls, maintains, keeps or harbors a dog or knowingly permits or intends to permit a dog to remain for seven (7) consecutive days on or about property or premises owned, controlled, or occupied by him or her; a kennel is not a dog owner within the purview of this definition. 
    Dog, spayed female is a female dog on which an ovariectomy or ovariohysterectomy has been performed by a licensed veterinarian. 
    Dog, stray means any licensed or unlicensed dog found loose or unattended anywhere within the County. 
    Dog tag means a metal tag stating vaccination against rabies which is serial numbered, bearing the year of issuance, the name of the County and the telephone number of the Animal Control Center. Dog tags are issued by a County Animal Control Officer or other authorized agent upon presentation of a current vaccination certificate issued by a licensed veterinarian. 
    Harbor or keep means to feed and care for any dog upon the premises or to permit any dog to be fed and cared for on the premises. The occupant of any premises on which a dog is kept or to which a dog customarily returns daily for food, shelter and/or care is presumed to be harboring a dog within the meaning of this Article, and said person shall be subject to the applicable provisions of this Article. No person is deemed to harbor or keep any animal that has been reported to Animal Control and is actively assisting in efforts to impound or confine said animal. 
    Keeper means any person who keeps or harbors a dog or cat for less than seven (7) days. 
    Kennel means a person, entity or operation which is required to be licensed or permitted by the State and/or County pursuant to applicable laws and regulations and which keeps and maintains dogs for sale, resale, boarding, breeding, show, hunting or other commercial or recreational purposes. 
    License year means January 1 through December 31 of the referenced year. 
    Mistreatment includes every act or omission which causes, or unreasonably permits the continuation of, unnecessary or unjustifiable pain or suffering. 
    Neglect includes failure to provide food, water, protection from the elements, opportunity for exercise, socialization or other care normal, usual and proper for an animal's health and well-being. 
    Potentially dangerous dog means any dog that when unprovoked: 
a.  Inflicts a bite on a human or a domestic animal, either on public or private property; 
b.  Chases or approaches a person upon the streets, sidewalks or any public grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack; or 
c.  Chases or approaches a person upon private property other than the owner's in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack. 
    Premises means property owned, leased or expressly permitted to be used by an owner; or any confined area or locality like a residence, business, room, shop, building or motor vehicle in which the animal's presence is authorized by the owner of the premises. The term premises includes the open space bed of a truck. 
    Proper enclosure of a dangerous dog means, while on the owner's property, a dangerous dog shall be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure, suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the animal from escaping. Such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, a locked gate and shall also provide protection from the elements. There shall be posted signs, which are legible to passers-by, warning of the dangerous dog's presence. 
    Proper restraint of a potentially dangerous dog means: 
a.  While on the owner's property, a potentially dangerous dog shall be restrained by chain, leash or other confinement suitable to prevent the animal from leaving the owner's property; or 
b.  While off the owner's property, a potentially dangerous dog shall be under physical restraint of the owner or other responsible person. 
    Provocation means harassment, teasing, threatening, striking or attacking an animal or its owner in the animal's presence by either a person or another animal. 
    Public nuisance means an animal infected with rabies or stray cat(s) or a barking dog which disturbs the peace of humans, or a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog, an unconfined dog in estrus, or a dog or a cat that deposits excrement on public or private property that is not subsequently and promptly removed by the responsible party. 
    Rabies means a communicable disease of both wild and domestic animals, especially dogs, transmittable to humans as defined by the United States Department of Agriculture. 
    Running at large means when a dog enters the property of another person without authorization of that person, or when it enters public property and is not under the control of the dog owner or a responsible person or an employee or agent of the owner either by leash, cable or chain not more than ten (10) feet in length. 
    Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery. 
    Vaccination, inoculation or vaccination for rabies means the inoculation of a dog with an anti-rabies vaccine approved by the State Department of Health and administered by a licensed veterinarian for use in the prevention of rabies which is deemed current by reference to the expiration date noted on the vaccination certificate or published duration as indicated by the manufacturer. 
(Ord. 1 §3, 1991; Ord. 27, 1992) 
Sec. 7-132. - Annual licensing and vaccination required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a dog owner to fail to annually obtain a license in accordance with the provisions of this Article for each dog which he or she maintains, keeps or harbors within the Town for seven (7) consecutive days and to have annually vaccinated or inoculated against rabies each dog for which said license is required. In order to be licensed, a dog must have been first vaccinated or inoculated as can be demonstrated by a vaccination certificate issued by a graduate veterinarian licensed to practice veterinary medicine. 
(b)  A license is not required for cats; however, every cat so maintained, kept or harbored within the Town for seven (7) consecutive days must be currently vaccinated against rabies and a certificate as to the date administered and expiration, identifying the type of vaccine, administering veterinarian and business address must be presented for inspection upon the request of any authorized officer. 
(Ord. 1 §3, 1991; Ord. 27, 1992) 
Sec. 7-133. - Issuance of dog license and dog tag. 
    The County Animal Control Department and/or Deputy County Clerk and Recorder, or any agency or person designated by the Board of County Commissioners in writing, shall issue a dog license and dog tag upon the receipt of the executed application thereof and inspection of the vaccination certificate. The vaccination certificate will certify that the dog has been vaccinated against rabies. 
(Ord. 1 §3, 1992; Ord. 27, 1992) 
Sec. 7-134. - Duration, fees and requirements of dog license and dog tag. 
(a)  A tag and license shall be available for a fee as set forth in Section 7-150. A dog license shall be valid from January 1 through December 31 of the referenced year. Upon the expiration of a dog license, a new license must be obtained from the County for the succeeding year. 
(b)  A dog license will provide a place to state the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of dog owner; 
(2)  Breed, sex, age and description of the dog to be licensed; 
(3)  Date of vaccination or inoculation against rabies according to the vaccination certificate; 
(4)  Date of issuance of license; and 
(5)  Number of the dog tag. 
(c)  A dog tag shall be issued to the dog owner with the dog license and will be regarded as part of the license. The tag will be made of durable material, shall be suitable to be attached to a dog collar or harness, and will state the year of issuance and the number of the dog license. 
(d)  In the event a dog tag is lost, destroyed or mutilated, a replacement tag may be issued by the appropriate official upon presentation of the current dog license and payment of a fee in an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful to possess and/or affix a tag to any other dog than that specific animal for which the respective license and tag have been issued. 
(Ord. 1 §3, 1991; Ord. 27, 1992; Ord. 12 §B23, 2003) 
Sec. 7-135. - Registration to license dog moved into Town; exception for dogs under age of twelve (12) weeks. 
(a)  With respect to a dog that is moved into the Town, the owner shall obtain a license for said dog within seven (7) days after entry into the Town. 
(b)  A dog under the age of twelve (12) weeks is not required to be licensed or vaccinated; provided, however, that within thirty (30) days after a dog has become twelve (12) weeks of age, the dog owner shall obtain a license for said dog. If said dog is impounded, vaccination shall be mandatory at the time of release from impoundment. Such vaccination shall be at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. 1 §3, 1991; Ord. 27, 1992) 
Sec. 7-136. - Vaccination or inoculation against rabies. 
(a)  Vaccination or inoculation against rabies in order to obtain a dog license must be by a licensed graduate veterinarian using a vaccine recommended by a current compendium of animal rabies vaccines. 
(b)  The dog owner will obtain from the veterinarian a vaccination certificate which states the type of vaccine with which the dog was inoculated, the date of inoculation, the expiration date of inoculation, the business address and the administering veterinarian. 
(Ord. 1 §3, 1991; Ord. 27, 1992) 
Sec. 7-137. - Retention of dog license; attachment of dog tag to collar or harness. 
(a)  A dog owner who obtains a dog license will retain it during the license year and is required to present it for examination by the County Sheriff, Deputy Sheriff, Town Police and the County Animal Control Officer or any other peace officer in the connection with the enforcement of this Article. 
(b)  No dog owner shall fail to place upon his or her dog the collar or harness to which the tag is attached. Said collar or harness must be worn by the dog at all times, except when the dog is securely confined within any enclosure on the property of the owner, possessor or keeper of such an animal. Failure to adhere to this regulation shall result in penalties listed in Section 7-149. 
(c)  If for some reason a dog cannot wear a collar or harness, the owner of said dog must have the dog tattooed with a tattoo approved by the Animal Control Department. 
(Ord. 1 §3, 1991; Ord. 27, 1992) 
Sec. 7-138. - Kennel regulations. 
    Dogs kept or maintained by a licensed kennel need not be licensed pursuant to the provisions of this Article while they are within the confines of the kennel premises; however, current rabies vaccinations and applicable certificates for each dog over four (4) months of age so kept or kenneled is required and shall be presented for inspection upon request of an authorized officer. 
(Ord. 1 §3, 1991; Ord. 27, 1992) 
Sec. 7-139. - Control. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of any owner or keeper of a dog to keep such dog under control, as herein defined, so as to prevent the dog from: 
(1)  Running at large; 
(2)  Becoming a danger to persons or property; 
(3)  Trespassing on the property of another; or 
(4)  Being a public nuisance as defined in Section 7-131. 
The purpose of this Subsection (a) shall not apply to dogs while actually working livestock, locating or retrieving wild game in season for a licensed hunter, assisting law enforcement officers or being trained for any of these specifically enumerated pursuits. 
(b)  The County Animal Control has the authority to and shall deem any animal that displays any of the characteristics set forth in Section 7-131 as dangerous or potentially dangerous, and shall notify the owner through posted notice. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a dog to not be under control in instances which shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  When said dog bites or damages a person or property of anyone other than the owner. The County Animal Control shall deem any dog that bites a human or domestic animal as potentially dangerous and shall notify the owner through posted notice. 
(2)  When said dog inflicts severe bodily injury or damage to the person or property of anyone other than the owner. The County Animal Control shall deem any dog that inflicts severe bodily injury to a human or domestic animal as a dangerous dog and shall notify the owner through posted notice. 
(d)  No dog owner shall fail to confine any unspayed female dog in the state of estrus (heat). The dog shall be confined during estrus in a house, building or secured enclosure constructed so that no other dog may gain access to the confined animal. Owners who do not comply with this Subsection may be ordered to remove the dog to a boarding kennel, veterinary hospital or the Animal Control Center. All expenses incurred as a result of such confinement shall be paid by the owner. Failure to comply with the removal order of an Animal Control Officer shall be a violation of this Article, and any unspayed female dog in estrus may be summarily impounded in the event of noncompliance with such a removal order. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for a dog owner to leave within the open portion of a vehicle parked on public property a dog which is creating a danger to persons and/or property in the immediate vicinity thereto. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for a person to leave any domestic companion animal confined within a vehicle so as to place said animal in undue stress of danger of extremes in temperatures. Any authorized officer finding such to be existent may take whatever reasonable means necessary to remove said animal from the vehicle and place said animal into "protective custody." 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for a person to abandon or leave unattended an animal owned by him or her or which has been under his or her control or in his or her possession. An animal which has been left unattended for more than twenty-four (24) hours after posted notice of abandonment by a County Animal Control Officer shall be considered abandoned and may be impounded by the County Animal Control exercising whatever reasonable means necessary to accomplish such impoundment. 
(h)  Dogs in Common and Public Areas: No dog owner shall fail to prevent his or her dog from running at large in the yard of any multiple occupancy building which is occupied by other persons; or in the common areas of mobile home complexes, apartments or condominium developments; or in open space areas of subdivisions; or in public or county parks or fairgrounds, unless permission is posted by county or public authorities allowing dogs at large on said property. 
(i)  Any animal obtained by the County Animal Control through a request from a government agency shall be deemed not under control and may be impounded and subject to disposition as provided by Section 7-140. 
(Ord. 1 §3, 1991; Ord. 27, 1992) 
Sec. 7-140. - Impounding of dogs. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the County Animal Control Officer to apprehend any stray dog or any dog running at large or not under control as defined in the provisions of Section 7-139 hereof or not duly licensed or vaccinated as provided by the County Animal Control Officer; and upon receiving any dog shall make a complete registry entering breed, sex and color of such dog, and whether licensed; if licensed, he or she shall enter the name and address of the owner and the date and number of the dog tag. 
(b)  When any dog has been impounded, Animal Control Personnel shall as soon as feasible give notice in person, by letter sent to the owner's last known address, by telephone or by service of a summons upon the owner of the dog's impoundment and dispositional alternatives. If the dog owner's identity or whereabouts are unknown at the time of impoundment, the Animal Control Personnel shall take all reasonable steps to identify the owner and provide such notification. If the dog owner's identity or whereabouts still cannot be established, the Animal Control Officer may proceed with any disposition authorized by this Article. The Animal Control Personnel shall maintain records of the time, dates and manner of any such notification, and such records shall constitute prima facie evidence of notification or attempted notification. The owner of said impounded dog may reclaim said dog upon payment of all costs and charges incurred by the County for impounding and maintenance of said dog. The charges and fines as listed in Section 7-150 shall be paid to the County Animal Control Department for impounding any dog or cat. 
(c)  All impoundments will be kept on record for a period of twenty-four (24) months from the date of the first impoundment. After such time, the record will start anew. 
(Ord. 1 §3, 1991; Ord. 27, 1992) 
Sec. 7-141. - Dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs. 
(a)  Dangerous dogs. 
(1)  Any dangerous dog (as described in Section 7-131 that has been found running at large may be impounded, and the owner shall be subject to a mandatory court appearance. If the dangerous dog injures a human or other domestic animal more than once, Animal Control has the authority to impound the dog at the owner's expense, until the owner appears on a mandatory court appearance (protective custody). The court may order the dog to be destroyed. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any dog owner who keeps a dangerous dog as defined in Section 7-131 to keep the same unless confined in a locked enclosure, as indicated in Section 7-131, so as not to interfere with the public thoroughfares, including sidewalks, bike paths or public easements. The enclosure must be sufficiently constructed to contain said dog and must be posted at each entrance and/or exit of the enclosure "Beware of Dog" or similar advisement. 
(b)  Potentially dangerous dogs. 
(1)  Any potentially dangerous dog, as described in Section 7-131 that has caused no human injury or domestic animal injury and has been found running at large may be impounded, and the owner shall be fined an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq., for the first offense, second offense and third offense. The third offense shall result in a mandatory Court appearance for the dog's owner. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to allow any potentially dangerous dog to run at large, and it is the responsibility of the dog owner, family members and/or any agent of the family to keep such a dog confined as stipulated in Section 7-131 at all times. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the County Sheriff, any Deputy Sheriff, Town Police, any County Animal Control Officer or Deputy Animal Control Officer to impound any such animal that is in violation of this Section, and violation of this Section shall constitute a separate offense in addition to a violation of Section 7-139. A violation of Subsections (a) and (b) above shall require a mandatory court appearance. 
(d)  Any dog that has been previously deemed dangerous by appropriate notification and while in violation of this Section is found to have caused bodily injury to a person or animal, or threatened or endangered wildlife and/or livestock, and repeats such incident or commits another violation of this Article, shall automatically constitute a directive for impoundment and protective custody, and a petition for a court order for the destruction of said dog under the supervision of the Animal Control Officer shall be filed immediately. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of any County Animal Control Officer, Deputy Animal Control Officer, Sheriff or Sheriff's Deputy to seize and impound any dangerous or potentially dangerous dog. After making every reasonable attempt to seize and impound said such animal, including the solicitation of assistance from the owner if said owner is known and available, if the officer determines that said animal cannot be seized without exposing the officer(s) or other persons to danger or personal injury, it shall be lawful for the officer to destroy said animal without notice to the animal's owner, keeper or possessor. 
(Ord. 1 §3, 1991; Ord. 27, 1992; Ord. 12 §B24, 2003) 
Sec. 7-142. - Quarantine of dogs and cats. 
(a)  A dog that does not have a current rabies vaccination and is known to have bitten or injured any person so as to cause a puncture or abrasion of the skin shall be quarantined for no less than ten (10) days at the expense of the dog owner. The place of confinement of said dog shall be the County Animal Shelter or a licensed veterinarian hospital at the expense of the owner. 
(b)  A dog or cat that is currently vaccinated and is known to have bitten or injured any person so as to cause a puncture or abrasion of the skin shall be quarantined for no less than ten (10) days at the expense of the owner. The place of confinement shall be the County Animal Shelter or a licensed veterinary hospital or, if the owner has an enclosure on the owner's property that would adequately contain the dog at all times of the required quarantine period, the Animal Control Officer, at his or her discretion, may place said animal under quarantine on the owner's property, provided that the owner keeps said animal confined without exposure to any other animals. The Animal Control Officer shall from time to time check the animal's health and behavior; and, if at any time the owner of said animal does not comply with the provisions of the confinement of said animal, the Animal Control Officer shall move the animal to the County Animal Shelter for the remainder of the quarantine period at the owner's expense. 
(c)  If at any time during the quarantine of a vaccinated or an unvaccinated animal, said animal becomes ill or displays symptoms of rabies, said animal shall immediately be examined by a licensed veterinarian and may be destroyed and a medical test conducted to determine if the animal was rabid, having thus exposed the bite victim to rabies. If said animal dies while under quarantine, a medical test shall be conducted to determine whether the animal was suffering from rabies at the time of death. All tests are conducted at the expense of the animal owner. 
(d)  If the owner of an animal referred to in the preceding Subsection cannot be determined or located, then the County Animal Control Officer shall confine said animal at the County Animal Control Shelter for a quarantine period of not less than ten (10) days. If the owner of said animal is not determined or located, or if the animal is unclaimed by the end of the quarantine period, the County Animal Control Supervisor may order said animal destroyed. If said animal is diagnosed by a licensed veterinarian to be suffering from rabies, said animal shall immediately be destroyed. 
(Ord. 1 §3, 1991; Ord. 27, 1992) 
Sec. 7-143. - Disposition of unclaimed or diseased animals. 
(a)  With respect to an animal which has been impounded or quarantined pursuant to the provisions of Section 7-140 or 7-142 hereof and has not been claimed, released or disposed of in accordance with said Sections, the County Animal Control Officer shall keep dogs in the County Animal Shelter or other suitable place for not less than five (5) days and cats for not less than seventy-two (72) hours, after which said custodian may have said animal destroyed, except as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  After the required time period, in lieu of having said animals destroyed, the County Animal Control Department may release any such animal, if unclaimed and not diseased, to a bona fide humane society, or with respect to a stray animal, to a person having no previous interest in said animal in accordance with the provisions of this Article. Upon release of said animal, the recipient shall pay an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. All animals adopted from the County Animal Shelter are required to be sterilized at the time of adoption. Transfer of ownership of the dog or cat shall not be effected until sterilization has occurred unless such surgery would be dangerous to the animal due to its age or physical condition, as determined by the selected veterinarian of record, in said circumstance the terms of the adoption contract shall specify a date by which sterilization shall be performed. Nothing hereinabove would place responsibility or liability for subject animal's action upon the County for any incident arising during that period of delay in transfer of absolute ownership. Failure of the person adopting a dog or cat to sterilize it shall be a violation of this Article. 
(c)  An impounded animal which is sick or injured and in pain or contagious to other animals, and which is not identifiable to an owner, is not subject to a minimal impoundment period and may immediately be euthanized. If a sick or injured animal which is in pain or contagious to other animals is identifiable to an owner, the Animal Control Officer shall diligently attempt to contact the owner within twenty-four (24) hours after impoundment, after which time the animal may be euthanized if still unclaimed. 
(d)  No animals that become property of the County as a result of these rules and the intergovernmental agreement concerning animal control between the Town and the County shall be released for animal research and/or experimentation. 
(e)  When recovering or disposing of dead animals, the County Animal Control shall take whatever reasonable and appropriate action is required to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community, including, but not limited to disposal of the dead animal without unnecessary delay. If the dead animal has a current license tag intact, the Animal Control Officer recovering the dead animal shall make reasonable efforts to notify the owner before disposing of the animal. Reasonable fees for time and expenses may be charged to an owner of such deceased animal. 
(f)  Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prevent an Animal Control Officer from taking whatever action is reasonably necessary to protect his or her person or members of the public from injury by any animal. 
(Ord. 1 §3, 1991; Ord. 27, 1992; Ord. 12 §B25, 2003) 
Sec. 7-144. - Quarantine and destruction of rabid dogs. 
    Animals known to have been bitten by or exposed to a rabid animal shall be: 
(1)  Where, in the reasonable discretion of the County Animal Control Officer, the County Sheriff, a Deputy Sheriff or the Town Police, said animal is suspected of rabies in endangering the life or person of another, or inflicting death or injury to livestock or wildlife, said animal may be immediately destroyed. 
(2)  When bitten by a rabid animal or exposed to a rabid animal, an unvaccinated dog or cat shall be destroyed immediately, unless the owner objects, in which case the animal shall be placed in strict isolation for a period of six (6) months and vaccinated for rabies one (1) month before being released from isolation. The isolation shall be supervised by a veterinarian licensed in the State. All expenses of said quarantine are to be borne by the animal's owner only. It shall be unlawful for any dog or cat owner to fail to have any unvaccinated dog or cat, bitten by a rabid animal, so destroyed or quarantined. Each day said owner fails to comply with the provisions of this Section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(3)  In any case where a rabid animal bites a dog or cat with a current rabies vaccination, the owner of the dog or cat shall obtain the immediate revaccination of the dog or cat by a licensed veterinarian and shall see that said animal is confined for a period of ninety (90) days. It shall be unlawful to fail to have a dog or cat, bitten by a rabid animal, revaccinated or to fail to confine said dog or cat for ninety (90) days. Each day said owner fails to comply with the provisions of this Section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 1 §3, 1991; Ord. 27, 1992) 
Sec. 7-145. - Affirmative defense. 
    An affirmative defense to the violation of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog attacking shall be: 
(1)  That, at the time of said attack by subject dog which causes injury or death of a domestic animal, such domestic animal was at large, was an estray, and entered upon the property of the owner of subject dog where referenced attack began, but did not necessarily end, upon the subject dog owner's property; 
(2)  That, at the time of said attack by subject dog which causes injury or death of a domestic animal, said domestic animal was biting or otherwise attacking subject dog or its owner or responsible companion and subject dog was otherwise conforming to the requirements of law as pertains to control; 
(3)  If a dog is provoked into biting or inflicting bodily injury or damage to the person or property of anyone other than the owner, such provocation shall constitute an affirmative defense that may be pled by an owner who is in violation of this Article on account of said biting. 
(4)  Any other conditions or defenses as outlined in Section 18-9-204.5(3)(h), C.R.S., known as "The Dangerous Dog Law." 
(Ord. 1 §3, 1991; Ord. 27, 1992) 
Sec. 7-146. - Interference with Animal Control Officer. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, molest, hinder, prevent or obstruct an Animal Control Officer, knowing that he or she is an Animal Control Officer, discharging his or her duties under this Article. Anyone so interfering, molesting or hindering shall be subject to arrest for obstruction of a peace officer in the performance of official duties pursuant to Section 18-3-201, C.R.S. 
(Ord. 1 §3, 1991; Ord. 27, 1992) 
Sec. 7-147. - Threatening of wildlife and livestock. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to permit and/or allow a dog to run after, chase, pursue, bite, snap at, worry, attack or otherwise threaten wildlife and/or livestock. In the event any dog is found to be threatening wildlife and/or livestock as described, said dog may immediately be destroyed at the discretion of the County Sheriff, any County Deputy Sheriff, the Town Police, any County Animal Control Officer or any Deputy Animal Control Officer. In the event said dog cannot be immediately destroyed, it shall be the duty of the County Sheriff, any County Deputy Sheriff, the Town Police, any County Animal Control Officer or any Deputy Animal Control Officer to impound such dog. A violation of this Section, whether or not said dog has been destroyed or claimed from impound, shall require a mandatory court appearance by the owner and, if convicted of a violation of this Section, the owner will be required to pay restitution for any animal or animals harmed by said dog in addition to court fines and court costs. If the dog was not destroyed at the time of the incident, the court may order the dog destroyed under the supervision of the Animal Control Officer. If the dog is not ordered destroyed, the court will deem said dog dangerous, and the owner may be permitted to keep the dog as provided in Section 7-141. 
(b)  Upon a second conviction of a violation of this Section, the court shall automatically enter a court order commanding the destruction of said dog under the supervision of the Animal Control Officer. 
(Ord. 1 §3, 1991; Ord. 27, 1992) 
Sec. 7-148. - Dog bite. 
    In the event any dog is found to have caused bodily injury to any human, said dog will be impounded as described in Section 7-140, and the owner will be in violation of this Article. Said dog can be destroyed under the direction of the County Animal Control Supervisor, and an appropriate rabies examination shall be performed at the dog owner's expense. 
(Ord. 1 §3, 1991; Ord. 27, 1992) 
Sec. 7-149. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person convicted of violating any provision of this Article which does not result in bodily injury to any person shall, on conviction thereof, be punished for such offense by payment of customary court costs and by imprisonment or payment of a fine, or both imprisonment and payment of a fine, in the discretion of the Court. The maximum period for imprisonment and the maximum fine shall be approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. 
(b)  Except those penalties and fines set forth in Section 7-150, fines and penalties shall be assessed through Section 16-2-201, C.R.S., or by the Court after conviction, in which case the Court shall also assess appropriate court costs. The amount of such fines shall be approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. 
(c)  The penalty assessment shall not be used for violations of Sections 7-141, 7-143, 7-147 and 7-157 of this Article, and a mandatory court appearance shall be required. 
(d)  For purposes of determining the proper fine (penalty assessment) for violations of this Article which do not result in bodily injury to any person, only those convictions or admissions of guilt occurring within twelve (12) months of the date of the offense for which the fine (penalty assessment) is now being imposed shall be considered. This twelve-month limitation shall not apply as to what evidence may be introduced in aggravation of any sentencing for any violation of this Article which does result in bodily injury to any person, nor shall any time limitation apply to provisions of Sections 7-147 or 7-151 of this Article. 
(e)  When a person is charged for a violation of this Article which does not result in bodily injury, except violations of Sections 7-141 and 7-147, and that person has three (3) or less previous convictions of violations of this Article, the arresting officer may either give the person a penalty assessment notice as provided for by Section 16-2-201, C.R.S., and release him or her upon its terms, or take him or her before a judge. The choice of procedures shall be based upon circumstances which reasonably persuade the officer that the alleged offender is likely or unlikely to comply with the terms of the penalty assessment notice. Such circumstances may include the officer accompanying the offender to a post office or mailbox and witnessing the deposit in the mail of the notice with payment of the fine attached. 
(f)  The penalty assessment notice shall be a summons and complaint containing identification of the alleged offender, specification of the offense and applicable fine, a requirement that the alleged offender pay the fine or appear to answer the charge at a specified time and place, and other matters reasonably adapted to effectuating the purposes of this Section. A duplicate copy shall be delivered to the Clerk of the Court if a payment of the penalty assessment notice has not been made within ten (10) days of the issuance of said notice. 
(g)  If the person given a penalty assessment notice chooses to acknowledge guilt, he or she may pay the specified fine in person or by mail and within ten (10) days of issuance of the notice. Upon trial, if the alleged offender is found guilty, the fine imposed shall be that specified in the notice for the offense of which he or she was found guilty, but customary court costs may be assessed in addition to the fine. 
(h)  Any violation of any provisions of this Article which results in bodily injury to any person or animal caused by a dog shall be punished as provided in Section 1-82 of this Code, upon conviction, for each separate offense. 
(i)  Upon conviction, the court may order restitution paid to the injured party or owner of the animal or animals harmed by a dog. 
(j)  Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent impoundment of any dog under Section 7-140. 
(k)  On any conviction under Section 7-159, all court costs and a penalty, imprisonment or both, in the discretion of the Court, will be assessed. The maximum penalty and period for imprisonment shall be in an amount and for a duration approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. 
(Ord. 1 §3, 1991; Ord. 27, 1992; Ord. 12 §B26, 2003) 
Sec. 7-150. - Animal Control Center charges and fines. 
(a)  Charges and fees of seizure, impoundment, boarding, licensing, veterinarian care and adoption of an animal shall be cumulatively assessed to any animal owner according to the fee schedules listed below. Payment of all applicable fees shall be a condition of release, redemption or adoption of any animal. These fees are for administrative expenses incurred in impounding, boarding, adoption, licensing and disposal of animals as well as certain fines for violations. 
(b)  The fees, fines and penalties for seizure, impoundment, boarding, licensing, veterinarian care and adoption shall be in amounts approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. 
(Ord. 1 §3, 1991; Ord. 27, 1992; Ord. 12 §B27, 2003) 
Sec. 7-151. - Destruction of dangerous dogs. 
(a)  In addition to any other penalty, if it is found by the court or a jury that any dog complained of is a dangerous dog as defined in Section 7-131, the court may, if it finds it is in the best interest of the public, order the dog destroyed. Such destruction shall not occur prior to the completion of observation of the dog for rabies when necessary. 
(b)  In the event the dog owner is twice convicted of a violation of Section 7-141, the Court shall order the dog destroyed and enjoin said owner from owning or harboring any dog at any premises for a period of three (3) years. 
(c)  Destruction is further permitted as authorized by Section 7-147 of this Article. 
(Ord. 1 §3, 1991; Ord. 27, 1992) 
Sec. 7-152. - Failure to appear. 
    If a person upon whom a summons and complaint (penalty assessment notice) fails to appear in person or by counsel at the time and place specified therein and has not paid the specified fine in person or by mail at the place and within the time specified in the penalty assessment notice, the court may issue a bench warrant for his or her arrest. 
(Ord. 1 §3, 1991; Ord. 27, 1992) 
Sec. 7-153. - Failure to redeem, comply or pay fines or fees. 
(a)  If a person "duly notified" fails to make arrangements for the redemption or surrender of any animal under his or her care, custody or control, regardless of "ownership," said person shall be charged with a violation of this Section and brought before the court which shall at such time assess the fine provided and recover all costs accumulated. 
(b)  Any violation under this Article that involves failure to comply, pay fines, meet stipulations of contract, payment schedules, or as otherwise outlined will constitute a violation under this Section. 
(Ord. 27, 1992) 
Sec. 7-154. - Muzzling and confinement. 
    Whenever it becomes necessary to safeguard the public from the dangers of rabies, the Board of County Commissioners and/or the Town Council, if it deems necessary, shall issue a proclamation ordering every person owning or keeping a dog to confine it securely on his or her property or premises, and such dog shall have a muzzle of sufficient strength to prevent it from biting any person. Any muzzled dog running at large during the time of proclamation shall be seized and impounded and, if noticeably infected with rabies and displaying dangerous propensities, shall be destroyed by the Animal Control Officer. Any dog impounded during such proclamation shall be considered to have been exposed to a rabid animal, and said impoundment and release shall fall under the provisions of Section 7-144 above. 
(Ord. 1 §3, 1991; Ord. 27, 1992; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 7-155. - Liability for accident or subsequent disease from impoundment. 
    The Board of County Commissioners, the Town Council, or their employees or agents, or persons authorized herein to enforce the provisions of this Article, shall not be held responsible for any accident or subsequent disease which may be suffered by a dog as a result of the administration or implementation of this Article. 
(Ord. 1 §3, 1991; Ord. 27, 1992; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 7-156. - Public nuisance. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and declared to be a public nuisance for any dog or cat owner or other responsible person to allow his dog or cat to excrete body waste upon public or private property and when the responsible person does not promptly remove same. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and declared to be a public nuisance for any dog owner to fail to prevent his or her dog from disturbing the peace of any other person or neighborhood by loud, habitual and persistent barking, howling, yelping or whining, whether the dog is on or off the dog owner's premises. It shall be the duty of the County Animal Control Officer and his or her deputies to impound said dog if the officer is unable to contact the owner and determines that the barking is disturbing the peace of the neighbors and has a signed complaint. 
(1)  Provocation defense: Provocation of a dog whose noise is complained of is an affirmative defense to any charge for violation of this Section. 
(2)  Warning required: No person shall be charged with a violation of this Section unless written warning as provided in Subsection (3) below has been given at least seven (7) days but not more than thirty-seven (37) days preceding the charge. 
(3)  Warning process: The warning process to be employed shall be substantially as follows: 
a.  The warning must relate to a barking incident separate from the charged violation. 
b.  The Animal Control Officer may issue a warning after receiving a complaint and investigating the complaint in the field and determining a nuisance does exist (consensus survey). 
c.  All complainants must clearly identify themselves by stating their name, address and telephone number. The complainant shall further state, if known, the name of the dog's owner, the owner's address and telephone number, a description of the dog, description of the offense, and the date, time, place and duration of the offense. 
d.  A record or incident report shall be kept of any such complaint and investigation. 
e.  A warning to a dog owner shall cite this Section and advise the owner of the penalty for violation of this Section. The warning shall also state that a complaint has been received, recite the date of the alleged offense and conclude that the owner's dog may have disturbed the peace of another individual. The warning must be identified as being issued by an Animal Control Officer. 
(4)  Complainant rights and responsibilities: 
a.  If a violation of this Section is charged, the complainant shall verify in writing the allegations of the complaint prior to its service upon the owner. 
b.  No person or owner shall be convicted at trial for violation of this Section unless testimony is presented by at least two (2) complaining witnesses or by one (1) complaining witness and the Animal Control Officer if evidence so merits. 
(Ord. 1 §3, 1991; Ord. 27, 1992) 
Sec. 7-157. - Notice and evidence of warnings. 
    An owner shall be deemed to have been issued and received an appropriate notice or warning as herein referred if the warning is personally served upon the owner, posted on the owner's premises, or placed in the U.S. mail, postage prepaid and addressed to the owner of the dog according to the last address given by the owner to obtain a certificate of license or license tag or to such other address as may be on file for the owner with a government agency. 
(Ord. 27, 1992) 
Sec. 7-158. - Unlawful taking or release. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to take any dog from an enclosed lot, vehicle, premises or other building and deliver the dog to the impoundment facility unless authorized to do so by the owner or the keeper of the dog or as authorized by this Article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to open or cause to be opened any closed lot, vehicle, premises or building or release from a chain any dog for the purpose of allowing said dog to run at large. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any dog from the County Animal Control Shelter or any County or Town vehicle, or from the custody of the Animal Control Officer or his or her deputies without the consent of the Animal Control Officer. Such action will be considered as an obstruction and charged accordingly. 
(Ord. 1 §3, 1991; Ord. 27, 1992) 
Sec. 7-159. - Abandonment, cruelty to dogs or neglected dogs. 
    No person shall physically or cruelly mistreat or neglect to provide proper amounts of food and water or neglect to provide proper shelter to any dog. Any violation of this Section will result in a mandatory court appearance of the owner. 
(Ord. 1 §3, 1991; Ord. 27, 1992) 
Sec. 7-160. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of the Article shall be enforced by the County Sheriff, Town Police and/or the County Animal Control Officer or their respective deputies. The provisions of this Article may be enforced by any peace officer. 
(Ord. 1 §3, 1991; Ord. 27, 1992) 
Sec. 7-161. - Hot pursuit. 
(a)  The County Animal Control Officer or his or her deputies or any peace officer in hot pursuit of any dog in apparent violation of this Article may enter onto private property for the purposes of enforcing this Article, including the impoundment of the dog, removal of the dog, ascertaining the identity of the dog, the currency or existence of County dog tags, or issuing a citation. 
(b)  This Section does not grant any Animal Control Officer or any peace officer any additional authority to enter into any dwelling or other building designed for human occupancy other than that authority which may now exist under state law. Any warrant requirements for entry into any dwelling or other building designed for human occupancy shall be observed. 
(Ord. 1 §3, 1991; Ord. 27, 1992) 
Sec. 7-162. - Animal Control Officers. 
(a)  There is hereby recognized the position of the County Animal Control Officer who shall be employed by the County and appointed as such by the Board of County Commissioners acting directly or through the County's Chief Administrative Officer, at such compensation and such qualifications as from time to time shall be fixed by order of the Board. 
(b)  There is hereby recognized the position of the Town Animal Control Officer who shall be employed by the Town. Said officer shall be appointed by the Town Council, acting directly or through the Town Manager or Chief of Police. The officer shall have such qualifications, and be paid such compensation, as shall be directed from time to time by the Town Council. Pursuant to Section 3 of the intergovernmental agreement entered into between the Town and the County dated December 23, 1992, the Town Animal Control Officer shall "secure the scene and administer control of the situation until the Eagle County Animal Control Officer arrives to resolve said incident" if a County Animal Control Officer is unavailable. 
(c)  Pursuant to Section 30-15-105, C.R.S., personnel engaged in dog control, however titled or administratively assigned, may issue citations or summonses and complaints enforcing this Article. Personnel so engaged shall be included in the definition of "peace officer or fireman" in Section 18-3-201(2) C.R.S., and, to the extent such personnel are empowered to do so by the laws governing the state bureau of animal protection, are hereby authorized to carry out the enforcement of the laws for the prevention of cruelty to animals pursuant to Section 35-42-101 et seq. , C.R.S. 
(d)  Nothing in this provision is intended to vest authority in any person so engaged to enforce any resolution or statute other than the ordinance codified in this Article. 
(Ord. 1 §3, 1991; Ord. 27, 1992; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 7-163. - Disposition of fines and forfeitures. 
    All fines and forfeitures for violation of any provisions of this Article and all monies collected by the County or the Town for licenses shall be paid over to the County Treasurer immediately upon their receipt. 
(Ord. 1 §3, 1991; Ord. 27, 1992) 
Sec. 7-164. - Existing dog license in effect until expiration date. 
    Adoption of this Article, regardless of its repeal of the prior Article VII, Chapter 7 of the Code, shall not in any way affect the validity of any unexpired dog license heretofore issued by the County, and any such license then in effect will continue to have validity until the regular expiration date thereof. 
(Ord. 1 §3, 1991; Ord. 27, 1992) 
ARTICLE VIII - Wildlife Protection 

Sec. 7-165. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Article the following definitions shall apply, unless the context indicates otherwise: 
    Enforcement Officer means any Basalt Police Officer, the Town Building Official or any other individual deputized by the Police Department. 
    Guidelines means the Town of Basalt's Wildlife Protection Guidelines which shall be approved by the Town Council and may be amended from time to time by the Town. The Guidelines shall be available for review and purchase at Town Hall and are incorporated herein by this reference. 
    Refuse container means any trashcan, dumpster or similar device used for the collection and storage of solid waste. 
    Special event means a large outdoor gathering such as a concert, conference, festival or rodeo. 
    Wildlife means any medium to large size nondomestic mammal indigenous to the Town, including but not limited to: black bear, mule deer, elk, raccoon, coyote, beaver, skunk, badger, bobcat, mountain lion, porcupine and fox. 
    Wildlife-resistant dumpster enclosure means a fully enclosed structure inaccessible to wildlife usually consisting of four (4) sides and a roof or cover. Wildlife resistant dumpster enclosures must be consistent with the "Town of Basalt's Wildlife Protection Guidelines." 
    Wildlife-resistant refuse container means a fully enclosed container including a lid which is inaccessible to wildlife. Wildlife resistant refuse containers must be consistent with the "Town of Basalt's Wildlife Protection Guidelines." 
(Ord. 8 §B, 2001; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 7-166. - Acceptable wildlife containers and enclosures. 
(a)  Any refuse container regardless of size, including containers for residential properties, that receives refuse which is edible by bears or other wildlife shall be either: 
(1)  An approved wildlife-resistant refuse container; 
(2)  A wildlife-resistant dumpster enclosure; 
(3)  A refuse container which does not contain any refuse edible by bears or other wildlife at any time except on the day of pick-up before the refuse is picked up by a trash hauler; 
(4)  A container that is removed each day and brought inside a building, house, garage, enclosure meeting the definitions in this Article; 
(5)  A container that is emptied each day and brought to an acceptable disposal location; or 
(6)  Other container described in the Guidelines. 
(b)  The minimum standards required for wildlife-proofing garbage are set forth in the Guidelines. 
(c)  Any trash hauler who provides a refuse container to a Town customer shall only provide wildlife-resistant refuse containers, wildlife-resistant dumpsters or a wildlife resistant poly-cart. If the trash hauler provides instructions to individuals or businesses regarding the construction of enclosures, the directions shall be consistent with this Article and the Guidelines. Further, any trash hauler that provides refuse removal within the Town and fails to comply with Section 7-167 below shall be in violation of this Article and subject to the penalties set forth herein. 
(d)  Overfilling of any refuse container, including trashcans set out on the day of collection, is prohibited. 
(Ord. 8 §B, 2001) 
Sec. 7-167. - Maintenance and operation of refuse containers and dumpster enclosures. 
(a)  Wildlife-resistant refuse containers which are kept outside and wildlife-resistant dumpster enclosures must be kept closed and secure when refuse is not being deposited. 
(b)  If a container or enclosure provided by a trash hauler is damaged, allowing access by bears or other wildlife, the owner or tenant shall report the damage to the trash hauler and to the Town as soon as reasonably possible. The trash hauler shall have twenty-four (24) hours to repair the damage (on a permanent or temporary basis) or replace the container or enclosure. 
(c)  If a container or enclosure provided by a Town owner or tenant is damaged, allowing access by bears or other wildlife, the owner or tenant shall have twenty-four (24) hours to repair the damage (on a permanent or temporary basis), replace the container or enclosure or take other acceptable action to ensure that refuse is not left in a manner accessible to wildlife. 
(d)  Owners or tenants who are storing refuse inside a building or structure with pickup by a licensed hauler on scheduled dates shall place the refuse container at the collection area, such as at the curb, only on the morning of pickup in accordance with the Guidelines. 
(Ord. 8 §B, 2001) 
Sec. 7-168. - Special event refuse disposal. 
    Outdoor special event sites shall be kept free from the accumulation of refuse edible by wildlife. Refuse must be collected from the grounds at the close of each day's activities and shall be deposited in wildlife-resistant refuse containers or wildlife-resistant dumpster enclosures or be removed to an appropriate disposal site. 
(Ord. 8 §B, 2001) 
Sec. 7-169. - Feeding of birds and wildlife. 
    No person shall knowingly leave or store any refuse, food product, pet food, grain or salt in a manner which would constitute a lure, attraction or enticement of birds and wildlife. Additional recommendations or requirements regarding the feeding of birds and wildlife may be included in the Guidelines. 
(Ord. 8 §B, 2001) 
Sec. 7-170. - Construction site refuse disposal. 
    All construction sites must have a designated container that receives refuse edible by wildlife in accordance with the Guidelines. 
(Ord. 8 §B, 2001) 
Sec. 7-171. - Enforcement. 
    No person shall interfere with, molest, hinder or impede the Enforcement Officers in the discharge of their duties as herein prescribed. Enforcement Officers may issue warnings, notices, penalty assessments and summons and complaints to any person in violation of this Chapter. An Enforcement Officer shall have the right to inspect property concerning any wildlife concern or potential wildlife attractant. 
(Ord. 8 §B, 2001) 
Sec. 7-172. - Compliance required. 
    Any dumpster enclosure or refuse container shall be brought into conformity with the wildlife protection provisions of this Article by May 1, 2001. Upon determination by the Town Manager that it appears that general compliance is not feasible by the May 1, 2001 date and that an overall hardship to the community would result, the Town Manager may select a later date to begin enforcement. Subsequent to that time, upon application to the Enforcement Officer and showing a hardship by any owner of a dumpster enclosure or refuse container required to comply with this Article, the Enforcement Officer may grant an extension, for a reasonable period of time, within which to comply with the provisions of this Article. 
(Ord. 8 §B, 2001; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 7-173. - Penalties. 
    Violations of any provision of this Section by any person, entity, firm or corporation shall be unlawful and subject to the penalty provisions of Section 1-82, provided that each day of continuing violation after notice or warning from the Enforcement Officer may be considered a separate offense subject to penalties as specified therein. Either the owner or the occupant or both may be held responsible for a violation of any provision of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 8 §B, 2001) 
Secs. 7-174-7-184. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX - Recycling and Waste Reduction[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. 01 , § 1, adopted Feb. 14, 2012, repealed former Art. IX, which pertained to recycling and waste reduction, and derived from Ord. 19, § B, adopted in 2011.   Subsequently, Ord. 28 § B(Exh. A), adopted Oct. 18, 2016 enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 7-185. - Purpose. 
    The Town wishes to further the implementation of the Basalt Master Plan through the implementation of the Recycling and Waste Reduction regulations in this Article in order to recycle a significant percentage of the solid waste generated by the Community. 
( Ord. 28 §B(Exh. A), 2016) 
Sec. 7-186. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given in this Section. Collectively, these items may be referred to as trash or rubbish. 
    Ashes means the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible materials. 
    Compostable material or compostables means any organic material that will naturally degrade including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Animal or vegetable based food scraps resulting from the preparation, cooking and serving of food; 
(2)  Organic materials including paper products and products designed to completely break down in a commercial composting facility; 
(3)  Organic material that has been completely segregated from trash by the generator for the purpose of being composted or otherwise processed through natural degradation into soil amendment, fertilizer or mulch. 
    Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
    Litter means all rubbish, waste material, refuse, garbage, trash, debris or other foreign substances, solid or liquid of every form, size, kind and description (litter and refuse shall be used interchangeably). 
    Recyclables means glass, aluminum, tin, plastic containers Nos. 1 through 7, paper (including magazines and newspaper), corrugated cardboard, and brown paper bags, either separated by material or commingled according to the trash hauler's directive. 
    Refuse means all putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes (refuse and litter shall be used interchangeably). 
    Rubbish means non-putrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes), consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, leaves, yard clippings, tree limbs, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. However, rubbish shall not include compost piles for home use that are properly maintained and contained on private property. 
    Wildlife-resistant means a trash enclosure that meets the requirements of Town Code Section 7-166, Acceptable Wildlife Containers and Enclosures. 
( Ord. 28 §B(Exh. A), 2016) 
Sec. 7-187. - Operating services, permit-Residential haulers. 
(a)  Any trash hauler providing residential trash service within the Town shall also provide recycling services to its residential trash customers. Before the trash hauler may commence providing trash collection and recycling services to residential trash customers, the hauler shall apply for and obtain a permit from the Town. The application shall include a written plan for collection of residential trash on a volumetric-based billing system, a statement of the charges proposed to be made to the customer and the plan for recycling. Each hauler shall submit an annual report to the Town Manager of the weight in tons of garbage, trash, recyclable materials and compostable materials collected within the Town limits. For loads that contain garbage and recyclables originating in part from within the Town, limits and in part originating outside the Town limits, the reported quantities may be estimated by the trash hauler. The report shall be submitted prior to January 31 of each new calendar year. The Public Works Director, in his or her discretion, may approve or disapprove the application. The permit fee shall be as set forth in the Town's Fee Schedule. 
(b)  Permits issued by the Town shall be valid for one (1) year. Application for renewal shall be made prior to the expiration of an existing permit and shall be granted or denied by the Public Works Director. The Town may perform an audit at the Town's discretion to determine if the annual report submitted is accurate. 
(c)  Each trash hauler that provides garbage collection shall also provide to each customer the collection of all of that customer's recyclable materials, including: glass, aluminum, tin, plastic containers Nos. 1 through 7, paper (including magazines and newspaper), corrugated cardboard, and brown paper bags, either separated by material or commingled according to the trash hauler's directive. Haulers are not required to collect hazardous materials. The collection of recyclable materials shall be offered no less frequently than once per week, and trash haulers shall make recycle bins available to customers upon request. It is also encouraged, but not required that trash haulers collect compostable materials. 
(d)  Nothing in this Section shall be construed as prohibiting any trash hauler from also establishing rules regarding the safe maximum weight of containers, as well as pricing for special collection of bulky items or of individual bags of garbage, provided that the price of collection of an individual bag of garbage is not less than that of a base unit of periodic garbage collection. 
( Ord. 28 §B(Exh. A), 2016) 
Sec. 7-188. - Collection by producers and outside collectors. 
(a)  Requirements for vehicles. Any person transporting refuse in or through the Town shall use a watertight vehicle with a tight cover so as to prevent offensive odors from escaping or refuse from escaping from the vehicle. 
(b)  Disposal. No person shall dispose of any refuse at any location within the Town without the prior written approval of the Public Works Director. 
(c)  Hauler guidelines. The Public Works Director shall have the authority to prepare other such guidelines for the Town Council's adoption concerning individual collection and disposal and relating to the hauling of refuse over the Town streets by outside collectors as he or she shall find necessary, subject to the right of appeal as set forth in Section 7-192 of this Article. 
(d)  Hours of operation. Trash and refuse haulers shall be limited to the following hours and days: 
(1)  Monday through Friday: 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
(2)  Saturday: 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
(3)  Sunday: No residential collection. 
( Ord. 28 §B(Exh. A), 2016) 
Sec. 7-189. - Volumetric trash collection and recycling services. 
    Private trash haulers providing residential collection services within the Town shall provide a volumetric collection and billing program which is designed to encourage reduction of trash being placed in landfills, and shall provide recycling services to each residential customer served. 
( Ord. 28 §B(Exh. A), 2016) 
Sec. 7-190. - Refuse and recycle containers. 
(a)  It is the duty of the customer to keep and maintain containers in a good and sanitary condition. 
(b)  Garbage containers shall be made of plastic or metal, shall be equipped with suitable handles and tightfitting covers and shall be weathertight. 
(c)  Garbage containers shall be wildlife resistant as defined in Section 7-166. 
(d)  Recycling containers provided by the waste haulers shall clearly communicate what is permitted to be recycled. 
( Ord. 28 §B(Exh. A), 2016) 
Sec. 7-191. - Recycled materials. 
    No residential trash hauler shall deposit recycled materials in a landfill unless the recycled materials have been contaminated or are otherwise not acceptable for recycling. Trash haulers shall use their best efforts to maximize the amount of material being recycled. 
( Ord. 28 §B(Exh. A), 2016) 
Sec. 7-192. - Appeals. 
    Any waste hauler aggrieved by a guideline or fee charged by the Public Works Director may appeal to the Town Council. 
( Ord. 28 §B(Exh. A), 2016) 
CHAPTER 8 - Vehicles and Traffic 
ARTICLE I - Model Traffic Code 

Sec. 8-1. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Title 31, Article 16, Parts 1 and 2, C.R.S., there is adopted by reference as if set forth verbatim Articles I and II, inclusive, of the 2010 edition of the "Model Traffic Code for Colorado" (Model Traffic Code), promulgated and published as such by the Colorado Department of Transportation, Staff Traffic and Safety Projects Branch, 4201 East Arkansas Avenue, Denver, Colorado 80222. The Model Traffic Code relates primarily to comprehensive traffic control regulations for the Town. The purpose of this Article and the code adopted herein is to provide a system of traffic regulations consistent with state law and generally conforming to similar regulations throughout the State and nation. A copy of the Model Traffic Code adopted herein will be available either in the office of the Town Clerk or online, accessible through the website for the Colorado Department of Transportation. 
(Prior code 64-1; Ord. 22, 1996; Ord. 06 §B2, 2005; Ord. 24 §1, 2013) 
Sec. 8-2. - Amendments. 
    Said adopted code is subject to the following additions or modifications: 
(1)  Part 7 of the Model Traffic Code is amended by the addition of a Section 713 as follows: 
    "Section 713. Funeral processions. 
    "(a) A funeral procession shall be identified by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying insignia or by such other method as may be required by the traffic or police authority of this municipality. 
    "(b) Each driver in a funeral procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practicable and safe. 
    "(c) No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession while said vehicles are in motion and when said vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this ordinance. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by signals or police officers." 
(2)  Part 12, Section 1212 is added to the Model Traffic Code as follows: 
    "Engine Idling. 
    "(a) Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to idle or permit the idling of the motor of any stationary motor vehicle for a prolonged or unreasonable period of time determined herein to be two minutes. 
    "(b) This section shall not apply when the engine of a motor vehicle must be operated in the idle mode for safety reasons including, but not limited to, the operation of cranes and fork lifts. 
    "(c) The time required by a diesel-powered motor vehicle while operating in a stationary position to achieve a temperature of one hundred twenty (120) degrees Fahrenheit and an air pressure of one hundred (100) pounds per square inch, shall not be included in the computation of the two minutes determined herein to be a prolonged or unreasonable period of time. The temperature and air pressure as indicated on the vehicle's gauges may be used for determining the diesel engine's temperature and air pressure and may dictate idling time for both warm-up and cool-down. 
    "(d) The time during which transportation vehicles are actively loading or discharging passengers shall not be included in the computation of the two minutes determined herein to be a prolonged or unreasonable period of time. A 'transportation vehicle' shall be defined for purposes of this section to mean motor vehicles designed to transport a minimum of sixteen (16) persons. 
    "(e) Emergency vehicles are exempt from the above engine idling restrictions." 
(3)  Section 1213 of the Model Traffic Code as adopted by the Town is hereby added as follows: 
    "Sec. 1213. Time Parking Zones. The parking of vehicles in those parking spaces on the North side of Midland avenue from the address of 137 Midland Avenue to 201 Midland Avenue and the South side of Midland Ave from 132 Midland Avenue to 220 Midland Avenue shall be limited to two hours between the hours of 9 a.m. and 5 p.m. on Monday through Friday. No person shall park for a period in excess of 2 hours in such locations. Upon conviction of a violation of this section, such person shall be punished by a fine in the amount of $20.00 for each offense. A new violation shall occur each additional day (which day commences at 9 a.m. the next day) that the vehicle remains in the parking space. In the event that the vehicle remains in said parking space for a period in excess of 24 hours the Town may remove said vehicle and the owner thereof be liable for the costs of removal and storage." 
(4)  Section 1412 of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended by the addition of the following: 
    "(12) It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or operate a bicycle, tricycle, scooter, roller skates, skateboard or other wheeled or roller skate vehicle on any of the following sidewalks in the Town; provided, however, that this shall not apply to any handicapped person operating a wheeled vehicle for transportation, nor shall this apply to any vehicle used to transport infant children: 
"Name of Street Portion Affected Midland Avenue From the easterly property line of the lot at 132 Midland Avenue to the easterly property line of the lot at 214 Midland Avenue. Midland Avenue From the westerly property line of the lot at 149 Midland Avenue to the easterly property line of the lot at 211 Midland Avenue.  
    "(13) Unauthorized Devices . No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any bicycle, unicycle, tricycle, coaster, toy vehicle, skateboard or similar device shall go upon any roadway or sidewalk in this municipality where signs are posted prohibiting such activities." 
(5)  Part 17 of the Model Traffic Code is amended by the addition of a Section 1718 as follows: 
    "1718. Penalties . The penalties for every person convicted of a violation of any provision stated or adopted in this Town Code shall be in an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381, et seq. The provisions of Section 1-82 of the Basalt Municipal Code shall not apply with regard to violations of the Model Traffic Code." 
(6)  Part 8 Section 508 is added to the Model Traffic Code as follows: 
" Vehicle Weight . 
    "(a) The use of vehicles on Two Rivers Road in Basalt, Colorado, from Midland Avenue west to State Highway 82, shall be restricted on commercial vehicles having no more than a Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR) of 10,000 (ten-thousand) pounds. 
    "(b) In order to enforce the provisions of this section, the Town shall provide and post signs in locations as are visible to provide notice to motorists of this weight restriction. This restriction shall be in effect after the effective date of this ordinance and the installation of said signs." 
(7)  Section 1701 of the Model Traffic Code, as adopted by the Town, is hereby amended by adding the following Subsection (5): 
" Penalty Point Reduction . 
    "(5) If a person receives a penalty assessment notice for a violation for which points are assessed under § 42-4-1701(5), C.R.S., 1973, as amended, and such person pays the fine and surcharges for the violation on or before the date the payment is due, the points assessed for the violation are reduced as follows: 
    "1. For a violation having an assessment of three points or more, the points shall be reduced by two points. 
    "2. For a violation having two points, the points shall be reduced by one point." 
(8)  Part 12 Section 1204 of the Model Traffic Code, as adopted by the Town, is hereby amended by adding the following Subsection (5): 
" Long Term Parking Prohibited . 
    "(5) No vehicle shall remain parked along any roadway in Town without moving for any consecutive period of seventy-two hours or more." 
(Prior code 64-2, 64-3; Ord. 18 §§1-6, 1991; Ord. 22, 1996; Ord. 16 §1, 2000; Ord. 1 §B1, 2003; Ord. 12 §B28, 2003; Ord. 14 §B, 2004; Ord. 07 §B1, 2005; Ord. 1 §3, 2007; Ord. 7, 2008) 
Sec. 8-3. - Certification by Town Clerk; copy available for public inspection. 
    The Town Clerk shall certify to the passage of this Chapter and make not less than one (1) copy of the adopted code available for inspection by the public during regular business hours. 
(Prior code 64-7; Ord. 22, 1996) 
Sec. 8-4. - Schedules. 
    The following traffic control schedules, made pursuant to Article I of the Model Traffic Code, and in lieu of the records described in Section 105 of the same code, are the official records of those local regulations that must be made known by official traffic control devices: 
Schedule I. Through Streets. 
    In accordance with the provisions of Section 2-1 and when official signs are erected giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles shall stop or yield as required by said signs at every intersection before entering the street or parts of street. 
Schedule II. Special Hazards. 
    The speeds specified are the lawful speeds and shall be controlling except when a special hazard material (for example, snow or rain) exists that requires a lower speed or when there is an official sign placed that specifies legal speeds that are different from that below. Unless a sign is posted with a different legal speed limit, all residential streets shall have a maximum speed limit of fifteen (15) mph. 
Town of Basalt Streets M.P.H. Parking Restrictions Basalt Avenue 25 No parking either side entire length Cedar Drive 15 No parking on pavement Cemetery Lane 15 Snow route* Cody Lane (private) 15 No parking on pavement Columbine Court 15 Snow route* Cottonwood Drive 15 No parking on pavement Duroux 25 No parking on pavement Elk Circle 15 No parking on inside of circle Elk Run Drive 25 Snow route* Emma Road (E. of Basalt Ave.) 15 No parking on pavement Fiou Lane (out of town) 15 No parking on pavement Frying Pan Road 25 No parking on pavement Hearthstone Drive 15 No parking on inside of circle Hillcrest Drive 25 No parking on pavement Hillside Drive (East) 15 No parking on pavement Homestead Drive 15 No parking on roadway Kestrel Court 15 Snow route* Kiln Court 15 Snow route* Lauren Lane 15 No parking on inside of circle Longhorn Lane 15 No parking on roadway Lupine Circle 15 No parking on inside of circle Meadow Lane 15 Snow route* Midland Avenue 20 No parking 3 a.m. to 6 a.m. 48-hr. parking Homestead Lane to Laundry Lane Midland Avenue 
(Two Rivers Rd to river) 15 Snow route* Midland Spur 15 Snow route* Mountain Court 15 No parking on south side of street Original Road 25 No parking on pavement Park Avenue 25 No parking on pavement Park Circle 15 No parking on inside of circle Pinon Drive 15 No parking on pavement Ptarmigan Court 15 No parking on south side of street No parking on cul-de-sac Redtail Drive 15 Snow route* Ridge Road 15 No parking on pavement River Cove Court 15 Snow route* River Oaks 15 No parking on pavement Riversedge Court 15 Snow route* Riverside Drive 15 No parking on pavement Roaring Fork Court 15 No parking on pavement School Street 15 No parking on pavement Sopris Drive 15 Snow route* South Side Drive 25 No parking on west side of street Spur Lane 15 No parking on pavement Swinging Bridge Lane 15 No parking on pavement Tucker Lane 15 No parking on roadway Two Rivers Road 35 Parking in designated areas only Two Rivers Road/School Zone 25 Parking in designated areas only Village Court 15 No parking on pavement Willits Lane 30 No parking on pavement East Valley Road 25 No parking on pavement CDOT Highway 82 from MM 21.2 to 20.4 55 No parking CDOT Two Rivers Road 35 No parking Frying Pan Road (Eagle Co. from Sopris to Homestead) 25 No parking  
*  Snow route (no parking and tow-away zone after 2" snowfall accumulation and until snow removal is completed). 
Schedule III. Parking Signs Authorized. 
    No person shall park a vehicle in violation of any official sign. 
Schedule IV. Traffic Signals Authorized. 
    In accordance with the provisions of Section 601, traffic control signals are authorized to regulate traffic when installed by a regulatory authority, including the Colorado Department of Transportation, the Town, Pitkin County and Eagle County. 
Schedule V. Snowplows. 
    When any snowplow or other snow removal equipment displaying flashing yellow lights is engaged in snow and ice removal or control, all other vehicles shall exercise caution and care in approaching or passing said snowplow or equipment, and in no case shall any vehicle behind a snowplow or equipment displaying flashing yellow lights and engaged in snow and ice removal or control follow it at a distance less than is reasonable and prudent, except when passing. 
    The driver of a snowplow, while engaged in the removal or control of snow and ice on any street or highway open to traffic and while displaying the required flashing yellow warning lights as provided by state law shall not be charged with any violation of the provisions of this Title relating to parking or standing, turning, backing or yielding the right-of-way. These exemptions shall not relieve the driver of a snowplow from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall these exemptions protect the driver of a snowplow from the consequences of a reckless or careless disregard for the safety of others. 
    Any reference in Sections 1709 and 1710 to a surcharge is hereby deleted. 
    Snow Removal . On any street designated for snow removal, parking shall be restricted from 5:00 a.m. or at a time thereafter when there is two inches or more of accumulation or until all snow is removed, unless otherwise posted by official signs of the Town of Basalt. 
(Prior code 64-8; Ord. 3, 1991 §1; Ord. 12 §1, 1991; Ord. 22 §1, 1991; Ord. 22, 1996; Ord. 06 §B2, 2005) 
Sec. 8-5. - Application. 
    This Chapter shall apply to every street, alley, sidewalk area, driveway, park and to every other public way or public place or public parking area, either within or outside the corporate limits of the Town, the use of which the Town has jurisdiction and authority to regulate. The provisions of Sections 1401, 1402, 1413, 606 and 713 of the adopted Model Traffic Code, respectively concerning reckless driving, careless driving, unauthorized devices, eluding an officer and snowplows, shall apply not only to public places and ways but also throughout the Town. 
(Prior code 64-4; Ord. 22 §3, 1996) 
Sec. 8-6. - Interpretation. 
    Except for the effect of the additions and modifications of the Code as set forth above, this Chapter shall be interpreted and construed so as to effectuate its general purpose to conform with the state's uniform system for the regulation of vehicles and traffic. Article and section headings in this Chapter and the adopted Model Traffic Code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or extent of the provisions of any article or section thereof. 
(Ord. 22 §3, 1996) 
Sec. 8-7. - Penalty assessment tickets. 
    Except where the Town Council has otherwise established penalty assessment fines by ordinance, the Municipal Judge is authorized to establish penalty assessment fines for violations of the Model Traffic Code. Upon the establishment of penalty assessment fines, the Police Department shall be authorized to issue penalty assessment tickets utilizing the fines ordered by the court. Procedures for the issuance and adjudication of penalty assessment tickets shall be substantially in conformance with the procedures set forth in Part 17 of the Model Traffic Code regarding traffic infraction penalty assessments, except that such matters shall be considered criminal. 
(Ord. 22 §2, 1996) 
Secs. 8-8-8-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II - Traffic Infractions 

Sec. 8-21. - Traffic infractions classified. 
(a)  It is a traffic infraction for any person to violate any of the provisions of the Model Traffic Code as adopted and amended herein except for the following sections which shall remain misdemeanors: 707-Specific Vehicular Stopping Requirements at Railroad Grade Crossings; 1903-Stopping for School Busses; 1101-Driving 25 or more miles per hour in excess of the reasonable and prudent speed or in excess of the maximum lawful speed limit of 55 miles per hour; 1101-Driving 20 or more miles per hour over the maximum lawful speed limit of 65 miles per hour; 1105-Speed Contest; 1401-Reckless Driving; 1402-Careless Driving; 607-Interference with Official Devices; 1413-Eluding or Attempting to Elude a Police Officer; and 501-Size, Weight and Load Violations. A traffic infraction shall constitute a civil matter. The procedures set forth herein for traffic infractions shall replace and supersede Part 17 of the Model Traffic Code. 
(b)  Upon entry of judgment, traffic infractions shall be subject to penalties in amounts approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. 
(c)  Penalty assessment notice. 
(1)  At any time that a person is charged with the commission of a traffic infraction, the peace officer shall, except when the provisions of Subparagraph (d)(3) below prohibit it, give a penalty assessment notice to the defendant. Such penalty assessment notice shall contain all the information required by Section 1707 of the Model Traffic Code. The peace officer shall advise the person cited of the points to be assessed in accordance with applicable state law. The penalty specified in Subsection (c) above for the violation charged may be paid at the office of the Municipal Court, either in person or by postmarking such payment within twenty (20) days from the date the penalty assessment notice is served upon the defendant. Acceptance of a penalty assessment notice and payment of the prescribed penalty thereon to the Municipal Court shall be deemed a complete satisfaction for the violation, and the defendant shall be given a receipt which so states when such penalty thereon is paid in currency or other form of legal tender. Checks tendered by the defendant to and accepted by the Municipal Court and on which payment is received by the Municipal Court shall be deemed sufficient receipt. 
(2)  Should the defendant charged with a traffic infraction accept the notice but fail to post the prescribed penalty thereon within twenty (20) days thereafter, he or she shall be allowed to pay such penalty and surcharge thereon, plus court costs, to the Municipal Court Clerk prior to the time for appearance as specified in the notice. If the penalty is not timely paid, the case shall thereafter be heard in the Municipal Court in accordance with applicable Municipal Court Rules of Procedure. In such case, the maximum penalty which may be imposed shall not exceed the penalty set forth in the applicable penalty schedule set forth herein. 
(3)  The penalty schedule set forth herein shall not apply to traffic infractions specified in said schedule when it appears that: 
a.  The alleged violation has caused, or contributed to the cause of, an accident resulting in appreciable damage to property of another or an injury or death of any person; or 
b.  The defendant has, in the course of the same transaction, violated one (1) of the provisions of the Model Traffic Code set forth in said schedule and has also violated one (1) or more provisions of the Model Traffic Code not so specified, and the peace officer charges such defendant with two (2) or more violations, any one (1) of which is not specified in said schedule. 
(4)  In all cases where Subparagraph (d)(3) prohibits the issuance of a penalty assessment notice, the penalty contained in the aforesaid penalty assessment schedule shall be applicable. 
(Ord. 22, 1996; Ord. 12 §B29, 2003) 
Sec. 8-22. - Traffic infractions; Municipal Court jurisdiction. 
(a)  Every hearing upon a traffic infraction shall be held before the Municipal Court pursuant to applicable Municipal Court Rules of Procedure. Whenever an infraction and a misdemeanor are charged in the same summons and complaint, all charges may be adjudicated simultaneously as a criminal matter by the Municipal Court, and the Municipal Court Rules of Procedures shall apply. 
(b)  When the Municipal Court determines that a person charged with a misdemeanor is guilty of a lesser included traffic infraction, the Court may enter a judgment as to such lesser charge. 
(c)  The burden of proof shall be upon the people, and the Municipal Court shall enter judgment in favor of the defendant unless the people prove the liability of the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt. The Town Attorney may, in his or her discretion, engage in plea discussions and shall represent the Town at trials conducted by the Municipal Court on traffic infraction matters. 
(d)  Appeals from judgments of the Municipal Court on traffic infraction matters shall be made in accordance with the Municipal Court Rules of Procedure. 
(e)  Time limitation. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (2) of this Subsection, no person against whom a judgment has been entered for a traffic infraction shall collaterally attack the validity of that judgment unless such attack is commenced within six (6) months after the date of entry of the judgment. 
(2)  In recognition of the difficulties attending the litigation of stale claims and the potential for frustrating various statutory provisions directed at repeat offenders, former offenders and habitual offenders, the only exceptions to the time limitations specified in paragraph (1) above shall be: 
a.  A case in which the court entering judgment did not have jurisdiction over the subject matter of the alleged infraction; 
b.  A case in which the court entering judgment did not have jurisdiction over the person of the violator; 
c.  Where the court hearing the collateral attack finds by a preponderance of the evidence that the failure to seek relief within the applicable time period was caused by an adjudication of incompetence or by commitment of the violator to an institution for treatment as a mentally ill person; or 
d.  Where the court hearing the collateral attack finds that the failure to seek relief within the applicable time period was the result of circumstances amounting to justifiable excuse or excusable neglect. 
(Ord. 22, 1996) 
Sec. 8-23. - Penalty assessment notices for traffic infractions. 
(a)  Whenever a penalty assessment notice for a traffic infraction is issued pursuant to Section 1701 of the Model Traffic Code, the penalty assessment notice which shall be served upon the defendant by the peace officer shall contain the name and address of the defendant, the license number of the vehicle involved, if any, the number of the defendant's driver's license, if any, a citation of the ordinance alleged to have been violated, a brief description of the traffic infraction, the date and approximate location thereof, the amount of the penalty prescribed for such infraction, the number of points, if any, prescribed for such traffic infraction pursuant to Section 42-2-123, C.R.S., and the date the penalty assessment notice is served on the defendant; shall direct the defendant to appear in the Municipal Court at a specified time and place in the event such penalty thereon is not paid; shall be signed by the peace officer; and shall contain a place for the defendant to elect to execute a signed acknowledgement of liability and an agreement to pay the penalty prescribed therein within twenty (20) days; as well as such other information as may be required by law to constitute such penalty assessment notice to be a summons and complaint, should the prescribed penalty not be paid within the time allowed in Section 1709 of the Model Traffic Code. 
(b)  One (1) copy of said penalty assessment notice shall be served upon the defendant by the peace officer and one (1) copy sent to the Chief of Police and such other copies sent as may be required by the Municipal Court and the Town Attorney. 
(c)  The time specified in the penalty assessment notice must be at least twenty-one (21) days but not more than ninety (90) days after the date such penalty assessment notice is served, unless the defendant shall demand an earlier hearing. 
(d)  Whenever the defendant refuses to accept service of the penalty assessment notice, tender of such notice by the peace officer to the defendant shall constitute service thereon upon the defendant. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any provision hereof to the contrary, penalty assessment notices for parking infractions as set forth herein or in Articles X, XI, XII and XIII of the Model Traffic Code shall require the defendant to pay the applicable fine or appear at the Municipal Court within seven (7) days of issuance. If the defendant fails to pay or appear as required, the Municipal Court Clerk shall proceed to notify and summons the defendant as more fully set forth in the Model Traffic Code. 
(Ord. 22, 1996) 
Sec. 8-24. - Failure to pay penalty for traffic infraction; procedure. 
(a)  Unless a person who has been cited for a traffic infraction pays the penalty assessment as provided herein, he or she shall appear at a hearing date on the date and time specified on the citation and answer the complaint against him or her. 
(b)  If the violator answers that he or she is guilty or if the violator fails to appear for the hearing, judgment shall be entered against him or her. 
(c)  If the violator denies the allegations in the complaint, a final hearing on the complaint shall be held subject to the provisions regarding a speedy trial which are contained in the Municipal Court Rules of Procedure. If the violator is found liable at such final hearing or if the violator fails to appear for a final hearing, judgment shall be entered against him or her. 
(d)  If judgment is entered against the violator, he or she shall be assessed an appropriate penalty plus applicable court costs. The penalty shall be no more than the amount specified in the penalty assessment notice. 
(e)  A defendant's failure to appear upon a penalty assessment notice for a traffic infraction shall not constitute a criminal offense. 
(Ord. 22, 1996) 
CHAPTER 10 - General Offenses 
ARTICLE I - Offenses by or Against Public Officers and Government 

Sec. 10-1. - Obstructing a peace officer or fireman. 
    A person interferes with a peace officer if he or she knowingly prevents or attempts to prevent a peace officer, acting under the color of his or her official authority, from effecting an arrest or pursuing an investigation, by: 
(1)  Using or threatening to use physical force or violence against the peace officer or another. 
(2)  Refusing or disobeying a reasonable request by the peace officer to withdraw from the immediate area of the peace officer to a reasonable distance from the peace officer to allow him or her to effect an arrest or pursue an investigation. 
(3)  Using any other means which create a risk of physical injury to the peace officer or another. 
(Prior Code 24-3) 
Sec. 10-2. - Resisting arrest. 
(a)  A person resists arrest if he or she knowingly prevents or attempts to prevent a peace officer, acting under color of his or her official authority, from effecting the actor's arrest by: 
(1)  Using or threatening to use physical force or violence against the peace officer. 
(2)  Using any other means which creates a risk of physical injury to the peace officer or to the person of another. 
(b)  It is no defense to a prosecution under this Section that the peace officer was attempting to make an arrest or pursue an investigation which in fact was unlawful, if he or she was acting under color of his or her official authority. A peace officer acts under color of his or her official authority when, in the regular course of his or her assigned duties, he or she is called upon to make, and does make, a judgment in good faith based upon surrounding facts and circumstances that an arrest or investigation should be made by him or her. 
(c)  The term peace officer, as used in this Section, means an officer of the Police Department in uniform or, if out of uniform, one who has identified himself or herself by exhibiting his or her credentials as a police officer to the actor, or a police officer whom the actor knew as a Basalt police officer at the time of the alleged offense. The term peace officer also includes any employee of the Town granted police or enforcement powers by any ordinance of the Town, who has exhibited his or her credentials to the actor, and any reserve or deputy peace officer. 
(Prior code 24-3) 
Sec. 10-3. - Duty of citizens to aid police officers. 
    It is the duty of all persons, when called upon by any police officer, to promptly aid and assist such officers in the discharge of his or her duties. 
(Prior code 2-25) 
Secs. 10-4-10-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II - Offenses Against Public Peace, Order and Safety 

Sec. 10-21. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  A person commits disorderly conduct if he or she intentionally, knowingly or recklessly: 
(1)  Makes a coarse and obviously offensive utterance, gesture or display in a public place and the utterance, gesture or display tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace; 
(2)  Abuses or threatens a person in a public place in an obviously offensive manner; 
(3)  Makes unreasonable noise in a public place or near a private residence that he or she has no right to occupy; 
(4)  Fights with another in a public place except in an amateur or professional contest of athletic skill; 
(5)  Not being a peace officer, discharges a firearm in a public place; or 
(6)  Not being a peace officer, displays a deadly weapon in a public place in a manner calculated to alarm. 
(b)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under Subsection (a)(2) of this Section that the actor had significant provocation for his or her abusive or threatening conduct. 
(c)  A violation of Subsection (a) above is a petty offense punishable under Chapter 1, Article IV, Section 1-82 or 1-83 of this Code. 
(Ord. 12, 1998) 
Sec. 10-22. - Harassment. 
(a)  A person commits harassment if, with intent to harass, annoy or alarm another person, he or she: 
(1)  Strikes, shoves, kicks or otherwise touches a person or subjects him or her to physical contact; 
(2)  In a public place directs obscene language or makes an obscene gesture to or at another person; 
(3)  Follows a person in or about a public place; 
(4)  Initiates communication with a person, anonymously or otherwise by telephone, in a manner intended to harass or threaten bodily injury or property damage, or makes any comment, request, suggestion or proposal by telephone which is obscene; 
(5)  Makes a telephone call or causes a telephone to ring repeatedly, regardless of whether a conversation ensues, with no purpose of legitimate conversation; 
(6)  Makes repeated communications at inconvenient hours that invade the privacy of another and interfere in the use and enjoyment of another's home or private residence or other private property; or 
(7)  Repeatedly insults, taunts, challenges or makes communications in offensively coarse language to another in a manner likely to provoke a violent or disorderly response. 
(b)  As used in this Section, unless the context otherwise requires, obscene means a patently offensive description of ultimate sexual acts or solicitation to commit ultimate sexual acts, whether or not said ultimate sexual acts are normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including masturbation, cunnilingus, fellatio, anilingus or excretory functions. 
(c)  Harassment is a petty offense punishable under Chapter 1, Article IV, Section 1-82 and/or 1-83 of this Code. 
(d)  Any act prohibited by this Section may be deemed to have occurred or to have been committed at the place at which the telephone call was either made or received. 
(Ord. 12, 1998) 
Sec. 10-23. - Fraud by check. 
(a)  As used in this Section, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Check means a written, unconditional order to pay a sum certain in money drawn on a bank, payable on demand, and signed by the drawer. 
    Drawee means the bank or other savings institution upon which a check is drawn. 
    Drawer means a person, either real or fictitious, whose name appears on a check as the primary obligor, whether the actual signature is that of the person or of a person authorized to draw a check on himself or herself. 
    Insufficient funds means a drawer has insufficient funds with the drawee to pay a check when the drawer has no checking account with the drawee, or has funds in a checking account with the drawee in an amount less than the amount of the check plus the amount of all other checks outstanding at the time of issuance; and a check dishonored for "no account" shall also be deemed to be dishonored for insufficient funds. 
    Issue means a person issues a check when he or she makes, draws, delivers or passes it, or causes it to be made, drawn, delivered or passed. 
(b)  Any person, knowing he or she has insufficient funds with a drawee who, with intent to defraud, issued a check, in an amount less than four hundred dollars ($400.00), for the payment of services, wages, salary, commissions, labor, rent, money, property or other thing of value, commits fraud by check, which is a misdemeanor. 
(c)  This Section does not relieve the prosecution from the necessity of establishing the required knowledge by evidence. However, for purposes of this Section, the issuer's knowledge of insufficient funds is presumed, except in the case of a post-dated check or order if: 
(1)  He or she has no account upon which the check or order is drawn with the bank or other drawee at the time he or she issues the check or order; or 
(2)  He or she has insufficient funds upon deposit with the bank or other drawee to pay the check or order, on presentation within thirty (30) days after the issue. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, no violation of this Section occurs if: 
(1)  The check alleged to be fraudulent was for a sum in excess of an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq., or more; 
(2)  The person issues two (2) or more checks within any thirty-day period in the State totaling an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq., or more in the aggregate; 
(3)  The person issuing the check has been twice previously convicted under Section 18-5-205, C.R.S., or any former state statute of similar content and purpose; or 
(4)  The allegedly fraudulent check was drawn on an account which did not exist or which has been closed for a period of thirty (30) days or more prior to the issuance of said check. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to open a checking account using false identification or an assumed name for the purpose of issuing fraudulent checks. 
(f)  If deferred prosecution or sentencing is ordered, the court as a condition of such disposition may require the defendant to make restitution on all checks issued by the defendant which are unpaid as of the date of commencement of the deferred period in addition to other terms and conditions appropriate for the treatment or rehabilitation of the defendant. 
(g)  A bank or other savings institution shall not be civilly or criminally liable for releasing information relating to the drawer's account to a police officer, town attorney, assistant town attorney or authorized investigator for a town attorney investigating or prosecuting a charge under this Section. 
(h)  Unless otherwise specifically provided, any person violating any provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code 38-1, 38-2; Ord. 17 §§1, 2, 1992; Ord. 12 §B30, 2003) 
Sec. 10-24. - Petty theft. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to commit theft. A person commits theft when he knowingly obtains or exercises control over anything of value of another without authorization, or by threat or deception, where the value of the thing involved is less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), and: 
(1)  Intends to deprive the other person permanently of the use or benefit of the thing of value; or 
(2)  Knowingly uses, conceals, or abandons the thing of value in such manner as to deprive the other person permanently of its use or benefit; or 
(3)  Uses, conceals, or abandons the thing of value intending that such use, concealment or abandonment will deprive the other person permanently of its use and benefit; or 
(4)  Demands any consideration to which be is not legally entitled as a condition of restoring the thing of value to the other person. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, a thing of value is that of "another" if anyone other than the defendant has a possessory or proprietary interest therein. 
(c)  Every person who obtains control over any stolen thing of value, where the value of the thing involved is less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), knowing the thing of value to have been stolen by another, may be tried, convicted and punished, whether or not the principal is charged, tried or convicted. 
(d)  Questioning of person suspected of shoplifting without liability. If any person conceals upon his person or otherwise carries away any unpurchased goods, wares or merchandise held or owned by any store or mercantile establishment, the merchant or any employee thereof or any police officer, acting in good faith and upon probable cause based upon reasonable ground therefor, may detain and question such person in a reasonable manner for the purpose of ascertaining whether the person is guilty of theft. Such questioning of a person by a merchant, merchant's employee or police officer does not render the merchant, merchant's employee or police officer civilly or criminally liable for slander, false arrest, false imprisonment, malicious prosecution or unlawful detention. 
(e)  For the purposes of this section, any reference or mention of stealing, false pretenses, or shoplifting shall be interpreted as if the word "theft" were substituted therefor. 
(f)  Any person who fails to comply with any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine as specified in Chapter 1, Article IV of this Code. 
(Ord. 17 §3, 1992; Ord. 12 §B31, 2003; Ord. 07 §1, 2014) 
Sec. 10-25. - Obstructing highway or passageway. 
(a)  An individual or corporation commits an offense if without legal privilege such individual or corporation intentionally, knowingly or recklessly: 
(1)  Obstructs a highway, street, sidewalk, railway, waterway, building entrance, elevator, aisle, stairway or hallway to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access or any other place used for the passage of persons, vehicles or conveyances, whether the obstruction arises from his or her acts alone or from his or her acts and the acts of others; or 
(2)  Disobeys a reasonable request or order to move issued by a person the individual or corporation knows to be a peace officer, a firefighter or a person with authority to control the use of the premises, to prevent obstruction of a highway or passageway or to maintain public safety by dispersing those gathered in dangerous proximity to a fire, riot or other hazard. 
(b)  For purposes of this Section, obstruct means to render impassable or to render passage unreasonably inconvenient or hazardous. 
(c)  Obstructing a highway or passageway is a petty offense punishable under Chapter 1, Article IV, Section 1-82 or 1-83 of this Code. 
(Ord. 12, 1998) 
Sec. 10-26. - Excreting in public. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate on any public street, upon any public sidewalk, in any other public place, in any public vehicle or in any store, assembly hall, corridor or other place open to or used by the public except restrooms and toilets which are provided for this purpose. 
(b)  Any person found to be in violation of this Section shall be punished in accordance with Chapter I, Article IV, Sections 1-82 and 1-84 of this Code. 
(Ord. 11, 1998) 
Sec. 10-27. - Unlawful use and possession of marijuana and related offenses. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this Chapter, the following words shall have the following definitions: 
    Marijuana means all parts of the plant cannabis sativa L., whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or its resin, It does not include fiber produced from the stalks, oil, or cake made from the seeds of the plant, or sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination, if these items exist apart from any other item defined as marijuana in this subsection. Marijuana shall include any product containing marijuana, which shall include but not be limited to extracts, by-products and vapors. 
    Registry identification card shall have the same meaning as is set forth in Article XVIII, Section 14(1)(b) of the Colorado Constitution, or as may be more fully defined in any applicable state law or regulation. 
    Underage person means any person under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(b)  Consumption of marijuana in public prohibited. 
(1)  No person shall consume any marijuana in public. 
(2)  For purposes of this section, in public means: 
a.  In or upon any public way or public right-of-way, whether in a vehicle or not; 
b.  On any property or in any building that is owned, leased, used by, or open to the public; or 
c.  In or upon those portions of any private property upon which the public has an express or implied license to enter or remain or for which the public can observe such use in plain view. 
(3)  No person shall drive or sit in any motor vehicle, other than one licensed to carry passengers for hire, in which a violation of subsection (b)(1) of this section is occurring. 
(4)  The maximum penalty for a conviction, based on date of violation of this section, is a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(c)  Unlawful to sell or give to or procure for minors. No person shall sell, serve, deliver, or give away any marijuana or any product containing marijuana to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) or purchase marijuana or marijuana-infused product for an person under the age of twenty-one (21). 
(d)  Possession and sale by minors unlawful. 
(1)  No person under the age of twenty-one (21) shall consume, possess or have under such person's control or request that any other person purchase for such person under the age of twenty-one (21) or sell, serve, give away or offer for sale any marijuana or any product containing marijuana, which shall include but not be limited to extracts, by-products and vapors. 
(2)  Prima facie evidence that a violation of this chapter occurred within the Town shall consist of: 
a.  Evidence that the defendant was under the age of twenty-one (21) years and possessed or consumed marijuana or any product containing marijuana, which shall include but not be limited to extracts, by-products and vapors within the Town; 
b.  Evidence that the defendant was under the age of twenty-one (21) years and manifested any of the characteristics commonly associated with marijuana use or impairment while present anywhere within the Town; or 
c.  Indicia including bloodshot eyes, watery eyes, eyelid tremors, green particulate on tongue, dilated pupils, dry mouth or any other indicator of marijuana consumption. 
(3)  An underage person and one (1) or two (2) other persons shall be immune from criminal prosecution under this section if they establish the following: 
a.  One (1) of the underage persons called 911 and reported that another underage person was in need of medical assistance due to marijuana consumption; 
b.  The underage person who called 911 and, if applicable, one (1) or two (2) other persons acting in concert with the underage person who called 911 provided each of their names to the 911 operator; 
c.  The underage person was the first person to make the 911 report; and 
d.  The underage person and, if applicable, one (1) or two (2) other persons acting in concert with the underage person who made the 911 call remained on the scene with the underage person in need of medical assistance until assistance arrived and cooperated with medical assistance and law enforcement personnel on the scene. 
(4)  In any judicial proceeding in any court of this state concerning a charge under this section, the court shall take judicial notice of methods of testing a person's blood, breath, saliva or urine for the presence of Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and of the design and operation of devices certilied by the department of public health and environment for testing a person's blood, breath, saliva or urine for the presence of Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). This subsection shall not prevent the necessity of establishing during a trial that the testing devices were working properly and that such testing devices were properly operated. Nothing in this subsection shall preclude a defendant from offering evidence concerning the accuracy of testing devices. 
(5)  It shall be an affirmative defense to a charged violation of this section that the underage person (1) on the date of the alleged offense lawfully possessed a current registry identification card issued by the state of Colorado to the underage person, and (2) possessed no more marijuana than the amount permitted by Article XVIII, Section 14 of the Colorado Constitution. Before evidence of this affirmative defense is presented to a jury, the underage person shall first provide written notice of this defense to the court and prosecution and a photocopy of the underage person's registry identification card, at least ten (10) days prior to trial. An underage person who raises this defense waives doctor-patient privilege and confidentiality concerning the underage person's patient registry information. 
(6)  The maximum penalty for a conviction, based on date of violation of this section, is a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(e)  Evidence of marijuana in trials. 
(1)  In any trial for a violation of this chapter, any witness with prior personal experience of the appearance, taste, or smell of marijuana may state an opinion that a substance was marijuana, based on his or her observations and experience. The witness need not be offered as an expert witness. 
(2)  In any trial for a violation of this chapter, any witness may testify that a person manifested characteristics commonly associated with marijuana use if the witness has personal experience or training that would enable the witness to recognize the characteristics. The witness need not be offered as an expert witness. 
(3)  In any trial for a violation of this section, any container or wrapper with labeling indicating the contents of the container or wrapper shall be admissible into evidence and the information on any label on such container or wrapper shall be admissible into evidence and shall not constitute hearsay. A jury or a judge, whichever is appropriate, may consider the information upon such label in determining whether the contents of the container or wrapper were composed in whole or in part of marijuana. A label identifying the contents of the container as "marijuana," "MJ," "weed," "bud," "saliva," "indica," or "kush" or any other slang term used for the identification of marijuana or its by-products shall constitute prima facie evidence that the contents of the container were composed in whole or in part of marijuana. 
(4)  In any trial for a violation of this section, testimony of a competent witness, including the arresting officer, that the substance possessed exhibited the smell, appearance or other characteristics of marijuana shall be sufficient to establish that the substance in question was marijuana. The defendant may rebut such testimony with a laboratory test, performed at the defendant's expense demonstrating that the substance was not marijuana. 
(f)  Possession in schools, daycares or governmental buildings. No person shall consume, possess or have under such person's control or sell, serve, give away or offer for sale any marijuana or any product containing marijuana, which shall include but not be limited to extracts, by-products and vapors, in or upon the property of any public or private primary or secondary school, daycare center or governmental building. 
(g)  Except as otherwise specified herein, any person who fails to comply with any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine as specified in Chapter 1, Article IV of this Code. 
(Ord. 17, 2009; Ord. 08 §1, 2014) 
Sec. 10-28. - Possession of drug paraphernalia. 
(a)  Drug paraphernalia determination, considerations. In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court, in its discretion, may consider, in addition to all other relevant factors, the following: 
(1)  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use. 
(2)  The proximity of the object to controlled substances. 
(3)  The existence of any residue or controlled substances on the object. 
(4)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the knowledge of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, or evidence that such person reasonably should know that it will be delivered to persons who such person knows or reasonably should know could use the object to facilitate a violation of this section. 
(5)  Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use. 
(6)  Descriptive materials accompanying the object that explain or depict its use. 
(7)  National or local advertising concerning its use. 
(8)  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale. 
(9)  Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a supplier of like or related items to the community for legal purposes, such as an authorized distributor or dealer of tobacco products. 
(10)  The existence and scope of legal uses for the object in the community. 
(11)  Expert testimony concerning its use. 
(b)  Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to possess any drug paraphernalia if such person knows or reasonably should have known that the drug paraphernalia could be used in a manner which would violate the laws of this State or of this Town. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person who fails to comply with any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine as specified in Chapter 1, Article IV of this Code. 
(Ord. 14 §1, 1998; Ord. 17, 2009; Ord. 09 §1, 2014) 
Sec. 10-29. - Curfew. 
(a)  Child's responsibility. It is unlawful for any child under the age of eighteen (18) years to remain or loiter, including being in a vehicle that is moving or stationary, in or upon any street, alley or other public place subsequent to the hour of 12:01 a.m., or prior to the hour of 6:00 a.m., except for lawful employment or unless there exists a reasonable necessity thereof; or unless such child is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or other person of the age of twenty-one (21) years having the permission of the parent or legal guardian to have the custody and care of such child. 
(b)  Parent's responsibility. It is unlawful for any parent, legal guardian or other person having the care or custody of any child under the age of eighteen (18) years, to allow or permit such child to remain or loiter, including being in a vehicle that is moving or stationary, in or upon any street, alley or other public place subsequent to the hour of 12:01 a.m., or prior to the hour of 6:00 a.m., except for lawful employment or unless there exists a reasonable necessity thereof; or unless such child is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or other person of the age of twenty-one (21) years having permission of the parent or legal guardian to have the custody and care of such child. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person violating this Section shall be punished as set forth in Chapter 1, Article IV, Section 1-82 (adults) or 1-83 (minors) of this Code. 
(Ord. 15 §1, 1998) 
Secs. 10-30-10-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III - Offenses Relating to Alcoholic Beverages 

Sec. 10-41. - Prohibited acts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Drink or consume, or permit the drinking or consumption of, any alcoholic beverage as defined by Section 12-47-102, C.R.S., or any fermented malt beverage, as defined by Section 12-46-102, C.R.S., in or about any street, alley, road, highway, sidewalk, automobile parking lot, store or other public place that does not have a liquor license, or inside vehicles while upon streets, alleys, roads, highways or automobile parking lots. 
(2)  Have in his or her possession any open container containing any alcoholic beverage as defined by Section 12-47-102, C.R.S., or any fermented malt beverage, as defined by Section 12-46-102, C.R.S., in or about any street, alley, road, highway, sidewalk, automobile parking lot, store or other public place that does not have a liquor license or inside vehicles while upon streets, alleys, roads, highways or automobile parking lots. 
(Prior code 18-1) 
Sec. 10-42. - Nonapplicability. 
    The above provisions shall not apply to Town parks, and they shall not apply to the designated section of the Town and for the designated period of time as set forth in any permit issued by the Town Council pursuant to the provisions of Section 10-43 of this Code. 
(Prior code 18-2; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-43. - Permit for public consumption. 
    Upon application by any person, group or organization, the Town Council may issue a permit allowing the consumption of any beverage described in Section 10-41 of this Code and allowing the possession of any open container of any beverage described in Section 10-41 of this Code within a designated section of the Town and during a designated period of time. The Town Council may issue such a permit only if it finds that the applicant is qualified under state law, a responsible person, group or organization and is sponsoring a specific public event that will promote the Town or its business and commerce or that will contribute to the amusement and entertainment of its citizens and visitors. 
(Prior code 18-3; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-44. - Restrictions and exceptions in force after 9:30 p.m. 
    It shall be unlawful for any licensee or operator, or agent or employee of any licensee or operator, of any establishment selling alcoholic beverages for on-the-premises consumption to allow or permit any person under the age of twenty-one (21) to enter or remain in such establishment after 9:30 p.m., or for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) to enter or remain in such establishment after 9:30 p.m. except: 
(1)  Persons under twenty-one (21) may remain in a dining room where meals are served and sold, where not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the gross income generated within such dining room results from the sale of alcoholic beverages, where the sale of alcoholic beverages is incidental to the sale and consumption of food and where such dining room is physically separated, by walls or other means, from the bar. 
(2)  Persons under twenty-one (21) may pass through a bar for purposes of obtaining access to a dining room or rest room. 
(3)  Persons over the age of eighteen (18) years may sell or dispense malt liquors or vinous liquors in a bar of an establishment licensed to sell or dispense malt liquors or vinous liquors but not licensed to sell spirituous liquors. 
(4)  Persons under the age of twenty-one (21) may enter or remain in a bar when the establishment is closed and alcoholic beverages are not being sold. 
(Prior code 18-5) 
Sec. 10-45. - Restrictions and exceptions in force before 9:30 p.m. 
    It shall be unlawful for any licensee or proprietor, or agent or employee of any licensee or operator, of any establishment selling alcoholic beverages for on-the-premises consumption to allow or permit any person under the age of twenty-one (21) to enter or remain in such establishment from the time the establishment opens for business until 9:30 p.m., or for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) to enter or remain in such establishment during such times, unless: 
(1)  The person under twenty-one (21) is accompanied and supervised by his or her parent, legal guardian or an adult over the age of twenty-one (21) who expressly assumes responsibility and liability for the acts of the person under twenty-one (21); 
(2)  The person under twenty-one (21) is lawfully engaged in selling or dispensing malt liquors or vinous liquors in a bar of an establishment licensed to sell or dispense malt liquors or vinous liquors, but not licensed to sell spirituous liquors; or 
(3)  The bar of the establishment is closed and alcoholic beverages are not being served. 
(Prior code 18-6) 
Sec. 10-46. - Display of warning card. 
    Every proprietor of an establishment selling alcoholic beverages for on-the-premises consumption shall display at all times in a prominent place a printed card with a minimum height of eighteen (18) inches and a minimum width of eleven (11) inches, with each letter a minimum of one-half (1/2) inch in height, giving notice of the prohibitions of this Article concerning persons under the age of twenty-one (21) years in said establishment. The failure to post such sign shall not be a defense in any prosecution against a person charged with being under the age of twenty-one (21) and unlawfully entering or remaining in an establishment selling alcoholic beverages for on-the-premises consumption. 
(Prior code 18-7) 
Sec. 10-47. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-48. - Unlawful possession of alcoholic beverages by a minor. 
(a)  Definitions. 
    Alcoholic beverages or alcoholic liquors means malt, vinous or spirituous liquors; except that alcoholic beverages and alcoholic liquors shall not include confectionery containing alcohol within the limits prescribed by Section 25-5-410(1)(I)(II), C.R.S., which section is incorporated herein by this reference. 
    Fermented malt beverage means any beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any similar product, or any combination thereof, in water containing not less than one-half of one percent (.5%) and not more than three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) alcohol by weight; except that fermented malt beverage shall not include confectionery containing alcohol within the limits prescribed by Section 25-5-410(1)(I)(II), C.R.S., which section is incorporated herein by this reference. 
    Malt liquors includes beer and shall be construed to mean any beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product, or any combination thereof, in water containing more than three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) alcohol by weight. 
    Spirituous liquors means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation, mixed with water and other substances in solution, and includes among other things brandy, rum, whiskey, gin and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing at least one-half of one percent (.5%) alcohol and which is fit for use for beverage purposes. 
    Vinous liquors means wine and fortified wines which contain not less than one-half of one percent (.5%) and not more than twenty-one percent (21%) alcohol by volume and shall be construed to mean alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural sugar contents of fruits or other agricultural products containing sugar. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to possess one (1) or more alcoholic beverages, malt liquors, vinous liquors and/or spirituous liquors, as such terms are defined herein or to possess fermented malt beverages as such term is defined herein, in a public place including public streets, alleys, roads or highways; upon property owned by a public or governmental entity, or any subdivision thereof, including the Town; or inside vehicles while upon the public streets, alleys, roads or highways. A person convicted of a violation of this Section shall be punished as set forth in Chapter 1, Article IV of this Code, Section 1-82 and 1-83. 
(Ord. 13 §1, 1998) 
Secs. 10-49-10-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV - Offenses Relating to Firearms 

Sec. 10-61. - Unlawful discharge of firearms. 
(a)  For purposes of this Section, the term firearm shall include any gun, pistol, rifle, shotgun, fowling piece, cannon, spring-operated device or any other device designed or used to propel projectiles in a dangerous manner, including but not limited to BB and pellet guns of any description. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm within the Town. 
(c)  This Section shall in no event be applied to the discharge of a firearm relating to: 
(1)  The carrying out of the duty of any authorized peace officer. 
(2)  The activities of any military exercise under the direction of an officer in any branch of the United States Armed Forces, active or reserve, or the activities of any recognized militia organized under and authorized by the laws of the United States or the State. 
(3)  The recreational activities of any firing or target range validly operating under all appropriate federal, state and local laws, ordinances and regulations. 
(4)  Any activity for which the Mayor has given written permission in behalf of the Town ten (10) days in advance, including but not limited to military parades and funerals. 
(5)  The self-defense of any person or the defense of a person's home from attack. 
(d)  This Section is not intended in any way to disturb or prevent the operation of legitimate and duly licensed businesses dealing in firearms, including but not limited to sporting goods stores, gunsmiths and pawnbrokers. 
(Prior code 20-1) 
Sec. 10-62. - Unlawful carrying of concealed weapons. 
(a)  For purpose of this Article, the term weapon shall include any firearm as defined in Section 10-61(a) above and any knife, switchblade, stiletto or gravity knife, bowie knife, dirk, dagger, razor, axe, slingshot, stone, bludgeon, club, blackjack, billy, metal knuckles or any other device designed or used to inflict bodily harm. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or have concealed upon or about his or her person any weapon or to exhibit any weapon in a rude, angry or threatening manner. 
(c)  This Section shall in no event be applied to weapons carried by: 
(1)  A peace officer in the performance of official duty. 
(2)  A person duly licensed to carry a weapon concealed on his or her person. 
(3)  A person in his or her house, dwelling or other area or premises to which he or she is entitled to exclusive possession unless such premises are open to the public. 
(Prior code 20-2) 
Secs. 10-63-10-80. - Reserved. 
CHAPTER 11 - Streets, Sidewalks and Public Property 
ARTICLE I - General Provisions 

Sec. 11-1. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
    Sidewalk means that portion of the street which is set aside for the use of pedestrians and which has been surfaced with cement, stone or other similar material. 
    Street means the entire width of every dedicated public way, and includes the traveled portion thereof, known as the "roadway," the portion used for sidewalks and the portion between the property line and the roadway, known as the "parking." The term also includes an alley. 
(Prior code 55-1) 
Sec. 11-2. - Grade determination. 
(a)  For the purpose of establishing uniformity in the construction of streets, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, as well as to provide suitable surface drawings of the Town streets, it shall be the duty of the Town Council to cause the several streets to be surveyed to determine the grades for streets, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, and to establish said grades by ordinance. 
(b)  Until such time as the Town establishes grades by ordinance, the Town Manager shall establish the grades and lines of all streets, sidewalks, curbs and gutters. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to construct any sidewalk, curb or gutter upon any grade or line other than the one furnished by the Town Manager or by the Town Council. 
(Prior code 55-2; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-3. - Civil liability imposed on owners or occupants of land abutting sidewalks, curbs or gutters. 
    The owner or occupant of any parcel of land within the geographical boundaries of the Town which abuts a sidewalk, curb or gutter shall be subject to civil liability for injuries caused by his or her failure to repair, maintain or remove accumulations of ice and snow from such sidewalk, curb or gutter in violation of this Code. 
(Prior code 55-3.5) 
Sec. 11-4. - Public Works Manual. 
    The Public Works Department shall prepare and provide for approval of the Town Council by ordinance a Public Works Manual establishing technical standards and specifications for improvements in or affecting public areas, improvements to be dedicated to the public and improvements connected to public systems. Such Public Works Manual may be amended from time to time by ordinance of the Town Council on recommendation from the Public Works Department. The Public Works Department will be responsible for enforcement of the Public Works Manual. A copy of the Public Works Manual shall be available on request at Town Hall or from the Public Works Department to all members of the public on payment of a reasonable fee established by the Town. 
(Ord. 28 §2, 2004) 
Secs. 11-5-11-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II - Sidewalk Construction and Repair 

Sec. 11-21. - Construction required; permit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to lay out, construct or reconstruct any sidewalk, curb or gutter without first obtaining a permit therefor. 
(Prior code 55-4; Ord. 22 §1, 1991) 
Sec. 11-22. - Application for permit; designation of grade and line. 
(a)  Application for the permit required shall be made to the Town Manager on a form furnished for that purpose. 
(b)  Before any construction or reconstruction is commenced, the Town Manager shall designate the grade upon which, and the line or location at which, the sidewalk, curb or gutter shall be constructed. 
(Prior code 55-5; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-23. - Specifications. 
    All sidewalks, curbs and gutters which are constructed or reconstructed shall be of concrete and shall be constructed or reconstructed in accordance with the specifications adopted by the Town Council and filed in the office of the Town Clerk. All sidewalks within the incorporated limits of the Town shall be of a uniform width of five (5) feet, except where the Town Manager specifies a different width, with the approval of the Town Council. 
(Prior code 55-6; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-24. - Maintenance and repair. 
    All sidewalks, curbs and gutters shall be maintained with an even surface, in good repair and in conformity with the established grade of the streets along which they are constructed. All sidewalks shall be repaired with concrete. 
(Prior code 55-7) 
Sec. 11-25. - Town Council order for construction or repair. 
    The Town Council, when it deems it necessary that a portion of a sidewalk, curb or gutter be constructed or repaired, may on its own motion order the same to be done. 
(Prior code 55-8; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-26. - Notice to property owner. 
(a)  An order of the Town Council for construction or repair of a sidewalk, curb or gutter, by resolution duly adopted, shall be directed to the Town Manager. 
(b)  The Town Manager shall serve notice by certified mail upon the owner or owners of the property adjacent to or abutting the sidewalk, curb or gutter ordered improved to make such construction or repair as ordered within thirty (30) days from the date of registering the notice for mailing. Such construction or repair shall conform with plans and specifications to be prepared by the Town Manager. 
(c)  The notice shall be in the form on file in the office of the Town Clerk, for use and examination by the public. 
(d)  Any failure by the Town, Town Council or Town Manager to serve the notice required by this Section shall not absolve the owner or occupant of land abutting the sidewalk, curb or gutter to be repaired from civil liability for injuries caused by the landowner's or occupant's failure to maintain or repair said sidewalk, curb or gutter, in accordance with Sections 11-3, 11-24, and 11-95. 
(Prior code 55-9; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-27. - Failure to comply with notice. 
    The Town Manager shall forthwith report to the Town Council any owner or owners of property adjacent to or abutting the sidewalk, curb and gutter ordered improved who have failed, refused or neglected to comply with the notice to construct or repair the sidewalk, curb and gutter. The Town Council may thereupon, by resolution duly adopted, order the construction or repair to be done by contract to the lowest responsible bidder on open bids, after ample advertisement. 
(Prior code 55-10; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-28. - Assessment of costs. 
    The cost of any improvement ordered by the Town Council shall be assessed against the owner or owners of adjacent or abutting property. Where such cost has not been paid within thirty (30) days after completion, notice of completion having been given by certified mail to said owners by the Town Clerk, the Town Clerk shall certify said assessment to the Treasurer of Eagle or Pitkin County, as the case may be, who shall extend the assessment upon the tax roll and collect the same in the same manner as other taxes assessed upon said property. 
(Prior code 55-11; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-29. - Inspection. 
    The Town Manager shall have the right to assign an inspector to check on any and all work performed under a permit issued for sidewalk, curb, gutter and driveway construction, including preparation of the base, condition and type of forms, etc., to be used, materials to be incorporated in the work and construction methods and practices. Inspectors shall be assigned to call the attention of contractors to infringements of these instructions, and they shall have authority to reject defective materials and workmanship and to stop work until such time as the contractor corrects the situation in question, subject to the final decision of the Town Manager. 
(Prior code 55-12; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-30. - Contractor to furnish inspection facilities. 
    The contractor shall furnish the inspector with all reasonable facilities and assistance necessary for the proper inspection of materials to be used and construction methods to determine compliance with these instructions. 
(Prior code 55-13) 
Sec. 11-31. - Rejection of materials and work. 
    Whenever the inspector finds it necessary to reject materials or defective work, the contractor shall promptly remove such rejected materials and defective construction from the site. In the event that the contractor fails to remove rejected items promptly, the Town Manager may arrange for such removal at the expense of the contractor. 
(Prior code 55-14; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-32. - Curb cuts. 
    At curb cuts, the contractor shall remove as much of the curb and gutter as necessary to permit proper construction of the driveway entrance and maintenance of the gutter. Removed materials shall be removed from the site by the contractor. New construction shall conform with plans as prescribed by the Town Manager. 
(Prior code 55-15; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-33. - Power line poles. 
    Whenever power line poles are located within the limits of proposed construction, the office of the Town Manager shall be so advised by the contractor at the time application is made for a permit. Arrangements will then be made for relocating such poles outside the area to be concreted, if relocation is feasible. Concrete shall not be placed at pole locations until they have been moved or until the Town Manager advises the contractor it is satisfactory to proceed without the poles being moved. 
(Prior code 55-17; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-34. - Trees. 
    When trees are located within the area to be concreted, and approval is given by the Town Manager for such trees to be left in place, an open space eighteen (18) inches wide shall be left around each tree. It will not be necessary to leave eighteen (18) inches of open space between a tree and the edge of a walk extending along only one (1) side of a tree. 
(Prior code 55-18) 
Sec. 11-35. - Water stop boxes. 
    Water stop boxes located within areas to be concreted shall be adjusted by the contractor to be flush with the surface of the finished concrete. 
(Prior code 55-19) 
Sec. 11-36. - Duty of property owner to prune or remove trees or shrubs; notice. 
(a)  The Town's right-of-way landscape policy is necessary to ensure that street trees planted on public property are consistent with the Town's landscaping standards, in the interest of public safety, and to preserve public welfare. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the property owner to cut, trim, prune or remove as necessary any trees or shrubs located upon the property of such owner in order to provide for the safe and convenient use of streets, sidewalks, alleys or other Town-owned property in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Tree branch growth must be maintained at a height no lower than eight (8) feet over a public sidewalk and not less than fourteen (14) feet over the travel lanes of a street or alley. 
(2)  Branches, trees and shrubs must not obscure street name signs. 
(3)  Branches or trees that are broken, hanging, decayed or otherwise defective in any way that threatens public property or the safe use thereof must be removed. It shall be the duty of the Town to do any cutting, trimming, pruning or removing of trees and shrubs necessary for the safe use of Town utilities or Town traffic-control devices and signs, with the exception of street name signs. 
(c)  Except where properties are subject to a site specific land use review, prior to any planting which will be within the Town's rights-of-way, the Public Works Director and the Town Planner shall review and approve landscape plans and/or proposals. Plan submittal and approval shall be part of any development review process or in direct response to a proposal to modify or add new landscaping to existing rights of way. Following submittal of plans, the Public Works Director may request additional information, plans, details and specifications as necessary to review the proposal. 
(d)  Should a property owner fail to maintain trees and shrubs in the manner required by Subsection (a) of this Section, the Public Works Director shall follow these enforcement guidelines: 
(1)  First contact : Notification by personal visit or phone to the property owner requesting compliance with the requirements in this Section. The property owner will be given fourteen (14) days to come into compliance. In the event that the property owner cannot be reached by personal visit or phone, the Public Works Department, after first making this attempt, shall send a letter to the property owner requesting compliance. 
(2)  Additional contact : If compliance is not completed within the above fourteen (14) days of first contact as described in Paragraph (1) above, the Public Works Department shall recontact the property owner by personal visit, phone or letter reminding him or her of the Town's regulations related to landscaping adjacent to the right-of-way and asking him or her to comply within the next seven (7) days. 
(3)  Notice of violation : If compliance is not completed within the time period allotted in Paragraph (2) above, the Public Works Department shall send a certified letter to the property owner reminding him or her of the Town's regulations related to landscaping adjacent to the right-of-way and requiring compliance within two (2) business days and identifying penalties for noncompliance as set forth in Section 1-82 of this Code. The Town Manager can extend the compliance time period if it is determined at the sole discretion of the Town Manager that there are special circumstances. By way of an example, special circumstances may include, but are not limited to, a property owner not being able to be contacted. 
(Ord. 11 §4, 2011) 
Secs. 11-37-11-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III - Excavations 

Sec. 11-51. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to dig up, open or excavate, or cause to be dug up, opened or excavated, any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place within the incorporated limits of the Town without first having secured a permit therefor from the Town Manager or his or her authorized representative. 
(Prior code 55-20) 
Sec. 11-52. - Application. 
    Application for a permit to excavate, required by this Section, shall be made upon a blank form provided by the Town Manager or his or her authorized representative. The application shall recite specifically and illustrate by sketch or plan the exact location, depth, extent, nature and purpose of the excavation desired to be made, the purpose for which the privilege is requested and the duration of time required for the work. 
(Prior code 55-21) 
Sec. 11-53. - Excavation permit fees. 
    No permit to excavate in any street or alley shall be issued unless the applicant for such permit has first paid to the Town the required fee for any minimum excavation, excavation in asphalt or concrete, excavation in gravel or excavation in dirt in amounts as approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. However, utility companies franchised in the Town registered with the Public Utilities Commission shall not be required to pay the excavation fee and may substitute the deposit with a bond, letter of credit or some other method of security approved by the Town Manager. 
(Prior code 55-22; Ord. 22 §1, 1991; Ord. 12 §B33, 2003) 
Sec. 11-54. - Issuance of permits. 
    The Town Manager shall grant permits to dig up, open or excavate, or cause to be dug up, opened or excavated, any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place in the Town to the following persons: 
(1)  Any person possessing, by ordinance, resolution or contract of the Town Council, general or special power to excavate in, or perform other work as aforesaid in or upon, the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public places. 
(2)  Any person properly licensed under the provisions of this Code filing an application, as provided for, pertaining to excavation work which will comply with the requirements stated herein. 
(Prior code 55-23; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-55. - Permit to be available for inspection. 
    The permit required shall be kept at the site of the excavation while the work is in progress and shall be exhibited upon request to any police officer or other authorized representative of the Town Manager. 
(Prior code 55-24; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-56. - Compliance with time limit and method restrictions. 
    All permits issued under this Article shall be issued according to the provisions stated and subject to such rules, directions and limitations as the Town Manager prescribes regarding the time required for the work and the manner in which the work is to be performed. 
(Prior code 55-25; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-57. - Protection of public places. 
    Permits shall be conditioned that all work performed under such permits shall be in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Town Manager, which rules shall provide for the proper care and protection of the streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public places of the Town and persons and property thereupon. 
(Prior code 55-26; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-58. - Compliance with specifications. 
    Permits shall be conditioned that all work done under such permits shall be only such work as is allowed by the Town and specified in the ordinance, resolution or contract of the Town Manager, or in the proper application. 
(Prior code 55-27; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-59. - Records to be kept. 
    The Town Manager shall keep a record of all applications made for excavation permits and of the permits issued. 
(Prior code 55-28; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-60. - License and insurance required. 
    All permittees must be licensed pursuant to this Code and must provide the insurance required. 
(Prior code 55-29) 
Sec. 11-61. - Time and space limitations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to obstruct more than the space of one (1) block and one (1) intersection at the same time in any one (1) street, or to keep the same blocked for more than three (3) days. 
(b)  In the event of unforeseen extenuating circumstances, an applicant may apply for an extension of the three (3) day limitation. The Town Manager or his or her authorized representative, after investigation of the extenuating circumstances, may grant such extension provided that valid reasons and circumstances exist and justify the extension. 
(c)  One (1) lane of traffic must remain open at all times unless prior approval is granted by the Town Manager. 
(Prior code 55-30; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-62. - Barricades and warning lights. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dig or cause to be dug any hole, drain, ditch or any other excavation in any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place within the Town without providing sufficient warning lights during the nighttime, to be placed with a suitable barricade or temporary fence around such hole, drain, ditch or other excavation, in order to prevent persons, animals and vehicles from sustaining injury or damage. 
(b)  During the daytime, the barricade shall be maintained, but warning lights are not required. 
(Prior code 55-31) 
Sec. 11-63. - Traffic safety appliances. 
    Every excavation shall be protected at all times by traffic safety appliances, as prescribed by the Town Manager, in order to minimize the disruption of the flow of traffic in the vicinity of the excavation. 
(Prior code 55-32; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-64. - Interference with safety devices. 
    It shall be unlawful to damage, displace, remove or interfere with any barricade, warning light or any other safety appliance which is lawfully placed around or about any street, alley, sidewalk or other excavation or construction work in the Town. 
(Prior code 55-33) 
Sec. 11-65. - Cuts; disposal of excess material. 
    Any cut in any pavement or surfacing shall be made in a neat manner, with square edges and corners, and shall be made with a pavement saw six (6) inches back from each side of the excavation. All excess material taken from the cut and excavation shall be trucked away and disposed of by the holder of the permit at the time the cut and excavation are made. 
(Prior code 55-34) 
Sec. 11-66. - Backfilling. 
    Upon completion of the work, each excavator shall backfill excavations as required herein. Backfill of any excavation made in any paved street or alley right-of-way shall conform to the conditions set out in this Code. 
(Prior code 55-35) 
Sec. 11-67. - Backfill material to be compacted. 
    Backfill material shall be placed in lifts not to exceed six (6) inches in depth by loose measurement, moistened as required and mechanically compacted to a minimum of ninety-five percent (95%) of the maximum density, to be tested and accepted by the Town Manager or his or her authorized representative. 
(Prior code 55-36; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-68. - Material for backfilling. 
(a)  All excavated material shall be removed, and backfill shall be of select material meeting the specifications established by the Town Manager. A sample of material to be used for backfill must be supplied to the Town Manager before the backfill is to be made, and such material shall have received previous approval of the Town Manager. 
(b)  In streets and alleys paved with concrete or asphalt, the top twelve (12) inches of the backfill shall be made with crushed gravel three-fourths (3/4) inch or less in diameter. In gravel streets and alleys, the top eight (8) inches of the backfill shall be made with crushed gravel three-fourths (3/4) inch or less in diameter. 
(Prior code 55-37; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-69. - Modifications. 
    The plans and specifications set out herein may be modified by the Town Manager so that they may be specifically adapted to the particular conditions of travel, load requirements, terrain, subsoil and moisture where the backfill is to be effected. 
(Prior code 55-38; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-70. - Responsibility for repair. 
    In the event of settlement or subsidence of a particular excavation or part of an excavation, the permittee who had performed the excavation work shall be responsible for all repaving and repair costs occasioned by such settlement or subsidence. 
(Prior code 55-39) 
Sec. 11-71. - Pavement or surfacing replacement. 
(a)  After an excavation in a street, alley or sidewalk, pavement and surfacing shall be replaced by the contractor in accordance with specifications provided by the Town Manager's office. 
(b)  If within the time specified in Section 11-56 the work is not completed, the Town will cause the work to be done and bill the contractor responsible. 
(Prior code 55-40; Ord. 22 §1, 1991; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-72. - Surfacing material to be separated from soil. 
    Excavators in paved or hard-topped streets shall take care to separate surfacing material from the soil removed from such excavation. 
(Prior code 55-41) 
Sec. 11-73. - Obstruction of excavations prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to hinder or obstruct any paving operations or excavations conducted in conformance with the provisions of this Article. 
(Prior code 55-42) 
Sec. 11-74. - Liability. 
    Any person who undertakes work pursuant to a permit issued under the provisions of this Article or performs work under contract with the Town or by permission obtained from the Town Council in accordance with provisions adopted by the Town Council shall be answerable for any damage occasioned to persons, animals or property by reason of carelessness or negligence connected with such work. 
(Prior code 55-43; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-75. - Furnishing of information. 
    It shall be the duty of every person, on request, to furnish the Town Manager with information regarding the location in any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place of the Town of any pipe or other structure installed, maintained or utilized by such person. 
(Prior code 55-44; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Secs. 11-76-11-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV - Encroachments 

Sec. 11-91. - Unlawful obstructions and improvements. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Code, it shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct a street or sidewalk with any debris, lumber, sand, gravel, dirt, abandoned or wrecked automobile or other material or substance without having first obtained a written permit from the Public Works Director. Such permit may be granted only where the obstruction is necessary for the construction, alteration or repair of the adjoining property, and such permitted obstructions shall be limited to as short a time as is reasonably possible. Each day that an unlawful obstruction is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to plant any tree or shrub within the public rights-of-way of any street or upon other Town-owned property within the Town without having first obtained written approval from the Public Works Director. 
(Prior code 55-45; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 11 §5, 2011) 
Sec. 11-92. - Walkways required. 
    Whenever in the construction, rebuilding or repairing of any building it becomes necessary to blockade, obstruct or remove the sidewalk, the person in charge of such work shall build and maintain a good and substantial walkway around the obstructed portion of such sidewalk, to be approved by the Town Manager. 
(Prior code 55-46; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-93. - Ditches to be bridged. 
    Any person owning or constructing any ditch, race, drain or flume in, upon or across any public street within the Town shall keep the same open for safe and convenient travel by constructing bridges over the same. Such bridges shall be of substantial construction and shall cover the full width of the street. After such construction, the owner thereof shall keep the same in good condition and repair. 
(Prior code 55-47) 
Sec. 11-94. - Excavations to be fenced. 
    All holes, depressions, excavations or other dangerous places within the Town that are below the natural or artificial grades of the surrounding or adjacent highway or street shall be properly enclosed with fences or walls, or filled up, so as to prevent persons and animals from falling into them. The Town Manager shall notify the owner or occupant of premises on which such dangerous places exist to cause fences or walls to be built around them or to cause the same to be filled up. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant so notified to fail to comply with such notification forthwith. 
(Prior code 55-48; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-95. - Removal of snow or ice. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any lot, block or parcel of ground within the Town, or any agent in charge of such property, to allow any snow or ice to accumulate or remain upon any sidewalk alongside such property longer than twenty-four (24) hours from the time of the last accretion of such snow and ice. 
(Prior code 55-49) 
Secs. 11-96-11-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V - Use Restrictions 

Sec. 11-111. - Injury to streets and sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, cut, mutilate, destroy or deface any street, sidewalk, curb or gutter, the paving or other surface thereof, the trees or plants located therein or any property maintained or used in connection therewith. 
(Prior code 55-50) 
Sec. 11-112. - Littering prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit in or litter any street with ashes, sod, earth, grass clippings, sand, gravel, rubbish, wastepaper, garbage or any other waste material. 
(Prior code 55-51) 
Sec. 11-113. - Certain tires prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or move upon any surfaced street in the Town any vehicles equipped with metal or solid rubber tires, or tires which have any flange, cleat, spike or other protuberances of any material other than rubber, except for studded snow tires which meet all requirements set forth by the State. 
(Prior code 55-52) 
Sec. 11-114. - Moving of buildings. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any building or the contractor for its removal, or either of them, to move any building over the streets of the Town without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Town Manager. 
(b)  In granting such a permit, the Town Manager may impose such restrictions or conditions as he or she deems necessary to protect the streets of the Town or any utilities from damage, and he or she may make any other responsible requirements which he or she or she deems necessary for the protection of the public. 
(Prior code 55-53; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-115. - Camping or lodging on property without consent. 
(a)  No person shall camp within any park, parkway, recreation area, open space or other Town property without prior authorization of the Town. 
(b)  No person shall camp within any public property other than Town property or any private property without first having obtained: 
(1)  Permission of the authorized officer of such public property; or 
(2)  Permission of the owner of private property. 
(c)  This section does not apply to any dwelling in the Town, as defined Section 16-4 of the Code. 
(d)  For purposes of this section "camp" means to reside or dwell temporarily in a place, with shelter, and conduct activities of daily living, such as eating or sleeping, in such place, but the term does not include napping during the day or picnicking. The term "shelter" includes, without limitation, any cover or protection from the elements other than clothing. The phrase "during the day" means from one (1) hour after sunrise until sunset. 
(e)  Testimony by an agent of the persons specified in subsection (b) of this section that such agent is the person who grants permission to camp or lodge upon such property, or that in the course of such agent's duties such. agent would be aware of permission and that no such permission was given, is prima facie evidence of that fact. 
(f)  Any person who fails to comply with any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine as specified in Chapter 1, Article IV of this Code. 
( Ord. 10 § 1, 2014) 
Sec. 11-116. - Unlawful use of vehicles as residence. 
    No person shall occupy a vehicle upon any Town street or streets or other public property if any of the purposes for such occupation is to use the vehicle as a permanent or temporary residence, The general penalty provisions of Chapter 1, Article IV shall apply to this section. 
( Ord. 10 § 1, 2014) 
Secs. 11-117-11-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI - Roadway Names and House Numbers 

Sec. 11-131. - Adoption of procedure. 
    The procedure set out in this Article is for the naming of streets and the numbering of houses within the Town limits and new additions to the Town. 
(Prior code 55-54) 
Sec. 11-132. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this roadway-naming and house-numbering plan is to provide an orderly and contiguous pattern throughout the Town and to enable particular roadways and houses to be found as quickly as possible. 
(Prior code 55-55) 
Sec. 11-133. - Review of roadway names; assignment of numbers. 
    Plats of new subdivisions shall be reviewed by the Town Manager or his or her representative in order to avoid duplication of roadway names. House numbers in the Town shall be assigned by the Building Inspection Department as building permits are issued, or upon demand. 
(Prior code 55-56; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-134. - Naming of roadways. 
    Roadways shall be named in accordance with the following guidelines: 
(1)  All roadway designations shall be approved by the Town Manager. 
(2)  Interrupted roadways that are in alignment with streets in other parts of the Town shall have the same name. 
(3)  Roadway names shall not be duplicated in the Town. 
(4)  Roadway signs shall be readable from each direction of travel. 
(5)  Temporary signs are required during construction periods. 
(Prior code 55-57; Ord. 22 §1, 1991; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-135. - Numbering of houses. 
    Houses shall be numbered according to the following guidelines: 
(1)  Odd numbers shall be on the south and east sides of roadways, with even numbers on the north and west sides. 
(2)  Numbers should not be duplicated for five (5) blocks. (For example, first house - 501; next street, first house - 503; next street, first house - 505, 507, etc.). 
(3)  House numbers shall be readable from the roadway, particularly at night. 
(4)  All new developments and numbering systems shall be submitted to the Town Manager for approval prior to recording of the final plat. 
(Prior code 55-58; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Secs. 11-136-11-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII - Cemeteries 

Sec. 11-151. - Cemetery created; recording. 
    There is hereby created a municipal cemetery, consisting of land owned by the Town, to be known and designated as the "Basalt Fairview Cemetery," to be used and sold for the burial and interment of bodies. The Town has caused the Basalt Fairview Cemetery to be surveyed by Alonzo H. Adams, a registered land surveyor, and the map is hereby accepted and declared to be the official map and plat of the Basalt Fairview Cemetery. The Town Clerk is hereby authorized to cause the plat to be recorded in the Clerk and Recorder's office of Pitkin County, and a copy of the plat shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk. The Town Council may, from time to time, by resolution, provide for additions to the municipal cemetery, securing the platting or replatting thereof and the filing of such plats as required herein. Such added lands shall thereafter be subject to all the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 7-1; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-152. - Management. 
    The Town Manager shall be responsible for the management of the Town cemetery and shall delegate the duties involved in improvement, maintenance and operation thereof to the Chief of Maintenance. The Town Manager shall report to the Town Council the financial and physical status of the cemetery and shall incorporate in the proposed annual budget such allocation of funds as may be necessary for its proper management. The Town Council shall levy and appropriate for the cemetery the necessary funds in a manner consistent with all budgeting requirements. 
(Prior code 7-2; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-153. - Conveyance of lots. 
    Lots and grave plots shall be conveyed to the purchaser by a certificate of purchase, a copy of which shall be filed by the Town Clerk. 
(Prior code 7-3) 
Sec. 11-154. - Title subject to rules and regulations. 
    All lots and grave plots in the Town cemetery shall be held in accordance with and subject to the rules, regulations and ordinances of the Town and the laws of the State. 
(Prior code 7-4) 
Sec. 11-155. - Duties of Town Clerk. 
    The Town Clerk shall keep and have custody of all books and records pertaining to the cemetery, shall issue all permits for burial, disinterment and removal of bodies in said cemetery and, with the Town Manager or Mayor, shall execute and issue, to those having paid therefor appropriate certificates of purchase of grave space in said cemetery, in such form as the Town Manager may determine and in compliance with the provisions of this Article and any and all rules and regulations made thereunder. 
(Prior code 7-5; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-156. - Fees and charges. 
    The Town Council shall request the Town Manager to report as conditions warrant on the income and expenses of the cemetery and shall adopt by resolution a schedule of prices for: 
(1)  Grave space. 
(2)  Opening and closing of graves. 
(Prior code 7-6; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-157. - Conditions of conveyance. 
    The rights, title and interest acquired by any person in and to any grave space in the Town cemetery shall be subject to any and all rules and regulations governing the cemetery as may, from time to time, be adopted by resolution of the Town Council. The Town shall not be liable for any injury or damage to any monument, marker or other structure in the cemetery resulting from any cause beyond its reasonable control. 
(Prior code 7-7; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-158. - Maintenance responsibilities. 
    The Town shall care for and maintain all roads, walks, pathways, grass, ground, shrubbery and improvements belonging to or appertaining to the Town cemetery; provided, however, that all lot or grave section owners are to maintain all monuments and markers erected on their lots or grave tracts. 
(Prior code 7-8) 
Sec. 11-159. - Prior purchase. 
    Nothing herein shall be construed to affect or alter the rights of persons who, prior to the adoption of this Article, purchased grave spaces. The Town Clerk shall maintain a list of all such prior purchases. 
(Prior code 7-9) 
Secs. 11-160-11-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII - Skateboard Park 

Sec. 11-171. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to regulate the use of the Skateboard Park through the implementation of rules and regulations and the imposition of penalties for the violation of such rules and regulations. 
(Ord. 11 §2, 2002) 
Sec. 11-172. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article, certain words or phrases are defined as follows: 
    Skateboard shall mean skateboard, in-line skate and any other similar device approved by the Public Works Department for use in the Skateboard Park. Skateboard shall specifically not include bicycles or scooters. 
    Skateboard Park shall mean that portion within Gissela Fiou Park which has been set aside and dedicated for use by persons using skateboards and similar devices as defined hereinafter. 
(Ord. 11 §2, 2002) 
Sec. 11-173. - Rules and regulations. 
    The Public Works Department shall promulgate such rules for conduct and use of the Skateboard Park as the Public Works Department deems reasonably necessary to protect the safety and welfare of the public and the users of the Skateboard Park. A copy of such rules shall be posted at the Skateboard Park and available at Town Hall. Any person who believes a rule is unnecessary or unreasonable may request review of such rule by the Town Council, which shall consider the reasonableness and necessity of such rule at a regularly scheduled meeting. It shall be unlawful for any person within the Skateboard Park to violate any rule posted by the Public Works Department. The rules may include, but shall not be limited to, rules concerning: 
(1)  Devices which may be ridden, operated and used at the Skateboard Park. 
(2)  Requirements concerning wearing a helmet designed for use with a Skateboard. 
(3)  Placement or utilization of additional obstacles or other material (including, but not limited to ramps or jumps) that are not specifically authorized by the Public Works Department. 
(4)  Hours of operation. 
(5)  Use of alcohol, tobacco products or illegal drugs at the Skateboard Park. 
(6)  Use of or possession of glass containers, bottles or other breakable glass products at the Skateboard Park. 
(Ord. 11 §2, 2002; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-174. - Public Works Department to post regulations. 
    The Public Works Department shall post on or near the entrance to the Skateboard Park a sign that clearly summarizes the regulations promulgated by the Public Works Department as set forth in Section 11-173 above. The sign to be posted shall, at a minimum, include the following language: 
WELCOME   
  SKATEBOARD PARK 
This facility has been designed for use by skateboarders and in-line skaters. In order to provide a safe and enjoyable experience, the following warning and regulations have been posted. Please heed the warning and observe all regulations. 
WARNING 
Skateboarding is a hazardous recreational activity. Use of this facility may result in serious injury or death. The Town of Basalt does not assume any responsibility for injuries or death. Each person entering the facility assumes all risks associated with the use of this facility. 
The following rules and regulations have been adopted by the Town of Basalt to protect your safety. It is unlawful to violate these rules and regulations. Any person failing to follow these rules and regulations may be subject to eviction from the park and prosecution pursuant to Section 1-82 of the Basalt Municipal Code. 
SKATEBOARD PARK RULES 
1. USE THIS FACILITY AT YOUR OWN RISK. 
2. HELMETS ARE MANDATORY. 
3. BICYCLES AND SCOOTERS ARE PROHIBITED. 
4. ALCOHOL, TOBACCO AND DRUGS ARE PROHIBITED. 
5. HOURS OF OPERATION ARE 8:00 A.M. TO SUNSET. 
6. ADDING OR MODIFYING RAMPS IS PROHIBITED. 
7. BOTTLES AND GLASS CONTAINERS ARE PROHIBITED. 
8. RESPECT EACH OTHER AND PRIVATE PROPERTY. 
REPORT ALL INJURIES TO THE TOWN OF BASALT, TELEPHONE 927-4701. 
CALL 911 FOR ALL SERIOUS INJURIES OR OTHER MEDICAL EMERGENCIES. 
(Ord. 11 §2, 2002) 
Sec. 11-175. - Eviction. 
    Any person found to be in violation of this Article or a regulation duly posted on the sign required by Section 11-174 above shall be subject to eviction from the Skateboard Park. 
(Ord. 11 §2, 2002) 
Sec. 11-176. - Penalty. 
    The privilege of any person to use the Skateboard Park is expressly conditioned upon compliance by that person with the provisions of this Article. A violation of any provision of this Article may be punishable by a fine as provided by Section 1-82 of this Code. In addition, the person shall be subject to eviction (temporary or permanent) from the Skateboard Park. 
(Ord. 11 §2, 2002) 
Secs. 11-177-11-190. - Reserved. 
CHAPTER 13 - Municipal Utilities 
ARTICLE I - Sewers 

Sec. 13-1. - Use of outside privies prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any building or other structure used for residence, business or other purposes within the Town to provide for said building or to maintain an outside or open closet, vault or privy to be used for the collection or disposal of sewage from said residence or premises. 
(Prior code 50-1) 
Sec. 13-2. - Use of individual sewage disposal devices in sewered areas prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to construct, reconstruct, repair, place or use any septic tank, cesspool, closet, toilet, pool, drain, ditch or other sewage disposal device in or near any residence or other building in the Town, to be used for the purpose of collecting, storing or disposing of sewage from such residence or other building, where such residence or other building shall be located within four hundred (400) feet of any public or district sanitary sewer or lateral. 
(Prior code 50-2) 
Secs. 13-3-13-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II - Water 

Sec. 13-21. - Creation of Water Department. 
    There is hereby created and established a Water Department of the Town for the purposes of the management, maintenance, care and operation of the water system of the Town. 
(Prior code 68-1) 
Sec. 13-22. - Superintendent of Water Department. 
    The Chairman of the Water Committee of the Town Council shall act as Superintendent of the Water Department until the Town Council authorizes another qualified person to fill the position. The Superintendent shall have the immediate control and management of all things pertaining to the water system, and he or she shall perform all acts that may be necessary for the prudent, efficient and economical management and protection of said water system, subject to the approval of the Town Council. The Town Council shall have the power, by motion or resolution, to promulgate rules and regulations relative to the water system of the Town. 
(Prior code 68-2; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 13-23. - Receipts and deposits. 
    The Finance Director shall keep a correct account of receipts, fees charged and materials furnished to users, and collect the same and deposit the proceeds so collected to the credit of the Water System Fund of the Town in accordance with the direction of the Town Council. 
(Prior code 68-3; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 13-24. - Inspections. 
    Any authorized representative of the Water Department shall have the right to enter any property or building where water furnished by the Town is used, for the purpose of making an inspection of pipes, fixtures or appliances and for the further purpose of detecting and eliminating any alteration, connection to or disconnection from meters, wasting of water, improper or unauthorized use of water facility, installation of pipes or fixtures or other improper use of water. Property owners shall make access available during regular working hours to Water Department personnel within fifteen (15) days of notification. Failure to comply shall result in a penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) per quarter being added to owner's water bill and shall allow the Town to charge for the estimated usage of water, both at each billing period. 
(Prior code 68-4; Ord. 22 §1, 1991) 
Sec. 13-25. - Applications for water. 
(a)  Applications for the use of water shall be made to the Finance Director at his or her office. The application must be made by the owner or authorized agent of the property to be benefited, designating the location of the property and stating the purpose for which the water will be used. 
(b)  In furnishing water for any purpose, the Town shall not be responsible for the quality or quantity of water furnished. 
(Prior code 68-5; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 13-26. - Tap charges; fee for turning water on or off. 
(a)  No water service shall be furnished to a consumer until all tap fees and other applicable fees as required herein are paid to the Finance Director. No prepayment for tap fees shall be allowed until all other requirements for the issuance of a building permit have been satisfied. Effective June 1, 2002, and thereafter until amended, and no later than the issuance of a building permit, the applicant for each new water tap shall pay a system improvement fee of five thousand two hundred seventeen dollars ($5,217.00) for each single-family residence and, for buildings other than single-family residences, a fee computed at the rate of five thousand two hundred seventeen dollars ($5,217.00) per EQR, as calculated by reference to the EQR Schedule adopted pursuant to Section 2-381 of this Code. The EQR Schedule may be amended on a periodic basis by resolution of the Town Council. 
(b)  A charge of fifteen dollars ($15.00) shall be made for initiating water service or for terminating or suspending water service for any period. 
(c)  System Improvement Fees (EQRs), as provided for in Subsection (a) above, remain with the property, may not be sold apart from the property upon which the fees were originally paid, and are transferable only to contiguous properties under the same ownership, except upon written approval of the Town Council. 
(Prior code 68-6; Ord. 15 §1, 1992; Ord. 8 §1, 1994; Ord. 7 §2, 1997; Ord. 10 §2, 2001; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 6 §1, 2004) 
Sec. 13-27. - Costs to user; special fees. 
(a)  All necessary pipes, fittings, valves, shutoffs, trenching, backfilling and installation of the tap shall be provided at the expense of the user and under the supervision of the Superintendent. 
(b)  All water service connections and extensions, both within and without the corporate limits of the Town, are subject to special fees as shall be established by the Town Council. 
(Prior code 68-7; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 13-28. - Surcharge on certain water line taps and for the Southside Water Tank. 
(a)  Surcharge C. A surcharge of seven hundred dollars ($700.00) per EQR shall be paid to the Town for each water tap served by the water line extension which is connected to the Town water main at Fiou Lane and Southside Drive and which extends from that location to the site of the RE-1 Basalt High School. Said surcharge shall also apply to any property located south of Fiou Lane and within five hundred (500) feet of said water line extension. Said surcharge shall be designated as Surcharge C. Said Surcharge C shall be reviewed by the Town Council at such time as the Town has collected full reimbursement of funds expended for the construction of said water line extension plus six percent (6%) interest on those funds that would otherwise have been collecting interest for the Town. 
(b)  Surcharge WT. A Southside Water Tank surcharge shall be paid to the Town for each new water tap connected to the Town water system, to be designated as Surcharge WT, as set forth in the Water Fee Schedule adopted pursuant to Section 2-381 of this Code. Surcharge WT shall increase by five percent (5%) annually beginning January 1, 2010, and on each January 1 thereafter, unless such annual increase is suspended or modified by an ordinance of the Town Council. Surcharge WT shall be reviewed by the Town Council at such time as the Town has collected reimbursement of more than sixty percent (60%) of the actual funds expended for the construction of the water tank. 
(Prior code 68-7.5; Ord. 16 §1, 1992; Ord. 36 §1, 1996; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 18 §1, 2008) 
Sec. 13-29. - Size of service tap. 
    No service tap shall be larger than three-fourths (3/4) inch in diameter, unless special permission is given by resolution by the Town Council. 
(Prior code 68-8; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 13-30. - Plumbing standards; permit required. 
    All plumbing, plumbing fixtures, pipes, faucets, tanks, valves and other fixtures by and through which water is supplied or waste water or sewage is used or carried shall be in accordance with such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the Town Council. In no event shall any plumbing be done, except in the case of repairing leaks, without a permit being first issued therefor in the manner prescribed by the Town Council, and such plumbing shall only be installed, altered and repaired in accordance with the minimum standards established by the rules and regulations made by the Uniform Plumbing Code. 
(Prior code 68-9; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 13-31. - Additional service or fixtures. 
(a)  Should the owners or the occupant of any premises desire additional water service or fixtures or a supply of water for a purpose not stated at the time of the original application, permission therefor must first be obtained from the Superintendent of the Department and the ordinary rates as provided for in Section 13-26(a) shall apply, except as provided as follows: Bars and restaurants shall be allowed, on a temporary basis, seasonal outside seating, from April 1 to September 30 of each year, not to exceed one-half (1/2) the interior seating capacity. A permit must be obtained from the Superintendent of the Department, on an annual basis, for a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fee. 
(b)  Any user, owner or occupant of a structure who installs or uses additional fixtures or plumbing services and does not report same, shall be charged at double the ordinary rates for such fixtures or plumbing service for the period of time that such fixtures are in use and remain unreported, in addition to a penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each violation, such amount to be added onto and collected with the water bill at each billing period at each billing period. 
(Prior code 68-10; Ord. 22 §1, 1991) 
Sec. 13-32. - Discontinuance of service. 
    Any user who desires to discontinue the use of water shall file written notice with the Finance Director and pay all current and back charges for water. Any user who desires to reserve the water tap must pay the standby fee set forth in Section 13-47(e). 
(Prior code 68-11; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 13-33. - Separate connections required. 
    Two (2) or more premises shall not be supplied from one (1) service connection to the water main unless specifically authorized by resolution by the Town Council and unless each premises is provided with separate shutoff cocks at the public street right-of-way line. 
(Prior code 68-12; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 13-34. - Service line regulations. 
(a)  No user shall be permitted to construct water line service across lots or buildings to any adjacent premises without the written permission of the Superintendent. 
(b)  Water service to a portion of a developed property, without service to all, shall not be permitted. Service must include all improvements on the property, with no cross connections with any other water supply. 
(c)  Service pipes must be laid at least six (6) feet below the surface of the ground. All water service lines shall be of soft copper "k" pipe designed not to freeze without bleeding. The Town shall not be responsible for the installation of service lines and fixtures. 
(d)  All owners, at their own expense, must keep the service lines from the Town mains and all their appurtenances in good working order and properly protected from frost and other disturbances. 
(e)  No liability shall accrue against the Town for any failure in the supply of water. No reduction in rates shall be made for failure in the supply of water. 
(f)  Specific approval by the Town Council is required for any extension of water service above seven thousand (7,000) feet elevation. 
(Prior code 68-13; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 13-35. - Irrigation hose and nozzle size. 
    Users shall not use any irrigating hose larger than three-fourths (3/4) inch in diameter. Sprinkling without a nozzle or from a nozzle larger than three-sixteenths ( 3/16 ) of an inch opening is forbidden. In addition to the penalty provided for Chapter violations, any violations of this Section may result in revocation of irrigation rights on premises of the person unlawfully irrigating. 
(Prior code 68-14) 
Sec. 13-36. - Waste of water; water use restrictions. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to set forth rules to ensure that enough water will be available in the Town's storage tanks for fire protection and consumer use within the Town limits. 
(b)  Waste of water. Water users shall at all times prevent unnecessary waste of water and keep all water outlets closed when they are not in actual use. Hydrants, faucets, urinals, toilets, showers, bathtubs and all other water outlets shall not be left running for any purpose other than the purpose for which they were designed and intended. It shall be considered a waste of water to operate any sprinkler or other irrigation system which applies water directly to a driveway, sidewalk, street or other concrete or pavement surface or which causes excess water to run in street gutters. Any person found guilty of wasting water within the Town shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Section 1-82 of this Code. In addition, the Town may disconnect the water supply to any premises where water is being wasted; and, in such event, a reconnection fee set forth in Section (d) below shall be charged to the owner of the premises. 
(c)  Water use restrictions. 
(1)  Beginning April 1 and ending October 31, which period of time corresponds to the average season for the irrigation of lawns, gardens and landscaped areas within the Town limits, the Town shall give public notice published in a local newspaper of general circulation within the Town that Stage 1 water restrictions are in effect within the Town. In addition, the Town shall place a yellow placard, measuring not less than one (1) foot on either side, in a window located on the east side of Town Hall. Further, the Town shall provide public notice on the Town's website that Stage 1 water restrictions are in effect. Stage 1 water restrictions shall be as follows: 
a.  Water users whose property address ends in an odd number may irrigate outdoors, wash streets, sidewalks, driveways, patios and other concrete or paved surfaces with water from a hose equipped with a nozzle which completely shuts off the flow of water when the hose is not in use on Wednesdays, Fridays and Sundays only. Water users whose property address ends in an even number may irrigate outdoors, wash streets, sidewalks, driveways, patios and other concrete or paved surfaces with water from a hose equipped with a nozzle which completely shuts off the flow of water when the hose is not in use on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays only. However, the Town Water Operator may exclude newly landscaped areas from the provisions of Stage 1 if the Town Water Operator determines that a failure to exclude would result in the destruction of the newly landscaped area. No outside irrigation whatsoever shall be allowed on Mondays. 
b.  Anyone washing a car, truck, boat, trailer or other vehicle at a destination other than a commercial washing facility shall use a hose equipped with a nozzle which completely shuts off the flow of water when the hose is not in use. 
(2)  When the amount of water available for diversion, storage and distribution in the Town's municipal water system is less than that amount of water determined by the Town's Water Operator to be reasonably necessary and prudent for fire suppression purposes, the Town shall give public notice that Stage 2 water restrictions are in effect within the Town. Such public notice shall consist of placing written announcements in close proximity to the following prominent roadway intersections: Elk Run Drive and Two Rivers Road; Midland Avenue and Two Rivers Road; Homestead Drive and Midland Avenue; Sopris Drive and Midland Avenue; Riverside Drive and Cottonwood Drive; and Homestead Drive and Two Rivers Road. In addition, the Town shall place a red placard, measuring not less than one (1) foot on either side, in the window of the Public Works Department located on the east side of Town Hall. Further, the Town shall provide public notice on the Town's website that Stage 2 water restrictions are in effect. Stage 2 water restrictions shall be concurrent with and in addition to the Stage 1 water restrictions set out above, except to the extent Stage 2 restrictions are more restrictive. Stage 2 water restrictions shall be as follows: 
a.  All outside irrigation with sprinklers, sprinkler systems or other passive or automatic methods, other than drip irrigation systems, shall be prohibited. Water users may irrigate outside only using buckets, watering cans, hand-held hoses or drip irrigation systems only on the days specified in the Stage 1 restrictions; provided, however, that the Town Water Operator may exclude newly landscaped areas from the provisions of Stage 2 if the Town Water Operator determines that a failure to exclude would result in the destruction of the newly landscaped area. 
b.  Washing of cars, trucks, boats, trailers or other vehicles at destinations other than commercial washing facilities shall be prohibited. 
c.  Washing of streets, sidewalks, driveways, patios and other concrete and paved surfaces with water shall be prohibited. 
(3)  When Stage 2 or Stage 1 water restrictions are no longer necessary, the Town shall give public notice that such restrictions are no longer in effect by causing the written notice, website announcement and colored placard which announced those restrictions to be removed. 
(d)  Violations and penalties. 
(1)  When the Town becomes aware of a violation of any provision of this Section, a written notice of the violation shall be posted on the property where the violation occurred, mailed to the person who is regularly billed for water service to that property and mailed to any other person responsible for the violation or its correction. The notice shall describe the violation and order that it be corrected, cured or abated immediately. If the responsible parties do not comply with the order, the Water Department may fine the responsible parties and disconnect water service to the premises where the violation is occurring. 
(2)  A fine of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be assessed for the first violation of Stage 1 water use restrictions under Subparagraphs (c)(1)a and b during the calendar year. 
(3)  A fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be assessed for the second and all subsequent violations of Stage 1 water use restrictions under Subparagraphs (c)(1)a and b during the calendar year. 
(4)  A fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be assessed for each and every violation of Stage 2 water use restrictions under Subparagraphs (c)(2)a through c during the calendar year. 
(5)  A fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be paid for the reconnection of any water service disconnected for waste of water under Subsection (b). 
(6)  A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid for the reconnection of any service disconnected for violation of a Stage 1 water use restriction under Subsection (c)(1). 
(7)  A fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid for the reconnection of any service disconnected for violation of a Stage 2 water use restriction under Subsection (c)(2). 
(Prior code 68-15; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 08 §1) 
Sec. 13-37. - Supply of water to others. 
    No occupant of any building or premises which receives water from the Town shall supply water to any other premises or user. The water service may be shut off for any violation of this Section. A fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) may be assessed before restoration of water service. 
(Prior code 68-16) 
Sec. 13-38. - Use of water outlets during fire alarms. 
    During any fire or alarms of fire, the use of all outlets where a constant flow of water is maintained is forbidden, except for extinguishing said fire. 
(Prior code 68-17) 
Sec. 13-39. - Water use outside corporate limits. 
    Use of water outside the corporate limits of the Town shall be subject to the paramount rights of users within the corporate limits, and in the event that there shall be insufficient water to provide for users both within and without the corporate limits of the Town, the Town Council may reduce, curtail or shut off water to users outside the corporate limitsof the Town during periods of water shortage or scarcity. 
(Prior code 68-18; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 13-40. - Repair and extension of mains. 
    The Town reserves the right, upon reasonable notice, to shut off its mains to make repairs or extensions or for any other purpose. No liability shall accrue against the Town for such shutoff, nor shall any claim result from shutting off water service. 
(Prior code 68-19) 
Sec. 13-41. - Metered service; separate connections required for duplexes. 
(a)  All water service shall be metered at the expense of the property owner. 
(b)  All duplexes, approval for which is obtained and construction of which is begun after November 9, 1983, shall be required to have two (2) separate service lines, curb stops, water taps and water meters, one (1) servicing each unit therein. 
(Prior code 68-20) 
Sec. 13-42. - Water bills: payment, penalties, rebates. 
(a)  When due. 
(1)  All charges as provided for in this Section shall be billed quarterly on January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1; in arrears for gallons used charges and in advance for the base rate. The January 1 billing may be for the actual usage or for the estimated gallons used, at the Town's discretion; and the April 1 billing shall be adjusted for two (2) quarters of actual gallons used. 
(2)  Water bills may be paid either quarterly or monthly. If bills are paid monthly, one-third ( 1 /3) of the bill is due by the twentieth day of each month in the quarter. 
(3)  Water bills may be paid monthly in advance of the billing in any amount at the office of the Finance Director. 
(b)  If such charges are not paid as provided in Subsection (a), such amount shall automatically become delinquent and shall bear interest at six percent (6%) per quarter (twenty-four percent [24%] annual percentage rate) until paid in full. 
(c)  If a water bill becomes delinquent over ninety (90) days, and no arrangements have been made with the Finance Director to pay the bill, the water service shall be shut off upon ten (10) days' written notice to the property owner. In addition to the water service charge, interest and turn-off fee as stated in Subsection (b), reasonable collection costs shall be charged. No one other than an agent of the Town shall turn water service off or on except in an emergency. 
(d)  There shall be no reduction in rates or charges or any rebates for water use for less than the period established for each class of user. 
(Prior code 68-21; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 13-43. - Delinquent water rent. 
    If for any cause any water rent shall become delinquent, the water service shall be shut off. In no case shall water service be turned on to the same property until all delinquencies and all other fees shall have been paid in full. Change of ownership or occupancy shall not affect the application of this Section. This Section shall include water users within and without the corporate limits of the Town. 
(Prior code 68-22) 
Sec. 13-44. - Water accounts kept in name of owner. 
    All accounts for water service shall be kept in the name of the owner of the property and not in the name of any tenant. The owner only, or his or her legally authorized agent, shall be held responsible for water rents. 
(Prior code 68-23) 
Sec. 13-45. - Unpaid water rents a lien. 
    All water rents and rates shall be a charge and lien upon the premises to which the water is delivered from the date the same become due and until paid, and the owner of every building, premises, lot or house shall be liable for all water delivered to or taken and used upon his or her premises, which lien and liability may be enforced by the Town by action at law or suit to enforce said lien. In case the tenant in possession of said premises or building shall pay the water rent or rate, it shall relieve his or her landlord from such obligation or lien, but the Town shall not be required to look to any person whatsoever other than the owner for further payment of water rents herein provided. 
(Prior code 68-24) 
Sec. 13-46. - Unlawful acts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use or take water from the Town waterworks without a permit therefor, to make any fraudulent representation for the purpose of obtaining water, to take or use water from the waterworks for a different purpose or purposes from that provided in the customer's permit, to willfully or unreasonably waste water, or to violate any of the provisions set forth in this Article. Each and every unlawful act shall constitute a violation of this Article and be punishable as provided for violations generally. 
(Prior code 68-25) 
Sec. 13-47. - Water rates. 
(a)  Basic rate . Except for those users set forth in the Subsections below, the charge for water service within and outside of the Town shall consist of two (2) parts, base charge and gallons used charge. The amount of such base charges and gallons-used charges shall be set on a periodic basis by ordinance of the Town Council. 
(b)  Deleted. 
(c)  Governmental or nonprofit entities requiring processed water. The availability of service and the rate structure for governmental entities requiring processed water shall be determined by the Town Council. 
(d)  Reduced rates for certain persons. 
(1)  Upon written request to the Town Manager, who shall make such decision, by the owner of a residential unit showing compliance with the requirements of this Subsection, the charge for water service within the Town to such unit shall be thirty-four dollars ($34.00) per quarter and the charge for water service outside the Town limits shall be sixty-five dollars ($65.00) per quarter. Gallons used will be calculated at the rates referenced in Section 13-47(a). The requirements for receiving such a reduced rate are as follows: 
a.  The applicant must be a resident of the Town for not less than thirty-two (32) consecutive days or an outside-of-Town-limits water user for not less than thirty-two (32) consecutive days. 
b.  The applicant must be the owner of the property or the person obligated to pay for services and a resident of the property for which the reduced rate is requested. Compliance with this Section must be certified annually by completing an affidavit included with the January billing every year. 
c.  The applicant must be sixty-two (62) years of age or older or have a permanent disability preventing the person from having a regular source of income. An affidavit from a physician, the State or the County must be submitted for a rate reduction due to a disability. 
(2)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Town Manager may appeal said decision to the Town Council upon written notice of appeal submitted to the Town Manager within ten (10) days from the date of the decision by the Town Manager, which notice shall state the basis of such appeal. The appeal shall be decided by the Town Council within thirty (30) days from the date said notice is submitted, and said decision shall be final. 
(e)  Disconnected tap service fees. Taps to which water service has been disconnected shall be charged a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per quarter. Failure to pay this charge as provided in Section 13-42 will result in the loss of the tap. In order to reinstate service to that location, a new tap fee is required as per Section 13-26(a). 
(f)  Bulk water rates. Water may be purchased in bulk from the Town for a fee of six dollars ($6.00) per one thousand (1,000) gallons, provided that a permit has been secured from the Water Superintendent and it is in the possession of the user. The permit for such bulk water usage shall be five dollars ($5.00) plus a four-hundred-dollar deposit to cover plant damages (including fire hydrants). The Water Superintendent must be notified each time water is purchased in bulk. 
(Prior code 68-26; Ord. 2 §1, 1991; Ord. 7 §3, 1997; Ord. 10 §3, 2001; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 4, §§1, 2, 2004; Ord. 09 §1, 2005) 
Sec. 13-48. - Cross-connections. 
    The Water Department shall prepare and provide for approval of the Town Council by ordinance a cross-connection manual. Such cross-connection manual may be amended from time to time by ordinance of the Town Council on recommendation from the Water Department. The Water Department will be responsible for enforcement of the cross-connection manual, which shall comply with applicable regulations and requirements of the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. A copy of the cross-connection manual shall be available on request at Town Hall or from the Water Department to all members of the public on payment of reasonable copy expenses. 
(Ord. 25 §2, 2004) 
Secs. 13-49-13-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III - Pollution 

Sec. 13-61. - Prohibited acts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Place, dump, throw, discharge or deposit any substance or material which will, in any manner, pollute or contaminate the waters of Spring Creek (Basalt Springs) or Lucksinger Creek or their tributaries on Basalt Mountain around or within a distance of five (5) miles above the intake points of the water utility of the Town. 
(2)  Allow any polluting or contaminating substance to remain upon his or her premises in such position that such substance or the drainage therefrom may be carried by natural causes into the water of Spring Creek (Basalt Springs) or Lucksinger Creek or their tributaries on Basalt Mountain around or within a distance of five (5) miles above the intake point of the water utility of the Town. 
(Prior code 68-27) 
Secs. 13-62-13-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV - Water Rights Dedication 

Sec. 13-81. - Title. 
    This Article shall be known and may be cited as the "Water Rights Dedication Ordinance of 1981." 
(Prior code 68-28) 
Sec. 13-82. - Intent and purpose. 
(a)  It is the intent and purpose of this Article to further the goals of the Water Department of the Town by requiring the dedication of water rights prior to the extension of treated or raw water service to new customers and to thereby assure an adequate and stable supply of water to the Town service area; to prevent the abandonment of water rights to the detriment of the Town; to ensure the financial stability of the Town water utility; and to promote the general welfare of the public. 
(b)  This Article, in part, provides a supplemental requirement for annexation pursuant to state annexation statutes, and is not be construed as altering, modifying, eliminating or replacing any requirements set forth in those statutes. 
(Prior code 68-29) 
Sec. 13-83. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Article, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Annexation is the act of attaching, adding, joining or uniting a parcel of land to the legal entity known as the "Town of Basalt." 
    Appurtenant means belonging to, accessory or incident to, adjunct, appended or annexed to. 
    Conveyance of water rights means the legal process by which legal title to the water rights to be dedicated is transferred to the Town by appropriate deed, stock assignment or otherwise. 
    Dedication means an appropriation of an interest in land or water to some public use, made by the owner, and accepted for such use by or on behalf of the public. 
    Equivalent Residential Unit ( EQR ) is a number related to the volume of water consumptively used by a single-family residential unit housing a statistical average of three and five-tenths (3.5) persons having not more than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of irrigated lawn or garden; that water consumption being two-tenths (0.2) acre feet per year. The consumptive use of all other uses is considered to bear the same ratio to the consumptive use of an average single-family residence as the EQR value assigned to that use in the table of EQRs in Section 13-47 bears to the EQR value assigned to the single-family residence in the table of EQRs. 
    Extensions of service means any extension of the Town water utility for which a tapping charge is assessed. 
    Historical use affidavit is a document which sets forth at least the following information concerning the water rights proposed for dedication: 
a.  The names and addresses of the owners of the water rights proposed for dedication; 
b.  A legal description of the land to be annexed, subdivided, replatted or provided with water service; 
c.  The total number of acres to be annexed or provided with water service; 
d.  The total number of acres presently being irrigated and/or intended to remain in irrigation; 
e.  A copy of all decrees concerning all water rights appurtenant to the property and/or all water rights proposed for dedication; 
f.  A copy of any legal decree or judgment which affects the title of those water rights entered since the owner received title to the water rights appurtenant to the property and/or proposed for dedication; 
g.  A copy of the documents by which the owner received title to the water rights appurtenant to the property and/or proposed for dedication; 
h.  A copy of all diversion records of the water rights proposed for dedication; 
i.  The owner's statement as to the historic use of the water rights appurtenant to the property and/or proposed for dedication. 
    Lease means any grant for permissive use which results in the creation of a landlord-tenant relationship. 
    Plat means an accurately surveyed map or chart of a piece of land subdivided into lots with streets, alleys, roads and other such avenues of transportation delineated thereon and drawn to scale. 
    Replat means to make a change in the original plat. 
    Subdivide means to separate a tract of land into two (2) or more lots, tracts, parcels, sites, separate interest in common, condominium interest or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership, for building or other development, or for street use by reference to such subdivision or a recorded plat thereof. 
    Sufficient legal priority means that the water rights proposed for dedication may reasonably be expected to provide a dependable water supply throughout the season of use in the amount for which they are decreed. In making this determination, factors to be considered shall include, but not by way of limitation, the adjudication date and appropriation date of the water rights, the decreed uses, the historic use of the water under the decree, the physical flow available and the administration practices of the office of the State Engineer. 
    Transfer of water rights means the conveyance of legal title to water rights to the Town in addition to referring to all actions required under the laws of the State to be brought in the Water Court to ensure that the dedication requirement is fulfilled. Such action may include, but not by way of limitation, a change in the type, place or time of use, a change in the point of diversion, a change from a fixed point of diversion to alternate or supplemental points of diversion, a change from alternate or supplemental points of diversion to a fixed point of diversion, a change in the place of storage, a change from direct application to storage and subsequent application, a change from storage and subsequent application to direct application, a change from a fixed placed of storage to alternate places of storage, a change from alternate places of storage, or any combination of such changes. Transfer of water rights includes transfer of conditional as well as absolute water rights. 
    Water rights means a decreed right to use, in accordance with its priority, a certain portion of the waters of the State by reason of the appropriation of the same. 
(Prior code 68-30)Sec. 13-84. Dedication requirements. 
(a)  The basic dedication requirement shall be the transfer to the Town of all direct flow and storage water rights appurtenant to the land to be annexed, subdivided, replatted or provided with water service. The required dedication shall be made prior to the approval requested. 
(b)  A minimum dedication requirement shall be calculated in accordance with Subsection (c) of this Section on forms provided by the Town Manager. Such forms shall be accompanied by a historical use affidavit. For those persons whose compliance with Subsection (c) of this Section results in total EQR of greater than thirty (30) EQR, no historical use affidavit shall be required, but an engineering analysis, acceptable to the Town, of the historic use of water rights proposed for dedication shall be required. 
(c)  The minimum dedication requirement shall be two-tenths (0.2) acre foot per year of historic consumptive use of a water right of sufficient legal priority for each EQR calculated pursuant to Section 13-26. For water uses not calculated under the table of EQRs, the basic requirement shall be the quantity of water to be required ultimately in the satisfaction of those uses as contemplated by the new user. 
(d)  The dedication requirements shall be satisfied by the person seeking approval of annexation, subdivision, replatting or the extension of municipally treated water service, whether or not that person will be the ultimate user. Such person shall satisfy either the basic dedication requirement or the minimum dedication requirement, whichever is greater in quantity. 
(e)  Water rights shall be dedicated so as to enable the Town to divert a quantity of water at any point of diversion it may determine, which will allow for the total consumption by the Town of at least the quantities set forth in Subsection (b) hereof. 
(Prior code 68-31; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 13-85. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The Town Manager shall have the authority to substitute or waive any conditions or requirements deemed necessary to meet the purposes of this Section. 
(b)  This Article shall not apply to a single-family dwelling unit seeking new municipal-treated water service where the person seeking such service is the owner of the real estate to be served and only one (1) dwelling unit will be located upon the real estate. 
(c)  This Article shall not apply to the extension of new municipal-treated water service or raw water service for which the dedication requirements have been previously complied with by any person. 
(d)  The Town Council may elect in its discretion to accept cash in lieu of all or part of the water rights dedication requirement. The amount of such cash in lieu shall be adequate for the Town to purchase water rights which would be acceptable for dedication to the Town under the standards set forth in this Article. Such amount shall reflect the cost of acquiring acceptable water rights in the Roaring Fork River or its tributaries and shall be adjusted at the Town Council's discretion to reflect changing market conditions. 
(Prior code 68-32; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 13-86. - Dedication of water rights for open space. 
    The owner of any property proposed to be annexed or subdivided, who dedicates property to the Town to be used for open space, park, aesthetic, recreation or irrigation purposes, shall also comply with the provision of this Article for the property to be dedicated. The minimum dedication requirement for open space property shall be one and five-tenths (1.5) acre feet of historic consumptive use of a water right of sufficient legal priority for each acre or fraction thereof so dedicated. 
(Prior code 68-33) 
Sec. 13-87. - Procedure. 
(a)  In accordance with the basic requirements set forth in Section 13-84, the Town Manager shall determine, after consultation with a person or persons skilled in the knowledge of water rights, whether the water rights proposed for dedication pursuant to the provisions of this Article will be of sufficient priority under the laws of this State to ensure the Town's ability to meet the service demands of the new user. This determination will be aided by a historic use affidavit or engineering report which shall be provided by the new user. 
(b)  The Town shall have the right, in its sole discretion, to accept or reject any water rights proposed for dedication pursuant to the provisions of this Article, which the Town Manager has determined do not have sufficient legal priority. 
(c)  The new user shall dedicate the water rights determined by the Town by filing with the Town Manager an offer thereof. It is the intent of this Article that no water service shall be extended to a new user until the agreed-to water rights have been dedicated to the Town; however, if there are matters pending resolution in the Water Court concerning the water rights to be dedicated, or if there is another delay beyond the control of the new user, the Town Manager shall have the discretion to approve the extension of such water service prior to the dedication of water rights to the Town by the new user or person seeking approval of annexation, subdivision or replatting, new extension of municipal treated water service or extension of raw water service which will thereafter be used for domestic purposes. 
(Prior code 68-34; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 13-88. - Agricultural and open space property. 
    If the owner of the property proposed to be annexed or subdivided desires to retain the land or any portion thereof in agricultural production or as open space prior to development, he or she shall be permitted to lease back, on an annual basis, and for irrigation, aesthetic and recreational purposes only, the water rights transferred pursuant to this Article. The terms of the lease shall be negotiated with the Town Manager. 
(Prior code 68-35; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Secs. 13-89-13-100. - Reserved. 
CHAPTER 15 - Annexations 
ARTICLE I - Annexation Procedures 

Sec. 15-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Chapter is to establish a procedure to bring land under the jurisdiction of the Town in compliance with the Colorado Municipal Annexation Act of 1965, as amended. 
(Ord. 22 §1, 1991) 
Sec. 15-2. - Responsibilities of applicant. 
    In addition to other duties imposed upon all applicants by this Code and the Colorado Municipal Annexation Act of 1965, as amended, all applicants shall have the following responsibilities: 
(1)  The applicant is responsible for having a representative at all meetings where the request is reviewed. 
(2)  The applicant shall consult with the Planning Department to discuss any special conditions pertaining to the annexation. 
(Ord. 22 §1, 1991) 
Sec. 15-3. - Preliminary steps. 
(a)  Procedure. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the presentation of any annexation petition to the Town Council, the applicant shall submit to the Town the annexation petition, a minimum of thirty-five (35) copies of the annexation map, a notarized agreement for reimbursement, all supportive information required by this Article and fees in an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. 
(1)  The Town shall review all documents submitted for completeness and accuracy. 
(2)  If all documents are complete and accurate, the Town Clerk shall present the annexation petition and a resolution initiating annexation proceedings to the Town Council which shall thereafter establish a date for a public hearing. Upon the establishment of a public hearing date, the Town Clerk shall give appropriate notice in accordance with the Colorado Municipal Annexation Act of 1965, as amended, and shall specifically direct copies of the annexation petition and the resolution initiating the annexation procedure by certified mail to the Board of County Commissioners and to the County Attorney of the county wherein the territory is located. Copies of the annexation petition and the resolution initiating the annexation procedure shall also be sent by certified mail to any school district or special district having territory within the annexed area. These copies shall be sent at least twenty-five (25) days prior to the public hearing. 
(3)  Upon acceptance of the annexation petition by the Town Council, the Planning Department may furnish to the following entities copies of the annexation map and the petition. The Planning Department may submit copies of the annexation map and the petition to additional interested entities as determined by the Planning Department in its sole discretion. Such entities shall be advised by the Planning Department of the scheduled hearing date and shall further be notified that any objections to the annexation and petition must be submitted at or prior to the hearing. 
a.  Telephone company. 
b.  Electric company. 
c.  Gas company. 
d.  Town Engineer. 
e.  Fire District. 
f.  Sanitation District. 
g.  State Highway Department. 
(4)  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the annexation map and all required supportive information and shall submit a written recommendation to the Town Council. 
(b)  Annexation map. All annexation maps shall be made with an engineer's scale, minimum scale to be one (1) inch represents one hundred (100) feet, and shall be on a reproducible medium with outer dimensions of twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches. The annexation map shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The date of preparation, the scale and a symbol designating true north. 
(2)  The name of the annexation. 
(3)  The names, addresses and phone numbers of the applicant and the firm or person responsible for preparing the annexation map. 
(4)  The legal description. 
(5)  Distinction of the boundary that is contiguous to the Town and the length of same. 
(6)  Lot and block numbers if the area is already platted. 
(7)  Existing and proposed easements and rights-of-way. 
(8)  Existing and requested zoning and acreage of each requested zone. 
(9)  Ownership of all parcels within and adjacent to the annexation. 
(10)  Appropriate certification blocks as directed by the Planning Department. 
(11)  Any additional information required by the Colorado Revised Statutes. 
(c)  Required supportive information. The Town may require any of the following: 
(1)  Supplemental mapping. All supplemental mapping shall be made with an engineer's scale, minimum scale to be one (1) inch represents one hundred (100) feet, and shall be on a reproducible medium with outer dimensions of twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches. The supplemental mapping shall contain the following information: 
a.  The date of preparation, the scale and a symbol designating true north. 
b.  The name of the annexation. 
c.  The names, addresses and phone numbers of the applicant and the firm or person responsible for preparing the mapping. 
d.  Existing and proposed easements and rights-of-way. 
e.  Block numbers and lot numbers with approximate dimensions. 
f.  Proposed gross and net residential density. 
g.  Existing watercourses with adequate easements for flood control. 
h.  Designation of all public sites to be reserved and dedicated. 
i.  Existing two (2) foot contours. 
j.  Appropriate certification blocks as directed by the Planning Department. 
(2)  Supportive information. The following supportive information may be required with the annexation map and petition: 
a.  Master Plan. 
b.  Soils description and limitation. 
c.  Preliminary utility plan. 
d.  Mailing addresses of all property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the annexation. 
e.  Affidavit concerning the amount and historical use of all water rights owned. 
f.  Vicinity map with one and one-half (11/2) mile radius, at a minimum scale of one (1) inch represents two thousand (2,000) feet. 
g.  Statement on community need for proposed annexation and zoning. 
h.  For all annexations in excess of ten (10) acres, the applicant shall obtain from the school district governing the area to be annexed a statement of the effect of the annexation upon the school district, including an estimate of the number of students generated by the proposed annexation and the capital construction required to educate such students. 
i.  Any other information deemed appropriate by the Planning Department. 
(Ord. 22 §1, 1991; Ord. 12 §B34, 2003; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 15-4. - Annexation impact report. 
(a)  For all annexations in excess of ten (10) acres, the Town shall prepare an impact report regarding the proposed annexation not less than twenty-five (25) days before the date of the annexation hearing. One (1) copy of the impact report shall be filed with the Board of County Commissioners governing the area proposed to be annexed within five (5) days thereafter. The preparation and filing of the annexation impact report may be waived upon approval of the Board of County Commissioners governing the area proposed to be annexed. 
(b)  The annexation impact report shall include the following: 
(1)  A map or maps of the Town and adjacent territory showing the following information: 
a.  The present and proposed boundaries of the Town in the vicinity of the proposed annexation. 
b.  The present streets, major trunk water lines, sewer interceptors and outfalls, other utility lines and ditches and the proposed extension of such streets and utility lines in the vicinity of the proposed annexation. 
c.  The existing and proposed land use pattern in the areas to be annexed. 
(2)  A copy of any draft or final pre-annexation agreement, if available. 
(3)  A statement of the Town's plans for extending or providing for municipal services within the area to be annexed. 
(4)  A statement of the Town's plans for the financing of municipal services to be extended into the area to be annexed. 
(5)  A statement identifying all existing districts within the area to be annexed. 
(6)  A statement of the effect of the annexation upon the school district governing the area to be annexed, as is more fully set forth in Section 15-3(c)(2)(h) of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 22 §1, 1991) 
Sec. 15-5. - Consideration of annexation ordinance. 
    Upon the submission of documentation in accordance with this Chapter and upon compliance with the notice and hearing requirements as set forth in the Colorado Municipal Annexation Act of 1965, as amended, the Town Council may consider the approval of an ordinance annexing the subject property to the Town. In the event the Town Council considers and disapproves such ordinance, no similar request may be heard for a period of one (1) year from the date of any election denying the annexation. 
(Ord. 22 §1, 1991; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 15-6. - Final submission. 
    In the event the Town Council approves an annexation ordinance, the applicant shall submit to the Planning Department two (2) Mylars of the final annexation map and two (2) Mylars of the supplemental mapping within ten (10) days of the effective date of the ordinance. 
(Ord. 22 §1, 1991; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 15-7. - Annexation agreement and policies. 
(a)  Agreement. Simultaneous with any ordinance approving the annexation of property into the Town boundaries, the owner of the annexed property shall enter an annexation agreement upon terms and conditions approved by the Town Council, which annexation agreement shall describe in reasonable detail the allowable development on the property and shall provide, at a minimum, for the payment of the fees described below. 
(b)  Fees. The annexation agreement for any property annexed into the Town shall require, at a minimum, payment of the following fees: 
(1)  All fees required to be paid pursuant to other provisions of this Code. 
(2)  Pedestrian and transportation impact fees. These fees shall be based on the costs experienced by the Town to repair, replace, construct, operate and maintain streets, sidewalks and trails in and through the Town on a per residential unit and per square foot of commercial space basis. Said fees shall be based on costs of improvements within an annexation area or development parcel and such cost necessary to upgrade or connect existing facilities to the annexation area or development parcel. These fees shall be established by resolution of the Town Council each year. Failure in any year of the Town Council to establish such amount shall not invalidate this provision. Said fees may in the Town's discretion include costs of improvements generated outside the Town boundaries subject to the appropriate regional studies and intergovernmental agreements with adjoining jurisdictions. 
(3)  Special improvement fees in the amount of one dollar ($1.00) per square foot of floor area of any building, excluding the floor area of basements. 
(c)  Affordable housing. In order to avoid potential jurisdiction shopping between the Town and the Counties in which the Town is located, the Town Council may require that any new development which occurs on property annexed to the Town provide affordable housing in accordance with the most demanding (in terms of bedrooms, units, land or cash-in-lieu thereof) of the requirements of either this Code or the County Land Use Regulations of the County from which the property is annexed. 
(d)  School land dedication. In addition to school land dedication requirements contained in this Code, the Town may require at annexation additional land dedications based on the Master Plan recommendations, concurrency regulations, school district facilities use and expansion plans, and other related studies of school district and general educational needs of the residents of the Town. 
(e)  Master Plan. Any petition for annexation filed with the Town under this Chapter shall include a development plan for the property, which at a minimum shall demonstrate that the proposed development of the property is in general conformance with the Master Plan as then in effect. Approval of any annexation shall require a finding by the Town Council that the proposed development for the property is in general conformance with the Master Plan as then in effect. 
(Ord. 1 §B, 1999; Ord. 17 §1, 1999; Ord. 31 §4, 2000; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 15-8. - Town-owned property. 
    This Article shall not apply to property when the Town is the sole owner of such property. In such case, the requirements and procedures for annexation of municipally owned property set forth in the Municipal Annexation Act, as amended, shall govern and control the annexation of such property. 
(Ord. 4 §B1, 2003) 
Secs. 15-9-15-20. - Reserved. 
CHAPTER 16 - Zoning 
ARTICLE I - General Provisions 

Sec. 16-1. - Purpose. 
    This Chapter is adopted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, convenience, order, prosperity and general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the Town, by the lessening of congestion in the streets and roads; securing safety from fire and other dangers; providing adequate light and air; classification of land uses and the distribution of land development and utilization; protection of the value of land and buildings; protection of urban and nonurban development; and providing for the best uses of lands within the Town. 
(Prior code 70-1) 
Sec. 16-2. - Statutory authority. 
    This Chapter is authorized by Section 31-23-301, C.R.S., and is hereby declared to be in accordance with all provisions of these statutes. 
(Prior code 70-2) 
Sec. 16-3. - Word usage. 
(a)  The word lot includes plot or parcel . 
(b)  The phrase used for shall be construed to include arranged for , designed for , intended for , maintained for and occupied for . 
(c)  Words used in the singular number include the plural, and the words in the plural include the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(d)  The word shall is always mandatory. The word may is permissive. 
(Prior code 70-3) 
Sec. 16-4. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this Chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined and shall have the following meanings unless it shall be apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
    Accessory building or structure is a building or structure on the same lot with the building or structure housing the principal use but housing a use customarily incidental and subordinate to and customarily associated with the principal use. 
    Accessory use is a use customarily associated with but subordinate to the principal use on the same zone lot. 
    Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated, slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one (1) time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult bookstore, adult video store or adult novelty store means a business having as a substantial and significant portion of its stock and trade, revenues, space or advertising budget resulting from the sale, rental or viewing of one (1) or more of the following: books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides or other visual representations which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar business, whether alcoholic beverages are served or not, which regularly features: 
a.  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas; or 
b.  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult video store, adult novelty store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, massage parlor, sexual encounter establishment or other similar business and includes any of the following: 
a.  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
b.  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
c.  The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
d.  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
    The definition of sexually oriented business shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or other similar professional person licensed by the State engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy. 
    Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar business which offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration and provides patrons live performances characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic or electronic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and which advertises the availability of this sexually oriented type of material by means of a sign visible from the public right-of-way, or by means of any off-premises advertising, including but not limited to newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or television, or which offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time less than ten (10) hours. 
    Adult motion picture theater means a business where films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic or electronic reproductions are regularly shown in a room or area designed to accommodate a minimum of twenty (20) viewers and which films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic or electronic reproductions are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar business which regularly features live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas. 
    Alley means a public right-of-way used primarily as a service or secondary means of access to abutting property. 
    Apartment means a room or suite of rooms in a multiple dwelling used or designed for occupancy by a single family. 
    Attainable housing shall mean dwelling units which are not deed-restricted but which are designed to be within the financial ability of many residents and workers in the Town of Basalt. 
    Bed and breakfast establishment means any principal building containing five (5) or fewer guest rooms where rent is paid for occupancy by guests for periods of less than thirty (30) days. 
    Brewpub/distillery means a facility licensed as a brewpub or distillery by the state that annually manufactures and sells in the facility not more than five thousand (5,000) barrels of beer, or not more than twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons of distilled spirits, only for consumption on the premises. 
    Buildable area means the portion of a lot, parcel or tract of land, excluding all required yard areas, where a building could be located in accordance with provisions of this Chapter. 
    Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the housing or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind. 
    Building envelope means the two-dimensional space within which a building is proposed to be located on a lot, parcel or tract of land. 
    Building height means the height of a structure which shall be measured vertically at any cross section of the building from the original grade to the highest point of a flat roof or parapet, or to the mid point of the highest gable of a pitched roof, at that cross section. The cross section shall be taken through the building on an axis generally parallel to the prevailing topographic contour lines, as determined by the Town staff. In cases where due to building design, topography or orientation of the building on the site, this definition does not yield a clear indication of building height, Town staff may require additional information and elevations, and may apply the criteria for the highest point of a pitched roof where no mid point of a pitched roof can be established along a specific cross section. In circumstances where it is necessary to raise the original grade to comply with Town-imposed requirements associated with flood plain regulations or environmentally sensitive areas, building height shall bemeasured vertically from the finished grade instead of the original grade. Original grade shall mean existing grade at the time of the applicant's purchase of the property or final grade as approved by the Town in a development review process. A building permit review process without other review pursuant to Chapter 16 or 17 is not a development review process for purposes of the prior sentence. The purpose of measuring height from "original" grade is to prevent a property owner from raising the grade before construction to increase the height of the building. Therefore, the Building Official shall have authority and discretion to determine original grade if it appears to the Building Official in his sole discretion that the grade of the property has been altered by the owner or a prior owner of the property. 
    Business offices means a building, or portion thereof, used for the transaction of business services and products, including real estate sales office, travel or adventure agency, advertising or marketing agency, insurance agency, computer services and consulting, event planner and similar businesses. 
    Church means a church or place of religious worship and institution that people regularly attend to participate in or hold religious services, meetings and other activities. The term church shall not carry a secular connotation and shall include buildings in which the religious services of any denomination are held. 
    Club means a membership organization, including a lodge catering exclusively to members and their guests and whose facilities are limited to meeting, eating and recreational uses and whose activities are not conducted principally for monetary gain. 
    Community center means a facility available for public activities, including but not limited to events, performances, entertainment, celebrations, meeting rooms, public classrooms and indoor gardens. The space is intended to be available for use by the public. However, the space may be rented by one (1) or more parties at any time. 
    Condominium hotel (or condotel or condo-hotel) means a hotel or motel operated under a condominium form of ownership. A condominium hotel must satisfy the following requirements: 
a.  Be advertised and marked with signage as a hotel or motel and be subject to the complete control and management of a single hotel or motel operator for operation as a hotel or motel. 
b.  Be created, sold and maintained under documentation, including condominium declaration, bylaws, sales brochures and pre-construction agreements, in form and content approved by the Town Attorney that adequately discloses and ensures that the facility will in all respects be permanently and exclusively operated as a hotel or motel and will not be occupied as a dwelling. 
c.  Except for dwelling units to be used by a manager or employees or any deed-restricted affordable housing, condominium hotels shall contain only individual sleeping units that are sold as a condominium hotel unit and are permanently dedicated to rental to the public for transient occupancy. Individual sleeping units may contain small kitchen facilities. 
d.  Be managed to ensure that: 
(i)  At least fifty percent (50%) of the units are available for rental to the general public at all times; and 
(ii)  That no unit owner may occupy their unit for more than sixty (60) days out of a calendar year; and 
(iii)  That no owner may occupy their unit more than twenty-nine (29) consecutive days; and 
(iv)  That no owner may store an automobile on site when they are not occupying a unit. 
e.  Contain and maintain standardized furniture, furnishings and decor in all individual sleeping units. 
    If a proposed development does not meet requirements a. through e. above, the Town Council may determine that a proposed development nevertheless qualifies as a condominium hotel if it finds that the proposed development, together with any related covenants, conditions, restrictions, or agreements between the developer and the Town, will ensure that at least the same number or a greater number of the condominium hotel units will be occupied for the same or a greater number of days each year as a condominium hotel that meets all of the requirements in subsections a. through e. above. 
    Construction waste compacting facility means any business involved in the separation and compaction of construction waste materials including sheet rock/dry wall, concrete, wood products, metal products (including nails, fittings and plumbing elements), carpet, tile, insulation material, roofing material and plastic fittings. Construction waste shall not include organic material, hazardous or chemical materials, medical waste, liquid petroleum products or any material which ferments or which biodegrades over a short period of time. Such facilities are prohibited from stockpiling materials for longer than two (2) business days. These facilities are to comply with all applicable code sections for the IN zone, including Section 16-24, Supplemental requirements for the Industrial Zone District, along with all other applicable state and federal regulations. 
    Day care means a facility which is maintained for a whole or part of a day for the care of two (2) or more persons not related to the owners, operator or manager thereof, which facility is operated with compensation for such care. Care provided by the caretaker is for more than two (2) consecutive days on a regular basis. A small day care home is for less than seven (7) individuals. A large day care home is for seven (7) or more individuals. 
    Dental clinic means a professional business providing general or special dental services employing three (3) or more dentists. 
    Dental office means a professional office providing general or special dental services employing fewer than three (3) dentists. 
    Developable area means the area, measured in square feet, included within the boundaries of a lot or parcel, measured on a horizontal plane upon which the boundaries have been vertically projected, reduced by the following exclusions: 
a.  The developable area calculation shall exclude the entire width of the right-of-way or easements for streets and alleys which have been or are to be dedicated for public use and the entire width of the right-of-way or easements for private roads, except for any private drive that serves a single dwelling unit. 
b.  The developable area of a lot that is adjacent to the Roaring Fork or Fryingpan River shall be calculated by excluding that portion of the lot lying below the line highest in elevation on the shore established by the fluctuations of the water indicated by physical characteristics, such as a clear natural line impressed on the bank; changes in the character of soil; destruction of terrestrial vegetation; the presence of litter and debris; or other appropriate means that consider the characteristics of surrounding areas. 
c.  The developable area calculation shall also exclude slopes of thirty percent (30%) or greater to the extent required by the formulas in Section 16-187(d). 
    Development means the use, alteration or disturbance of land, land uses, or improvements to land, including but not limited to: 
a.  The creation, division, alteration or elimination of lots; 
b.  Mining and drilling (except to obtain soil samples or to conduct tests); 
c.  Construction, erection, alteration or demolition of buildings or structures, including a material change in the appearance or footprint of a building or structure; 
d.  Change in the intensity of use of land, such as an increase or decrease in the number of dwelling units or floor area; 
e.  Installation of mitigation measures associated with construction, such as a retaining wall, berm, or similar structure; and 
f.  Clearing of land, including grading, excavation, cutting or filling, and substantial clearing or removal of vegetation. Minor removal of vegetation or disturbance of soil for the purpose of landscaping shall not be considered to be development. 
    District means a section of the Town for which regulations governing the use of buildings and premises, the height of buildings, the size of yards and the intensity of the use are uniform, as outlined on the adopted Zoning Map of the Town. 
    Dwelling means a permanent building or portion thereof which is used as a private residence or sleeping place of one (1) or more human beings, but not including temporary structures such as tents, railroad cars, streetcars or similar structures. A dwelling is to include mobile homes or trailer homes that are located in accordance with the provisions of Article XVI of this Chapter. While dwellings are intended to be occupied for long-term residential purposes and be maintained in whole ownership, short-term rental of a dwelling is permitted as provided elsewhere in this code. Dwellings shall not be sold in fractional, interval or timeshare forms of ownership unless approved through a PUD review. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family means a single building used by three (3) or more families living independently of each other in separate dwelling units, but not including motels, hotels, boardinghouses and tourist homes. 
    Dwelling, single-family means a detached building used as a dwelling exclusively by one (1) family as an independent living unit and which contains only one (1) kitchen. 
    Dwelling, two-family means a single building containing two (2) dwelling units and occupied by two (2) families living independently of each other. 
    Dwelling unit means one (1) room, or rooms connected together, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment. The dwelling unit shall be restricted to a single kitchen and may be physically separated from other dwelling units by any one (1) of the following means: independent exterior entry, lockable space, floor levels, hallways and foyers, walls or other enclosures causing separation from any other dwelling units in the same structure. A dwelling unit shall be served by no more than one (1) gas meter and one (1) electric meter. 
    Employee means a person who works or performs in and/or for a business, regardless of whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of said business. 
    Enclose means to create a barrier or wall to the outside, such as windows, screens, doors on a porch, deck or patio. If a porch, deck or patio has one (1) or more of its exterior sides enclosed, the entire porch, deck or patio shall be considered enclosed for purposes of total square footage. Railings up to forty-two (42) inches in height are exempt from this provision. 
    Entertainment means a facility providing entertainment or recreation activities, including but not limited to theaters, bowling alleys, nightclubs, game centers, gymnasiums, health clubs, and climbing wall centers or rooms that can be rented for parties or events, where all activities take place within enclosed structures. This use does not include a conference center, adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult video store, adult novelty store, adult cabaret, adult entertainment establishment, sexually oriented business, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, or adult theater. 
    Family means any individual or two (2) or more persons related by blood or marriage or between whom there is a legally recognized relationship or a group of not more than three (3) unrelated persons occupying the same dwelling unit. 
    Floor area means the gross area of the building measured along the outside walls of the building, including each habitable floor level and interior balconies but excluding the following: 
a.  Interior courtyards. 
b.  The first five hundred (500) square feet of area for garages and enclosed parking. 
c.  Mechanical or utility areas. 
d.  One-half (1/2) of the area used exclusively for storage. 
    Floor area ratio means the ratio of the total floor area of a building, including all floor levels, to the total developable area. Total floor area shall be as elsewhere defined in this Section. Total developable area shall not include areas to be dedicated for street or alleys. Calculation of the floor area ratio (FAR) is as follows: 
FAR = total floor area 
developable area  
    Garage, commercial means any building or structure where automobiles, trucks or commercial vehicles are stored, repaired, painted or equipped for remuneration. 
    Garage, private means an accessory building or portion of a main building on the same lot and used for the storage only of private passenger motor vehicles. 
    Good moral character, as used within the adult entertainment establishment licensing provisions of this Code, means one who has not engaged in a specified criminal act within the times set forth in Article IV of Chapter 6 of this Code. 
    Guest room means a room which is intended, arranged or designed to be occupied or which is occupied by one (1) or more guests but in which no provision is made for cooking and not including dormitories for sleeping purposes. 
    Home occupation means a business or profession that is conducted within a dwelling unit, an enclosed garage or accessory building and carried on by the inhabitants of the dwelling unit and is in conformance with the provisions of Section 16-202. 
    Kitchen is an area for cooking or food preparation associated with a dwelling unit and is further defined by the existence of either Paragraph a or any two (2) of Paragraphs b-f outlined below: 
a.  Range, grill, broiler or cooktop fueled by solid fuel, L.P. or natural gas or by electrical power. This will include any gas piping from the area of the range or cooktop back to the point of intersection with the primary gas piping system and any 220-volt electrical wiring back to the main electrical panel. 
b.  Sink, not including a small bar sink, lavatory or laundry tub. 
c.  Dishwasher. 
d.  Counters and cabinets of a quantity and configuration that indicate the creation of a food preparation area. 
e.  Refrigerator or refrigerator/freezer five (5) cubic feet or more in capacity. 
f.  Microwave oven, hot plate or similar portable cooking device. 
    Licensing officer, when used in conjunction with licensee of adult entertainment establishments, means the Town Manager whose function is to review adult entertainment establishment license applications and either issue a license or deny the license based upon the licensing provisions set forth in Article IV of Chapter 6 of this Code. For these purposes, a licensing officer shall also include his or her designee. 
    Loading area means a parking space, other than a public street or alley, for the parking of commercial vehicles for the purpose of loading or unloading materials or merchandise. 
    Lot means a parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a building or use and its accessories and arranged to meet all the requirements of this Chapter and have at least twenty-five (25) feet of frontage on a public street. A lot shall be held in unified ownership and may or may not coincide with a platted subdivision lot. 
    Lot area means the number of square feet included within a lot as measured within the boundaries of the lot, measured on a horizontal plane upon which the boundaries have been vertically projected. 
    Lot coverage means the percent of the total lot area that is devoted to ground floor building area. Calculation of lot coverage is as shown below: 
Lot coverage 
(expressed as a percent) = 
  Total building ground 
floor area x 100 
_________________ 
Lot Area  
    Lot length means the average distance from the street to the rear of the lot, measured perpendicularly from the street line upon which the lot faces. 
    Lot line, front means the property line dividing a lot from the right-of-way of a street. On a corner lot, the shorter street right-of-way line shall be considered the front lot line. 
    Lot width means the lot width to be determined as follows: 
a.  If the side lot lines are parallel, the lot width is the perpendicular distance between the side lot lines. 
b.  If the side lot lines are not parallel, the lot width shall be the length of the line measured at right angles to the line or axis connecting the midpoints of the front lot line and the rear lot line. The length of the line shall be measured at the point equal to the front yard setback for the zoning district in which the lot is located. 
    Makerspace/craft industry means a facility that contains one (1) or more artists or craft industries. A makerspace is a community center that includes manufacturing equipment, community and education for the purposes of enabling individuals to design, prototype and create manufactured works. A craft industry encompasses goods that are handmade by artisans or those skilled in a particular trade, including but not limited to art galleries, handmade textiles, food, beverages, and culinary products. Products made on site may also be sold on site. No such individual facility shall be larger than six thousand five hundred (6,500) total square feet. 
    Manager means an operator, other than a licensee, who is employed by a business to act as a manager or supervisor of employees or is otherwise responsible for the operation of the business. 
    Massage parlor means an establishment where, for any form of consideration, massage, alcohol rub, fomentation, electric or magnetic treatment, or similar treatment or manipulation of the human body is administered, unless such treatment or manipulation is administered by a medical practitioner, chiropractor, acupuncturist, physical therapist or similar professional person licensed by the State. This definition does not include an athletic club, health club, school, gymnasium, reducing salon, spa or similar establishment where massage or similar manipulation of the human body is offered as an incidental or accessory service. 
    Material means any physical object, facsimile, recording, transcription, pictorial representation, motion picture or reproduction, whether mechanical, electrical or chemical, which is used as a means of communicating sensation or emotion to human beings to or through the visual, aural or tactile senses. 
    Medical center means a facility where multiple professional health and medical services are provided, such as general medical practice, chiropractic, psychological, nutritional advice and physical therapy and where the focus is providing both diagnostic services and treatment. A medical center must contain at least three (3) of these types of practices, and there must be at least six (6) licensed professionals. A medical center must contain at least five thousand (5,000) square feet of contiguous, leasable floor area either under single ownership or other Town-approved form of unified coordination. 
    Medical clinic means a professional business providing general or special medical, chiropractic or psychological services employing three (3) or more physicians. There are no limitations on the number of physicians, and there is no maximum size limitation. Clinics may specialize in one (1) discipline or may include more than one (1) type of medical service. 
    Medical marijuana center shall have the same meaning as set forth in C.R.S. § 12-43.3-104 (a person licensed to operate a medical marijuana center that sells medical marijuana to registered patients or primary caregivers, as defined in Article XVIII, Section 14, of the Colorado Constitution, but is not a primary caregiver), as amended. 
    Medical marijuana facility means a medical marijuana center, an optional premise, or medical marijuana-infused product manufacturer. The term "medical marijuana facility" expressly excludes patients and primary caregivers, which are regulated pursuant to C.R.S. § 25-1.5-106. 
    Medical marijuana-infused product shall have the same meaning as set forth in C.R.S. § 12-43.3-104 (a product infused with medical marijuana that is intended for use or consumption other than by smoking, including but not limited to edible products, ointments, and tinctures. These products, when manufactured or sold by a licensed medical marijuana center or a medical marijuana-infused product manufacturer, shall not be considered a food or drug for the purposes of the "Colorado Food and Drug Act", part 4 of article 5 of title 25, C.R.S), as amended. 
    Medical marijuana infused products manufacturer shall have the same meaning as set forth in C.R.S. § 12-43.3-104 (a person licensed to manufacture medical marijuana infused products), as amended. 
    Medical office means an office providing general or special medical, chiropractic, psychological or similar services where there are fewer than three (3) physicians. 
    Mobile home means a transferable, single-family dwelling unit suitable for year-round occupancy and containing the same water supply, waste disposal and electrical convenience as immobile housing. Such structure will have no foundation other than wheels or removable jacks for conveyance on highways and may be transported to a site as one (1) or more modules. Such structures shall include those which may be fitted with wheels or removable jacks for transportation. The term mobile home shall not include travel trailers, recreation vehicles, campers or self-contained motor homes or camper buses. 
    Motel or hotel means a building containing six (6) or more units intended for temporary occupancy by guests. Accessory use facilities may consist of an office, laundry facilities, recreation facilities, a lobby or lounge, restaurant and associated kitchen facilities, and similar accessory uses commonly found in association with a commercial motel and hotel operation, but may not include kitchen facilities within individual units. Occupancy shall be deemed to be temporary only if said occupancy is of shorter duration than a month-to-month tenancy. In addition, one (1) manager's unit for long-term occupancy shall be permitted for a motel or hotel facility. 
    Nonconforming building means a building that does not conform to the minimum setbacks, maximum height, floor area, parking requirements, open space or other provisions of this Chapter. 
    Nonconforming lot means any lot that does not conform to the minimum lot area, minimum width or frontage upon a public street. 
    Nonconforming use means a use of land or building that is not in conformance with the use regulations of this Chapter. 
    Nudity or state of nudity means the appearance of more than two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the human bare buttocks, or the anus, male genitals, female genitals or the female breasts below the top of the nipple; or a state of dress which fails to opaquely cover more than two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the human buttocks, or the anus, male genitals, female genitals, pubic region or aureole of the female breast below the top of the nipple. 
    Obscene material means that material which: 
a.  Taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest of the average person, applying a contemporary statewide standard; 
b.  Depicts or describes hard-core sexual conduct; and 
c.  Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value 
    Obscene performance means that performance which: 
a.  Taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest of the average person, applying a contemporary statewide standard; 
b.  Presents or shows hard-core sexual conduct; and 
c.  Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
    Open space (replaces greenbelt) means land retained in an open or natural state, except for agricultural use or for the placement of landscape materials, including trees, shrubs and grass, and structures limited to footpaths, bridges, irrigation, erosion protection, underground utilities, or improved for park use. Ownership may be public or private. Designation of open space does not imply the right of access by the public unless the property is dedicated to the Town or a public easement is obtained. 
    Open space, landscaped means a lot, tract or parcel of land that has been improved by the preservation, rearrangement, installation or planting of different trees, shrubs, grass and decorative materials. Decorative materials means materials which augment and enhance the botanical landscaping, including rocks, gravel, driftwood, bark, ponds, fountains, walls or other landscape design features approved by the Town. Such land may be used for plazas, walkways, arcades and pedestrian areas. 
    Operator means and includes the owner, permit or license holder, custodian, manager, operator or person in charge of any permitted or licensed premises. 
    Optional premises shall have the same meaning as set forth in C.R.S. § 12-43.3-104 (the premises specified in an application for a medical marijuana center license with related growing facilities in Colorado for which the licensee is authorized to grow and cultivate marijuana for a purpose authorized by section 14 of article XVIII of the state constitution), as amended. 
    Optional premises cultivation operation shall have the same meaning as set forth in C.R.S. § 12-43.3-104 (a person licensed pursuant to operate a business to grow and cultivate marijuana), as amended. 
    Parking area means an open space or an enclosed structure or building used exclusively for the temporary storage of automobiles. 
    Parking, off-street means any parking area located wholly within the limits of one (1) or more lots. 
    Patient , when used within definitions and provisions in this Code regulating the use of medical marijuana, means a person with a valid registry identification card pursuant to C.R.S. § 25-1.5-106. 
    Peep booth means a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space. 
    Performance means a presentation or exhibition, whether live or recorded, in a public place or place open to the public or to a segment thereof. 
    Permittee or licensee means a person in whose name a permit and/or license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as the applicant on the application for a permit and/or license. 
    Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity. 
    Personal services means a commercial establishment engaged in providing personal services and products to the general public, including barbershop and beauty shop; tattoo parlor; dry cleaner; Laundromat; tailor; repair shop for small appliances, electronics, sporting goods and similar items; art/martial arts/dance studios; health and fitness facility; spa and similar uses. 
    Planned Unit Development (PUD) means an area of land, controlled by one (1) or more for a number of dwelling units or commercial, educational, recreational or industrial uses, or any combination of the foregoing, the plan for which does not correspond in lot size, bulk or type of use, density, lot coverage, open space or other restriction to the existing land use regulations. 
    Premises shall have the same meaning as set forth in C.R.S. § 12-43.3-104 (a distinct and definite location, which may include a building, a part of a building, a room, or any other definite contiguous area), as amended. 
    Primary caregiver , when used within definitions and provisions regulating the use of marijuana, shall have the same meaning as set forth in Article XVIII, Section 14, of the Colorado Constitution (a person, other than the patient and the patient's physician, who is eighteen (18) years of age or older and has significant responsibility for managing the well-being of a patient who has a debilitating medical condition), as amended, and who is regulated under the provisions of C.R.S. § 25-1.5-106, as amended. 
    Principal owner means any person owning, directly or beneficially, twenty percent (20%) or more of the ownership interest in any legal entity. 
    Private educational institutions or instructional facility means an organization giving systematic instruction in any branch of knowledge and affiliated with a religious or other private organization or a for-profit organization designed to give instruction in any field. 
    Private open space means open space that is directly accessible from an individual dwelling unit and is owned by the owner of the dwelling unit. 
    Private room means a room in an adult motel that is not a peep booth, has a bed and bath in the room or adjacent room and is used primarily for lodging. 
    Professional office means a building or portion thereof used as the office of a doctor, dentist, lawyer, architect, landscape architect, engineer, planner, accountant and similar professionals. 
    Promote means to produce, direct, manufacture, sell, provide, distribute, present or exhibit for consideration, or to offer or agree to do any of these things for consideration, or to have a financial interest in any of these things. 
    Public and governmental building or use means any building open to the general use, participation or enjoyment of the public and owned by the Town, County, State or federal government or by a public utility corporation. 
    Public hearing means a duly noticed hearing of the Town Council, the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Board of Zoning Adjustment that is open to parties in interest and citizens providing them with an opportunity to be heard. The body calling such a hearing shall possess the authority to continue any hearing before it to a later time or different place if, in the discretion of the members of the body, such a continuance will aid in the resolution of the matters regarding which said hearing is being held, and provided that the applicant consents to the continuance of said hearing. 
    Public nonprofit entity, community development organization means a non-profit organization which meets the requirements of Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code. In addition, a community development organization is distinguished from other nonprofit organizations in that the focus for a community development organization is on community economic development and furthering social capital as defined in the Town's Master Plan through activities such as the creation of affordable housing, business micro lending, job training, and real estate development that has a community purpose and that typically would not occur in the free market. The Town Planner shall make the initial determination of whether an entity satisfies the definition of a community development organization, and said determination may be appealed to the Town Council. 
    Restaurant means a commercial establishment engaged in the preparation and serving of food and drink to the general public. The sale of products manufactured or enhanced on premises shall be permitted. Restaurant uses shall include restaurant, fast food, nightclub and bar, neighborhood cafe and other similar uses and activities. 
    Retail means commercial establishments engaged in the selling or renting of consumer goods and merchandise. The sale or rental of products manufactured or enhanced on premises and the rendering of services incidental to the sale or rental of such products shall be permitted. Retail includes food markets, clothing, sporting equipment, jewelry, books, videos, prescription drugs, liquor, hardware, furniture, flowers, gifts, art, motor-driven cycles and motorized bicycles, nonmotorized vehicles, such as bicycles, and similar uses and activities. Retail shall not include office uses, sale or rental of motorized vehicles or motorcycles. 
    Retail marijuana cultivation facility shall have the same meaning as set forth in Subsection 16(2) of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution under "marijuana cultivation facility" (an entity licensed to cultivate, prepare, and package marijuana and sell marijuana to retail marijuana stores, to marijuana product manufacturing facilities, and to other marijuana cultivation facilities, but not to consumers), as amended. 
    Retail marijuana establishment shall have the same meaning as set forth in Subsection 16(2) of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution under "marijuana establishment" (a marijuana cultivation facility, a marijuana testing facility, a marijuana product manufacturing facility, or a retail marijuana store), as amended. 
    Retail marijuana product shall have the same meaning as set forth in Subsection 16(2) of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution under "marijuana establishment" (concentrated marijuana products and marijuana products that are comprised of marijuana and other ingredients and are intended for use or consumption, such as but not limited to, edible products, ointments, and tinctures), as amended. 
    Retail marijuana products manufacturing facility shall have the same meaning as set forth in Subsection 16(2) of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution under "marijuana products manufacturing facility (an entity licensed to purchase marijuana; manufacture, prepare, and package marijuana products; and sell marijuana and marijuana products to other marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to retail marijuana stores, but not to consumers), as amended. 
    Retail marijuana store shall have the same meaning as set forth in Subsection 16(2) of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution (an entity licensed to purchase marijuana from marijuana cultivation facilities and marijuana and marijuana products from marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to sell marijuana and marijuana products to consumers), as amended. 
    Retail marijuana testing facility shall have the same meaning as set forth in Subsection 16(2) of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution under "marijuana testing facilities" (an entity licensed to analyze and certify the safety and potency of marijuana), as amended. 
    River setback means that distance between the point closest to the river on the face of a building on land adjacent to a river to the line highest in elevation on the shore established by the fluctuations of water and indicated by physical characteristics, such as a clear, natural line impressed on the bank; shelving; changes in the character of soil; destruction of terrestrial vegetation; the presence of litter and debris; or other appropriate means that consider the characteristics of the surrounding areas. 
    Sadomasochistic material or sadomasochistic performance means that material or performance which: 
a.  Taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest of the average person, applying a contemporary statewide standard; 
b.  Depicts, presents, shows or describes flagellation, mutilation or torture, actual or simulated, in a sexual context; and 
c.  Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
    School. An entity or organization, to be considered as a school, must comply with at least one (1) of the following definitions: (a) a nonprofit entity with its own taxing district that offers education to the public; (b) an organization giving systematic instruction in any branch of knowledge and affiliated with a religious or other private organization; (c) a for-profit organization designed to give instruction in any field; (d) an institution specialized in higher education associated with a public or private university; 
    Setback means the required minimum horizontal distance between a building and the front, side or rear property line. 
    Sexual encounter establishment means a business or commercial establishment which, as one of its primary business purposes, offers a place where two (2) or more persons may congregate, associate or consort for the purpose of the exposure of specified anatomical areas, or when one (1) or more of the persons exposes any specified anatomical area. 
    Short-term multi-family or lodge means a building containing six (6) or more units intended for temporary occupancy by guests. Accessory uses may consist of an office, laundry facilities used by the occupants, recreation facilities, a lobby or lounge, kitchens to be used by the occupants within individual units, and dining facilities and similar accessories as commonly found in association with a commercial lodging operation and meeting the requirements of the particular zone district in which the building is located. Occupancy shall be deemed to be temporary only if said occupancy is of shorter duration than a month-to-month tenancy. In addition, one (1) permanent manager's unit for long-term occupancy shall be permitted for a temporary multi-family or lodge facility. 
    Sign means an identification, description, illustration or device which is affixed to or represented, directly or indirectly, upon a building, structure or land, which attracts attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution or business. 
    Slope means the change in vertical elevation measured over a specified horizontal distance. Slope is determined by dividing the horizontal distance or "run" into the vertical distance or "rise" between two (2) points and converting the resulting ratio into a percentage value. A higher slope value indicates a steeper incline. For purposes of regulation and measurement, a slope of thirty percent (30%) or greater must involve an elevation change of at least ten (10) feet over a horizontal distance of thirty (30) feet or less. Areas that an applicant can demonstrate are manmade anomalies in the natural grade, such as a cut previously made to a natural grade for a foundation wall or retaining wall, or a berm installed on a property, shall not be construed to be a slope of thirty percent (30%) or greater unless the area is associated with a natural grade that meets the above-written definition of a thirty percent (30%) slope. 
    Small animal veterinary clinic means a professional business providing veterinary services to small animals, employing one (1) veterinarian in a practice that is all contained indoors, has no outside runs and does not provide kennel or boarding services except for animals receiving or recovering from veterinary services. 
    Small business incubator means a facility operated to encourage and support the growth and success of entrepreneurial companies by providing a variety business support resources and services, including but not limited to physical space, coaching and mentoring services, access to financing, networking connections, shared supply purchasing, or shared data systems and resources. 
    Special event means temporary, short-term uses of lands or structures, not otherwise included as a permitted use by the zoning regulations. Special events include such uses as public events intended for amusement or entertainment (concerts, festivals); private events such as weddings; fund-raising or events for nonprofit organizations; foot races, bike races and such. 
    Special review use means uses that are permitted within a zoning district only with the prior approval of the Town Council in accordance with the procedures stated in Article III of this Chapter. 
    Specified anatomical areas are defined as including: 
a.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks and female breast below a point above the top of the nipple. 
b.  Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state even if completely and/or opaquely covered. 
c.  Areas included within the definition of nudity. 
    Specified criminal acts means acts which include sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape or crimes connected with another sexually oriented business, including but not limited to distribution of obscenity; sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; prostitution, promotion of prostitution, aggravated promotion of prostitution; compelling prostitution; sexual performance by a child; possession of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; engaging in organized criminal activity as defined by the state statutes; sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as defined by the state statutes; incest; solicitation of a child or harboring a runaway child as defined by the state statutes; kidnapping or aggravated kidnapping as defined in the state statutes; robbery or aggravated robbery as defined in the state statutes; bribery or retaliation as described in the state statutes in violation of the Colorado Controlled Substances Act or Dangerous Drugs Act punishable as a felony, Class A Misdemeanor or Class B Misdemeanor; criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses; pandering or tax violations associated with sexually oriented businesses; or crimes involving the use of or trafficking narcotic drugs, or violent acts against persons or property. 
    Specified sexual activities means acts, simulated acts, exhibitions, representations, depictions or descriptions of: 
a.  Human male genitals in a discernable and evident state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
b.  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast. 
c.  Intrusion, however slight, actual or simulated, by any object, any part of an animal's body or any part of a person's body into the genital or anal openings of any person's body. 
d.  Cunnilingus, fellatio, anilingus, masturbation, bestiality, lewd exhibition of genitals or excretory function, actual or simulated, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism and zooerasty. 
e.  Flagellation, mutilation or torture, actual or simulated, including sadomasochism, in a sexual context. 
    Story means that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level directly above a usable or unused underfloor space is more than six (6) feet above finished or original grade, whichever is lower, for more than fifty percent (50%) of the total perimeter or is more than twelve (12) feet above finished or original grade, whichever is lower, at any point, such usable or unused underfloor space shall be considered as a story. A mezzanine floor, loft or other intermediate floor, placed within any story shall not be considered a story if the area of the intermediate floor does not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the total floor area of the story within which it is placed. 
    Structural alteration means any addition to or subtraction of parts of a building, including walls, columns, beams, girders, foundations, doors and windows. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected upon the ground, except utility poles, flagpoles or walls and fences less than four (4) feet high. 
    Toe of slope means a line drawn along the lower boundary of a steeply sloping area that represents the place at which the grade of the property transitions from a slope of greater than thirty percent (30%) to a slope of less than thirty percent (30%). The toe of slope shall be identified as part of a slope category analysis prepared for a property. 
    Total care facility means a facility designed for round-the-clock (24-hour) care of individuals. A small total care facility is for three (3) or less individuals. A large total care facility is for more than three (3) individuals. 
    Total square feet means the entire square footage of a dwelling unit, including storage, mechanical, basement, garage, but excluding crawl spaces and open (not enclosed) porches, patios and decks covered or uncovered. Porches, patios and decks that are enclosed shall count as part of total square footage. 
    Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means any business arrangement, gift or other similar legal devise which transfers ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the ownership or control. 
    Travel trailer, camper means a portable structure mounted on wheels and drawn by a stock passenger automobile or designed to be loaded on to or affixed to the bed or chassis of a truck, or a portable structure mounted on wheels and constructed with collapsible partial side walls of fabric, plastic or other pliable material which fold for towing by another vehicle and unfold at the campsite to provide for temporary living quarters for recreational camping or travel use. The term travel trailer shall include the units designated as "campers," "pop-ups," "motor homes," "camper buses" or "recreational vehicles." 
    Use means the purpose for which any land, structure or building is designed, maintained or occupied. 
    Utility facilities: 
    Utility facilities, major means all private and public utility facilities, including but not limited to communications, telecommunications, gas, electric, alternative power sources, turbines, water and sewer facilities, structures, towers and buildings (but not including transmission lines) which do not satisfy the criteria for minor utility facility. In the event of uncertainty concerning whether a utility facility is major or minor, a determination may be made by the Technical Review Committee which may be appealed to the Town Council in the event the applicant disagrees with the determination of the Technical Review Committee. 
    Utility facilities , minor means private and public utility facilities, including but not limited to communications, telecommunications, amateur radio operator's facilities, gas, electric, alternative power sources, micro-turbines, water and sewer facilities, structures, installations and buildings (but not including transmission lines). Minor utility facilities shall satisfy all applicable criteria set forth below. Utility Facilities which are larger than those satisfying the relevant criteria set forth below are major utility facilities. Utilities designed to serve a building or use on the same property shall not generally be considered a minor utility facility subject to the provisions established herein for minor utility facilities but shall be considered as a mechanical use subject to the provisions of the schedule of requirements of the zone district in which they are located (e.g., a micro-turbine serving as an energy source for a building). Individuals, businesses or nonprofit entities may produce energy for sale back to the utility company and a residence may have amateur radio operator facilities, if the unit producing the energy or transmission satisfies the schedule of requirements for that zone district and is so small and hidden from view of the public that in the opinion of the Building Official the utility unit does not meet the definition of a minor utility facility . 
    Minor utility facilities shall satisfy the following: Improvements shall conform with the corresponding zone district schedule of requirements; improvements and connections will be below grade to the extent reasonably possible; any above-grade portions of a building, structure or installation shall not exceed two thousand (2,000) square feet of total gross floor area, including all enclosed square footage, storage areas and utility boxes or pedestals; the height for any above-grade structure shall conform to the maximum height allowed for an accessory building or fifteen (15) feet at the peak of the structure, whichever is lower; no more than one (1) off-street parking space or loading area shall be allowed, with a maximum of five hundred (500) square feet in any loading area and landscaping shall be incorporated into the parking or loading area; no full-time employees, including office or administrative functions, shall be provided at such facility; no above-grade, unenclosed storage or outside work areas shall be permitted at such facilities; transmission and/or receiving units or similar installations shall conform with height and setback requirements of the zone district schedule of requirements and must be contained in a structure or within a utility pedestal no larger than twenty-seven (27) cubic feet in size or otherwise shielded from view; there shall be no noise, glare, vibration, electrical interference or similar nuisance impacts generated from or off of the utility installation; the building mass shall be compatible with the existing building sizes in the neighborhood; and the installation shall incorporate features and design elements consistent with the Town's Master Plan, including the neighborhood typologies. 
    Utility lines : 
    Utility lines, major , means all private and public utility transmission lines, including but not limited to communications, telecommunications, gas, electric, alternative power sources, water, sewer and any other transmission lines which are not underground or for which the purpose is to transmit or transport the utility service to areas outside the Town. In the event of uncertainty concerning whether a utility line is major or minor, a determination may be made by the Technical Review Committee which may be appealed to the Town Council in the event the applicant disagrees with the determination of the Technical Review Committee. 
    Utility lines, minor, means private and public utility transmission lines, including but not limited to communications, telecommunications, gas electric, alternative power sources, water, sewer and other transmission lines which are underground and for which the purpose is to serve properties within the Town. 
    Yard means the space on the same lot as a building or structure that is unoccupied and open to the sky. 
    Yard area, required means the open space area that is not occupied by a principal building, with a depth or width specified by the setback regulations for the district in which the lot is located. 
    Yard, front means that portion of a yard between the street line and the building and between the two (2) side lot lines, the depth of which shall be the least distance between the front lot line and the building. 
    Yard, rear means that portion of a yard between the rear of a building and a rear lot line and between two (2) side lot lines, the depth of which shall be the least distance between the building and the rear lot lines. 
    Yard, side means all the yard between the front and rear yards, the width of which shall be the least distance between the side lot lines and the building. 
    Zoning Administrator means the Town Manager or his or her designee. 
(Prior code 70-4; Ord. 10 §1, 1991; Ord. 22 §1, 1991; Ord. 8 §1, 1993; Ord. 13 §1, 1993; Ord. 20 §3, 1996; Ord. 1 §1, 1997; Ord. 5 §§3, 4, 1997; Ord. 10 §1, 1997; Ord. 23 §1, 2000; Ord. 32 §2, 2000; Ord. 33 §1, 2001; Ord. 9 §B, 2002; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 13 §§1, 4, 5, 2008; Ord. 07 §B1, 2009; Ord. 12 §§1, 2, 2009; Ord. 05 §C(Exh. B), 2012; Ord. 07 §3(Exh. C), 2012; Ord. 10 §B1(Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 04 §B1, 2013; Ord. 30 §1(Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 14 §1(Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 21 §B.2(Exh. B), 2016) 
Sec. 16-5. - Districts established. 
    For the purpose of implementing the provisions of this Chapter, there are hereby established the following zone districts: 
District Description R-1 Rural Residential District R-2 Low Density Residential District R-3 Medium Density Residential District R-4 High Density Residential District R-4 Mixed Density Residential District R-3 TN Traditional Neighborhood/Hill District C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District C-2 Downtown Business District C-3 Community Commercial District CSC Community Serving Commercial Zone District P Public District DR Developing Resource District IN Industrial Zone District  
(Prior code 70-5; Ord. 28, 2003; Ord. 10, 2012 ; Ord. 04, 2013 ) 
Sec. 16-6. - Zoning map; map changes; district boundaries. 
(a)  The location of zoning districts hereby established are shown on the map entitled "Town of Basalt, Colorado, Official Zoning Map," and is hereby made, along with explanatory matter thereon, a part of this Chapter. The Official Zoning Map shall be filed at the office of the County Clerk and shall be kept current at all times. 
(b)  All amendments to the Map made in conformity with this Chapter shall be recorded on the Map within one (1) week of adoption, showing the general location, effective date and nature of the change. 
(c)  Unless otherwise specified on the Official Zoning Map, zone boundaries shall be construed to lie on the center line of streets and alleys, on lot lines or platted subdivisions, on railroad right-of-way boundaries, on the boundary lines of zoning districts or incorporated areas, or on section lines. 
(Prior code 70-6) 
Sec. 16-7. - Conformance required; application. 
    Except as hereinafter provided in this Section or by a variance granted by the Board of Zoning Adjustment: 
(1)  No building, structure or land shall hereinafter be occupied or used and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, moved or structurally altered unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
(2)  No building or structure shall hereinafter be erected or altered to exceed the height, to accommodate or house a larger number of families, to occupy a greater percentage of the lot or to have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards or other open spaces than is herein permitted in the district in which the building or structure is located. 
(3)  No part of a yard, loading zone or open space needed by a building or structure to meet the requirements of this Chapter may be included in whole or in part in meeting the requirements of any other building or structure. 
(4)  No yards or lots existing at the time of the adoption of this Chapter shall hereafter be reduced below the minimum dimensions or area required by this Chapter. 
(Prior code 70-7) 
Sec. 16-8. - Development review and agenda scheduling. 
    Development review considerations and public hearings shall be subject to the following guidelines and restrictions: 
(1)  Development review items will be scheduled for consideration as agenda time is available. Nothing herein shall require the scheduling of additional or special meeting times, unless required subject to applicable state statutes. Agenda scheduling shall be subject to approval by the Planning and Zoning Chairman for the Planning and Zoning Commission and subject to approval by the Mayor for the Town Council. 
(2)  Continuations of development review, subject to provisions of applicable state statutes, shall be an option for the Town Council and Planning and Zoning Commission subject to reasonable findings including but not limited to: (a) need for additional time for public input; (b) requests for additional information from the applicant; (c) lack of available agenda time; (d) need for additional time for Councilor or Commissioner comments; (e) direction to staff for additional information, analysis or review; (f) incomplete, inconsistent or unclear application materials requiring clarification or additional refinement; (g) the need for additional referral comments or coordination of review with neighboring jurisdictions; (h) failure of the applicant to provide requested information. 
(Ord. 5 §1, 1997; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-9. - Compliance with Master Plan. 
    Any development review application filed with the Town under this Chapter, including, but not limited to, all applications for planned unit development, site plan, special review, rezoning or text amendment shall demonstrate that the proposal is in general conformance with the Master Plan as then in effect. Approval of any such development application shall require a finding by the approving board that the application is in general conformance with the Master Plan as then in effect. 
(Ord. 17 §2, 1999) 
Sec. 16-10. - Action by ordinance. 
    Any act of the Town pursuant to this Chapter which places a burden on or limits the use of private property shall be by ordinance approved by the Town Council in accordance with the procedures described in the Town Charter. 
(Ord. 33 §B2(17), 2003) 
Sec. 16-11. - Procedures for code interpretations and appeals. 
(a)  The Town Council shall have the authority to hear and decide requests for code interpretations and appeals as provided in this section. 
(b)  At the request of any affected person, the Town Council may make an interpretation to the text of this Chapter or the boundaries of the zone district map and consider an appeal of such interpretation made by the Town Planner. Any such request shall require a public meeting with written notice being provided to the interested parties as they are determined by the Town Planner. 
(c)  The Council may consider any other appeal for which specific authority is not granted to another board or commission as established by this Chapter. An appeal of this nature shall be a public meeting with written notice being provided to the interested parties as they are determined by the Town Planner. 
( Ord. 6 §1(Exh. A), 2014) 
Secs. 16-12-16-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II - District Regulations 

Sec. 16-21. - Intent of individual districts. 
    The Town shall be divided into the following zoning districts. The intent of each district shall be as described below: 
(1)  R-1 Rural Residential District. It is the intent of the Rural Residential District to provide for those low density residential or agricultural uses on relatively larger lots due to the character of the land, location and desirability for rural density. 
(2)  R-2 Low Density Residential District. The Low Density Residential District is intended to provide for those residential uses as a transition between the lower density rural areas and the medium and higher density residential areas. 
(3)  R-3 Medium Density Residential District. The Medium Density Residential District is intended to provide for single-family and two-family residential development. Higher density development may be permitted if compatible in scale and adjoining residential areas. 
(4)  R-4 High Density Residential District. It is the intent of the High Density Residential District to provide for the creative and efficient development of a density of higher density housing types, such as garden apartments, townhouses and attached dwellings. The scale and character of the higher density housing shall be compatible with the Town as a whole. It is further intended that new high density areas be developed in a manner that is energy efficient and incorporate amenities, such as public and private open space, for the residents. 
(5)  C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District. It is the intent of the Neighborhood Commercial District to provide for those low intensity business and commercial services that are required for the convenience of the residents of the adjacent residential neighborhood. Buildings with permitted uses should be compatible in scale to the character of the residential area and generate low traffic volume. Neighborhood commercial centers are intended to be within convenient walking distance from the neighborhood area. Neighborhood commercial uses are not intended to attract traffic from outside the residential neighborhood. 
(6)  C-2 Downtown Business District. The intent of the C-2 Downtown Business District is to promote the downtown area as a special activity center by encouraging a mixture of compatible commercial, office, residential, institutional and public uses and interesting street-level activity in buildings. The intent of this district is further described in Section 16-29 of this Article. 
(7)  C-3 Community Commercial District. It is the intent of the Community Commercial District to provide for the general retail uses and services for the community as a whole. Community commercial uses generally require larger land areas than neighborhood or downtown business uses and close proximity to major collector or arterial streets. 
(8)  P Public. The Public District is intended for areas to be used for a public purpose owned by a governmental or public nonprofit entity as defined in Section 16-4. Only property owned by a governmental or public nonprofit entity as defined in Section 16-4 is eligible for Public District zoning. For purposes hereof, ownership may include a long-term lease or other financing mechanism as reasonably determined by the Town Attorney. 
(9)  DR Developing Resource District. The Developing Resource District is intended to provide for the annexation of those areas, tracts or parcels of land that are eligible for annexation and are designated in the Comprehensive Plan as potentially suitable for urban development but not in the immediate future because of lack of utilities or other services. 
(10)  R-3 Traditional Neighborhood/Hill District. It is the intent of this zone district to provide a residential zone district that recognizes and allows for existing patterns of traditional neighborhood development with greater flexibility and variety in development standards. This zone district emphasizes the single-family residential character of the traditional neighborhoods. 
(11)  Community Serving Commercial Zone District. The intent of the CSC zone District is to combine the social capital objectives of the Town's Master Plan with the vitality objectives of the C-2 zone district to produce tailored zoning controls for four (4) key redevelopment parcels in downtown Basalt in order to implement the results of the Our Town Downtown planning process. The scale and character of development authorized in this zone district may allow buildings that are larger and more multi-faceted than areas zoned C-2 (Downtown Business) or P (Public). 
(12)  R-4 Mixed-Density Residential (R-4 MD). It is the intent of this zone district to promote the creation of affordable community housing or attainable housing. This zone district encourages affordable and attainable housing units through the use of small lots, flexible lot configurations, a mix of lot and home sizes and efficient use of land. 
(Prior code 70-8; Ord. 16 §2, 1995; Ord. 33 §2, 2001; Ord. 07 §B2, 2009; Ord. 10 §B.2, 2012; Ord. 04 §B.2, 2013; Ord. 21 §B.3, 2016) 
Sec. 16-22. - Schedules of uses and requirements. 
    To facilitate public understanding of this Chapter and for convenient reference and use, the following schedules are provided for the residential districts and commercial districts. These schedules are a part of this Chapter and may be amended as with any other part of the Chapter. 
(1)  Schedule of Uses. The Schedule of Uses indicates by district those uses that are permitted by right, permitted by special review or prohibited. Any use that is not specifically permitted shall be deemed to be excluded. If a question arises as to whether a specific use does or does not fall within the expressed use categories, any persons may apply to the Planning and Zoning Commission for a determination as to whether a specific use is permitted. 
Schedule of Uses 
Residential Districts 
Use Public R-1 R-2 R-3 R-3 TN R-4 R-4 
MD Single-family dwellings P P P P P P Single accessory dwelling unit associated with an allowed single-family dwelling S 1 S1 Two-family dwellings S S S X P P Multi-family dwellings, apartment, townhouse, not exceeding six (6) units/lots X X S X P P Multi-family dwellings, in excess of six (6) units/lot X X X X S P Mobile home parks X X S X S S Park and recreation areas P P P P P P School P X X X X X X Fire stations S S S S S S Churches S S S S S S Community centers S S S S S S Governmental uses S S S S S S Offices Home occupation only S S Major utility facilities P X X X X X X Major utility lines S S S S S S S Minor utility facilities P S S S S S S Minor utility lines P P P P P P S Neighborhood commercial X X Neighborhood convenience stores 2 Part of PUD 
only S X S X Private education or instructional facility X S S S X S X Small day care X P P S S S P Large day care X S S S X S S Small total care X P P P S P P Large total care X S S S X S S Bed and breakfast establishments X S S S X S S Adult entertainment establishments X X X X X X X  
P = Permitted  S = Permitted by special review 
X = Prohibited 
NOTES: 
1.  See supplemental regulations, Section 16-27(a) and Section 16-31. 
2.  Neighborhood commercial centers shall be limited to a total of ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area with no single use greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. 
Schedule of Uses 
Commercial Districts 
Use C-1
Neighborhood C-3
Community Retail business/ commercial uses P P Wholesale business commercial X S Personal services P P Automobile sales and services X S Gas stations X S Parking lots S P Fast-food and drive-in restaurant X S Restaurants X P Commercial recreation facilities, including pool halls, bowling alleys, clubs, theaters, skating rinks X S Professional and business offices S P Hotels and motels X P Temporary multi-family or lodge X S Dental or medical clinics X P Churches X S School X S Private education or instructional facility X P Transportation facilities, terminals X P Campgrounds X S Public and governmental facilities S S Single-family residential units or apartments in conjunction with a business S P Community centers X S Banking, savings and loan with drive-up window X S Multi-family dwellings X S Mobile home parks X S Mobile home sales X S Extraction, processing and transportation of natural resource materials X S Park and recreation areas P P Child care and day nurseries S P Lumberyards X P Small day care S X Large day care S S Small total care X X Large total care S S Bed & breakfast establishment X X Small animal veterinary clinic X P Adult entertainment establishments X X Medical center (may include a medical marijuana center or retail marijuana store if it satisfies the definitions included in the Code and the special review approval) X S Medical marijuana center premises X S6 Retail marijuana store X P6  
6. See Requirements in Section 16-190 and Article V, Chapter 6. 
P = Permitted use S = Permitted by special review 
X = Prohibited 
  
NOTES: 
1. For C-2, see Section 16-29, C-2 Downtown Business District. 
Schedule of Uses 
Industrial Zone District 
Use IN Facilities for research, testing, fabrication, processing, manufacture, repair, cleaning and/or assembly of:   - sporting goods P   - electronic components P   - computers P   - steel (no manufacturing) P   - textiles P   - food processing P   - cosmetics P   - musical instruments, toys, novelties P   - artwork, pottery P   - ceramics, glass, metal and plastic products P   - natural or cultured stone products S   - furniture P   - paper products P   - other products and materials similar to and compatible with the above products and materials as determined by the Town Planner P   - other products and materials similar to and compatible with the above products and materials for which the Town Planner determines that Special Review Approval is necessary S Bottling plants P Office for conduct of a business or profession P Automobile, mobile home or recreational vehicle sales, and sales of parts and accessories P Automotive leasing P Industrial equipment sales and leasing and the sale of parts and accessories P Automobile, mobile home or recreational vehicle general service, repair, painting body work and storage P Gasoline stations and/or automobile washing facilities, with retail sales of automotive accessories only P Gasoline stations with accessory sales of convenience items not to exceed 2,000 sq. ft. of floor area S Restaurants not including drive-through establishments P Restaurants including drive-through establishments S Lumberyards, including sale of building and construction materials P Nursery stock production and sales, and greenhouse P General storage and warehouses for goods P Mini storage warehouse P Contractors supply yards P Shop for:   - blacksmith P   - cabinetworks and furniture P   - glazing P   - machining P   - printing and publishing P   - plumbing P   - electrician P   - sheet metal P   - handicraft products P   - upholstery P   - general repair P   - welding P   - shops for uses and products similar to and compatible with the above uses and products as determined by the Town Planner P   - shops for uses and products similar to and compatible with the above products and materials for which the Town Planner determines that Special Review Approval is necessary S Retail sales of products directly related to the primary use on the property within the IN Zone District for which the gross floor area related to on-site retail sales is 20% or less of the gross floor area of the use P Retail sales of furniture, household appliances and electrical equipment P Vocational or trade school S Bulk dry cleaning and commercial laundries P Motor or railroad freight depot S Cold storage lockers P Storage, repair, manufacture, rental and/or sales with contract installation for durable goods (by way of example, kitchen appliances, saunas, jacuzzis, sheet metal products, sheet rock, office equipment, solar energy equipment, etc.) P School S Private educational or instructional facilities S Health club not more than 12,000 sq. ft. of total floor area P Health club more than 12,000 sq. ft. of total floor area S Public and governmental building S Major utility facilities, including transmission lines and substations S Small day care S Large day care S Wholesale sales operation P Outdoor storage S Recycling facility S Parking lot S Drive-through bank, automatic teller machine/mini bank S Studio for motion picture or video production P Accessory dwelling units (accessory to a primary use). Generally, children will be prohibited in accessory dwelling units in the IN zone, but children may be allowed in certain circumstances through the special review process where there is a finding that the principal use of the property and the uses in the immediate neighborhood do not pose significant threats to the health or safety of children and that there are appropriate play area in or near the vicinity of the property S Catalog sales outfit P Any of the above uses, with the exception of lumberyards and mini storage warehouses, which exceed 35,000 sq. ft. of building and/or covered storage areas on a single lot S Salvage yard, junkyard X Adult entertainment establishments S 1 Construction waste compaction facility P Minor utility facilities 2 P Minor utility lines P Major utility lines S Medical office P Medical clinic S Medical marijuana center premises and retail marijuana store P Optional premises for a medical marijuana center X Premises for infused products manufacturing X  
P = Permitted use S = Permitted by special review 
X = Prohibited 
  
NOTES: 
1.  For the purpose of an application for special review approval of an adult entertainment establishment in the IN Zone District, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Town Council shall, when approving or denying the special review request for approvals, rely upon all special review criteria set forth in Section 16-44 through 16-47 but for Sections 16-44(e)(1)(c) through (f). 
  
2.  Structures owned or operated by a utility solely for office purposes, shall be reviewed as office uses not as a utility facility. 
(2)  Schedule of Requirements. The Schedule of Requirements includes basic bulk, setback, density, intensity and open space requirements for each residential and commercial zone. Additional requirements are listed for uses permitted by special review. 
Schedule of Requirements 
Residential Districts 
Use R-1 R-2 R-3 R-3TN R-4 R-4 MD Minimum lot area (square feet) 43,560 14,520 6,000 1 6,000 2 6,000 3 Note 12 Maximum building height (feet) 24 24 24 24 4 33 Note 12 Highest point of a pitched roof not to exceed (feet) 28 28 28 28 4 35 Note 12 Maximum number of stories 2 2 2 2 3 Note 12 Minimum lot width (feet) 75 50 50 50 Note 12 Yard requirements: (feet) Note 12 Front yard setback: Note 6 Note 12  Arterial 50 40 25 25 25 Note 12  Major collector 35 25 25 Note 7 25 Note 12  Minor collector 25 20 20 Note 7 20 Note 12  Local 25 20 20 Note 7 20 Note 12  Side yard 20 10 10 7.5 11 10 Note 12  Rear yard 35 20 20 10 20 Note 12 Rivers and other environmentally sensitive areas Note 10 Note 10 Note 10 Note 10 Note 10 Note 10 Maximum floor area ratio - - 0.35 0.35 to 0.50 9 .50 Note 12 Maximum lot coverage 20% 30% - 30% - Note 12 Minimum landscaped open space - - 20% 20% 30% Note 12  
NOTES: 
1.  In the R-3 District, up to six (6) multifamily or attached units may be permitted by special review. Two (2) family and multi-family uses within the R-3 zone district may be allowed in detached buildings by special review approval subject to compliance with the Master Plan typologies and compliance with the Supplemental Requirements for the R-3 TN zone district set forth in Section 16-27(a)(1)c, (a)(3) and (c), Town Code. The minimum lot areas shall be in accordance with the schedule below: 
Dwelling Units Minimum Lot Area (square feet) Permitted by right 1 6,000 Permitted by special review 2 8,000 3 10,000 4 14,000 5 18,000 6 22,000  
2.  For 6,000 sq. ft., see supplemental regulations, Section 16-27(b). For a single-family dwelling with an accessory dwelling unit, the minimum lot size is 8,000 sq. ft. 
  
3.  In the R-4 District, up to six (6) multifamily or attached units are permitted by right. By special review, developments with over six (6) units may be considered. The minimum lot areas shall be in accordance with the schedule below: 
Dwelling Units Minimum Lot Area
(square feet) Permitted by right 1 6,000 2 6,000 3 8,000 4 10,000 5 13,000 6 16,000 Permitted by special review Over 6 16,000 plus 3,000 for each additional unit  
When calculating the maximum number of units permissible, fractions shall be rounded to the nearest whole number with five-tenths (0.5) rounded up to the nearest whole. 
4.  See supplemental regulations, Section 16-27(c) and Section 16-27 (j). 
5.  See supplemental regulations, Section 16-27(b). 
6.  See supplemental regulations, Section 16-27(d), (e), (f) for additional setback regulations. 
7.  10 feet, covered porches; 15 feet for living areas; 20 feet for garage areas 
8.  In the R-4 District, the minimum side yard shall be ten (10) feet for the first twenty-five (25) feet of building height. Buildings in excess of twenty-five (25) feet shall increase the side yard setback one (1) foot for each two (2) feet of building height over twenty-five (25) feet. 
9.  See supplemental regulations, Section 16-27(j). 
10.  See Article XXI concerning development in or around rivers, wetlands and environmentally sensitive areas. 
11.  See supplemental regulations, Section 16-27(e). 
12.  See supplemental regulations, Section 16-31. 
Schedule of Requirements 
Commercial Districts 
Use C-1 Neighborhood C-3 Community Minimum lot area (square feet):   Nonresidential 6,000 10,000   Residential - 6,000 1   Combined residential/commercial 6,000 10,000 Maximum building height (feet) 24 33 Highest point of a roof not to exceed (feet) 28 35 Maximum number of stories 2 3 Maximum floor area ratio:   Nonresidential 0.5 1.5   Residential - 0.5   Combined residential/commercial - 2.0 Yard requirements (feet):   Front yard setback:    Arterial 25 50    Major collector 25 40    Minor collector 25 25    Local 25 25   Side yard 15 10 2   Rear yard 25 25 Rivers and other environmentally sensitive areas Note 4 Note 4 Minimum landscaped open space 30% 20%  
NOTES: 
1.  Residential minimum lot sizes in the C-2 and C-3 Districts shall conform to the requirements of the R-4 District. 
2.  In the C-3 District, the minimum side yard shall be ten (10) feet for the first twenty-five (25) feet of building height. Buildings in excess of twenty-five (25) feet shall increase the side yard setback one (1) foot for each two (2) feet of building height over twenty-five (25) feet. 
3.  The required ten percent (10%) open space may he provided in the public right-of-way with credits given for pedestrian improvements, street furniture, etc., subject to the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
4.  See Article XXI concerning development in or around rivers, wetlands and environmentally sensitive areas. 
5.  For C-2, see Section 16-29, C-2 Downtown Business District. 
Schedule of Requirements 
Industrial Zone District 
Use IN Minimum lot area (square feet) 6,000 Maximum building height (feet) 33 Highest point of a pitched roof not to exceed (feet) 35 Maximum number of stories 3 Maximum floor area ratio 2:1 Yard requirements (feet)   Front yard setback:    Local street 20    Other streets 25   Setback from zone district boundaries (landscaped) 20   Side yard setback (other than from IN district boundaries) (feet) 10 1   Rear yare setback (other than from IN district boundaries) (feet) 10 1 Rivers and other environmentally sensitive areas Note 2 Minimum landscaped open space 10%  
NOTES: 
1.  Variable side and rear yard setbacks may be permitted, that would allow a zero lot line development, provided that the following conditions are met: that a minimum of 20 feet be maintained between buildings unless common wall construction is proposed, that the lot line shall not abut a public right-of-way or private access easement, that all zero lot line developments shall provide a maintenance easement of 3 feet adjacent to the lot line with a zero setback, and that the variable setback shall be allowed only where all the lots involved are part of a platted subdivision or PUD with unified ownership of the lots adjacent to the property line with the reduced setback. 
2.  See Article XXI concerning development in or around rivers, wetlands and environmentally sensitive areas. 
(Prior code 70-9; Ord. 10 §§13, 14, 15, 1991; Ord. 12 §§1, 2, 1992; Ord. 13 §2, 1993; Ord. 14 §1, 1995; Ord. 16 §1, 1995; Ord. 20 §4, 1996; Ord. 10 §2, 1997; Ord. 30 §8, 1998; Ord. 7 §B, 1999; Ord. 5 §1, 2000; Ord. 32 §3, 2000; Ord. 9 §B, 2002; Ord. 13 §B, 2002; Ord. 28, 2003; Ord. 34 §B1, 2003; Ord. 07 §B3, 2009; Ord. 12 §5, 2009; Ord. 07 §4(Exh. D), 2012; Ord. 04 §B.3(Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 30 §1(Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 14 §1(Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 24 §1(Exh. A), 2016) 
Sec. 16-22.5. - Maximum size for residential units. 
    No dwelling unit regardless of zone district shall be in excess of five thousand (5,000) total square feet. 
(Ord. 23 §2, 2000) 
Sec. 16-23. - Developing Resource District. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted by right in the Developing Resource District include only those existing uses of the land at the time of annexation, limited to the following: 
(1)  Single-family residence. 
(2)  Raising of crops, grain, except for medical marijuana. 
(3)  Ranching. 
(4)  Other agricultural uses. 
(b)  Rezoning required. No uses other than those existing at the time of annexation shall be permitted on property zoned DR Developing Resource unless the property is rezoned to a zoning district that permits the proposed use. 
(c)  Uses permitted by special review: 
(1)  New dwelling units. 
(d)  Park dedication requirements and water rights. The properties that are annexed and zoned DR Developing Resource shall not be subject to the requirements for park dedication or cash payment in lieu of dedicating parkland or for water rights fees or requirements, except as to secured uses by right or permitted uses by special review, until the property is rezoned, wherein full satisfaction of such ordinance requirements shall then be due. 
(e)  Adult entertainment establishments and medical marijuana facilities are prohibited in Developing Resource Districts. 
(Prior code 70-10; Ord. 20 §5, 1996; Ord. 12 §4, 2009; Ord. 30 §1(Exh. A), 2013) 
Sec. 16-24. - Supplemental requirements for Industrial Zone District. 
(a)  All loading and unloading of vehicles shall be conducted on private property and not on any street or alley. 
(b)  All service operations, repair operations and fabrication and/or storage of materials shall be conducted in the building or within a yard enclosed by a fence at least eight (8) feet high on all sides. Such fences shall visually screen all storage and/or other activities occurring within such area. 
(c)  No dust, odor, glare, fumes, hazardous gases or waste shall be projected beyond the lot. 
(d)  Radiation hazards and electrical disturbances: No operation shall be conducted unless it conforms to the standards established by the rules and regulations of the State Department of Health pertaining to irradiation control. 
(e)  Noise: No noise shall be emitted which exceeds a maximum of seventy (70) decibels per minute (notwithstanding activity at the time of construction of original building or buildings). The noise shall be measured at the property line. 
(f)  Landscaping. All landscaping shown on the landscape plan as described in Section 16-25 and 16-26 shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  All disturbed unimproved areas shall be planted with grass, shrubs and/or indigenous trees. Undisturbed areas may be left in their natural condition, except as provided in subparagraphs (2) and (3) below. 
(2)  Dense planting of evergreens or other indigenous trees or shrubs averaging approximately four (4) feet or higher shall be used along site boundary lines visible from the State Highway 82 bypass or zone district boundaries for the purpose of screening parking and service yard area. 
(3)  Street setback areas shall either be planted with grass and maintained as lawns or be landscaped with "dryland landscaping." 
(Prior code 70-11) 
Sec. 16-25. - Procedures for permitted uses in Industrial Zone District. 
(a)  Prior to obtaining a building permit for any permitted use, at least one (1) copy of a site plan drawn to scale shall be provided to the Town Manager. The site plan shall be drawn in black ink on Mylar. 
(b)  The Town Manager or his or her designee shall review the site plan and determine within five (5) working days whether said site plan and application are in conformance with all Code requirements. Upon approval, the applicant may formally apply for a building permit. The building permit may be given concurrently with the above outlined procedure if all required building plans and other documents necessary for a building permit are submitted with the site plan. 
(c)  The site plan shall show the following: 
(1)  The location of all existing and proposed structures and other improvements on the real property. 
(2)  A legal description of the property. 
(3)  All off-street parking spaces and loading areas. 
(4)  The location of all ways for ingress and egress to a public, dedicated right-of-way and all internal circulation areas. 
(5)  Service, refuse collection and outdoor materials storage areas. 
(6)  All fencing and screening proposals including types of materials to be used and height of screening. 
(7)  A landscape plan shall be submitted. Landscaping can be shown on the site plan if at an adequate scale for review. Landscaping materials shall be indicated in tabular form, showing the type of plant material, minimum size and quantity. The approximate location of landscaping shall be indicated on the plan. 
(8)  Where necessary, all service line or utility main extensions shall be shown on the site plan at the request of the Town Manager. 
(9)  Other information as needed by the Town, which may include but not be limited to soils or geologic reports or drainage and engineering studies. 
(Prior code 70-12; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-26. - Procedures for special review uses in Industrial Zone District. 
(a)  Any uses defined as special review uses in the Industrial Zone District shall follow the review procedures specified in Article III of this Chapter. 
(b)  In addition to the items listed in the special review site plan contained in Section 16-43, the following information shall also be submitted: 
(1)  A landscape plan as specified in Section 16-25(c)(7). 
(2)  All plans and documents required to be transmitted by the applicant to county, state or federal agencies for applicable permits. 
(3)  Where necessary, all service line or utility main extensions shall be shown on the site plan at the request of the Town Manager. 
(Prior code 70-13; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-27. - Supplemental requirements for R-3 Traditional Neighborhood/Hill District. 
(a)  The following supplemental regulations shall apply to accessory dwelling units within the R-3 Traditional Neighborhood/Hill District: 
(1)  Accessory dwelling units, subject to special review approval, may be located within the principal residence or detached accessory buildings. Special review applications within the R-3 TN zone district, including requests for accessory dwelling units, shall be processed in accordance with standard special review procedures and approval criteria provided at Sections 16-41 through 16-47, subject to the following modifications: 
a.  The Town may make findings and recommendations that certain application requirements are not relevant to the circumstances of the particular application and shall be waived. 
b.  Only lots eight thousand (8,000) square feet or larger in size shall be eligible to request special review approval for an accessory dwelling unit. 
c.  Special review requests within the R-3 TN District shall be subject to the following approval criteria: 
1.  Conformance with Master Plan policies and guidelines and any illustrations and graphic guidelines included therein for maintaining traditional neighborhoods; 
2.  Preservation of existing structures including sheds and outbuildings; 
3.  Treatment of and relationship to public areas including sidewalks, streets and alleys; 
4.  Consistency of architectural treatments and building materials; 
5.  Consistency of mass and scale of new structures with other existing structures in the R-3 TN Neighborhood; 
6.  Conformance with all applicable building and fire code provisions. 
(2)  Accessory dwelling units shall be restricted in size in accordance with the schedule of requirements, and in no case shall they exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet in the R-3 Traditional Neighborhood/Hill Zone District unless the unit is documented as being legally approved prior to August 22, 1995 (which is the date of the original R-3 TN ordinance), or is documented as being in existence within the Town prior to the adoption of zoning regulations. In such cases, the maximum size restriction on such previously approved and preexisting uses shall be as in existence at the time of special review approval or adoption of zoning by the Town. 
(3)  The Code restriction of one (1) principal building on a property shall not apply in cases involving accessory dwelling units located in detached buildings. 
(4)  There shall be no condominiumization on which an accessory dwelling unit is created, except in the following situations: 
a.  The accessory dwelling unit is approved through the special review process or is preexisting, and is deed restricted through the Town's Affordable Housing Program; or 
b.  The accessory dwelling unit is created through a Town transfer of development rights process and is approved through the special review process. 
(5)  Special review approval for accessory dwelling units shall require that a deed restriction be recorded against the property which requires that one (1) of the two (2) dwelling units located on the property shall be resident-occupied unless the property owner obtains an exception from the Town under one (1) of the eligible exceptions. Resident-occupied, for the purpose of this requirement, means that at least one (1) member of a household shall occupy the dwelling unit as his or her primary residence. The determination of residency shall be made by the Town in accordance with the provisions of Section 31-10-201(3), C.R.S. Eligible exceptions are: 
a.  The accessory dwelling unit is less than five hundred (500) square feet of floor area and six hundred fifty (650) total square feet, and the unit is fully detached from the primary dwelling unit. 
b.  The owner pays a fee in lieu to the Town's affordable housing fund equal to the fee-in-lieu amount for one (1) employee as specified in the then-current Affordable Housing Guidelines. This exception does not apply without prior Town Council approval. 
(6)  Accessory dwelling units created on a property on which one (1) of the two (2) dwelling units are deed-restricted as resident-occupied shall have the parkland dedication fees waived for the creation of the accessory dwelling unit. Resident-occupied shall have the meaning as defined in Paragraph (5) above. 
(b)  Minimum lot size shall be six thousand (6,000) square feet, and minimum lot width shall be fifty (50) feet for newly subdivided lots. For developed lots the minimum lot size and width shall be as established in the schedule of requirements or as existing on August 22, 1995 at the time of the adoption of the original R-3 TN ordinance codified herein, whichever is least restrictive. 
(c)  Building height for accessory buildings located within this zone shall be no higher than the principal building on a lot, or twenty (20) feet with a restriction of twenty-four (24) feet to the highest point of a pitched roof, whichever results in a lower building height. 
(d)  Yard requirements. Yard requirements for the R-3 TN zone district shall be calculated as follows: (1) for developed lots, lots that are improved with existing buildings and residences, the setbacks shall be the building envelope which existed on August 22, 1995, at the time of adoption of the original R-3 TN ordinance codified herein or the schedule of requirements, whichever is least restrictive; and (2) for undeveloped lots with no existing structures, or for newly subdivided lots, the setbacks shall be as outlined in the schedule of requirements. Submittal of an improvement location survey as evidence of historical location of structures may be required by the Town in order to determine setbacks based on the above provisions. 
(e)  The Town may review the circumstances particular to the property and approve a reduced side yard setback subject to special review approval using the following procedures and criteria: 
(1)  The proposal satisfies all of the special review requirements in Section 16-27 (a)(1)c and Section 16-41 et seq. 
(2)  The Town Council finds the following: 
a.  Concerns raised by the Basalt and Rural Fire Department have been adequately mitigated; 
b.  There remains adequate light and air around the development to be allowed through the approval; 
c.  There are practical or legal instruments in place that make it possible to conclude that there will be adequate separation between the buildings. Examples include maintenance easements between the applicant and the adjacent property owner or fire wall construction on the building walls built within the seven-and-one-half-foot setback. 
(3)  The building code adopted in Chapter 18 of this Code restrictions shall be applicable and may restrict setback proposals for both residential and nonresidential structures. 
The purpose of the above provision is to allow flexibility to respond to unique lot sizes and shapes and existing building structures and not merely to allow a larger housing unit. 
(f)  Reductions in the front yard setbacks may be granted by special review for porches, and subject to the requirement that the Town Council find that the reduced yard setback for the porch will encourage neighborhood interaction and not have a substantial negative impact on the adjacent properties, and subject to the procedures and approval criteria for special review provided in Sections 16-27 (a)(1)c and 16-41, et seq. 
(g)  Reductions in the front yard setback requirements for purposes other than as a porch may be considered in this zone district through special review, which evaluation shall be conducted in accordance with special review procedures and criteria set forth in Sections 16-27 (a)(1)c and 16-41, et seq., and the following: 
(1)  The provisions of this district create an unreasonable hardship for the property because of exceptional and unique circumstances including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings; 
(2)  Exceptional circumstances exist on the property which are not a general condition within the zone district or surrounding neighborhood; and 
(3)  The requested change would be consistent with the spirit and intent of this zone district and the Basalt Zoning Code. 
(h)  The maximum floor area ratio in this zone district shall be thirty-five hundredths (0.35) in accordance with the countable square footage in the definition of floor area in Section 16-4 of this Code, except as provided in Subsection 16-27(i). In addition, the following restrictions and clarifications apply: 
(1)  Each dwelling unit shall be in compliance with Section 16-22.5 limiting the total square feet of any dwelling unit. 
(2)  Each individual lot shall be restricted to a maximum of three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet of floor area above grade for primary residences and a maximum of four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet for lots with accessory dwelling units. For the purpose of this additional limitation, floor area that satisfies the definition of below-grade space or basements is not counted in the three-thousand-five hundred-square-foot or four-thousand-five-hundred-square-foot limitation. 
(3)  There shall be only one (1) five-hundred-square-foot floor area exemption for the garage for the primary dwelling unit and none for a garage for an accessory dwelling unit. 
(i)  Lots less than six thousand (6,000) square feet in existence on August 22, 1995, shall be permitted to seek special review approval for a floor area ratio greater than thirty-five hundredths (0.35) up to a maximum floor area ratio of fifty hundredths (0.50) in accordance with the procedures and approval criteria in Sections 16-27(a)(1)c and 16-41, et seq. However, no lot of less than six thousand (6,000) square feet shall be entitled to construct more than two thousand, one hundred (2,100) square feet of floor area. 
(j)  Two and one-half (21/2) stories may be permitted by the Town Council by special review in accordance with the special review procedures and approval criteria of Sections 16-27(a)(1)c and 16-41, et. seq. The purpose of permitting two and one-half (21/2) stories is to encourage smaller building footprints and more landscaped open space and less development into hillsides. In cases where two and one-half (21/2) stories are permitted the maximum lot coverage shall be reduced to twenty-five percent (25%). In addition to any other findings to be made, the Town Council shall also be required to make a finding that the increased height does not negatively affect the value, use, enjoyment of or prevent the proper access of light and air to the adjacent properties any more than a two-story structure. The height shall be no higher than thirty-two (32) feet at the highest point of a pitched roof. 
(k)  Whenever under this Section the status of property or existence of facts as of the effective date of the ordinance codified herein is at issue, it shall be the property owner's burden of proof, by a preponderance of evidence, to establish such status or facts. 
(l)  Home occupations shall be an allowed use within the R-3 TN zone district and shall be subject to all regulations and provisions of this Code relating to home occupations as amended and supplemented by the following: 
(1)  Home occupations may employ one (1) full-time equivalent employee other than residents of the home subject to verification by the Town that there is one (1) additional off-street parking space available to serve the property. 
(2)  Traffic generated by the business and the single-family home together, including deliveries and customer visits, shall not exceed that which is typically generated by a single-family home. 
(3)  The home occupation may utilize one (1) business identification sign no larger than one hundred forty-four (144) square inches. Lighting of the sign shall be prohibited. Such signs may be located within a front yard setback. 
(4)  The home occupation use may be conducted within an accessory building including unattached garages and sheds. 
(5)  The total floor area used for the home occupation shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total floor area of buildings on a lot. The square footage of a garage used as a home occupation shall be counted in the FAR calculation. 
(6)  Each home occupation use shall be registered with the Town. Such required registration shall occur at the time that the home occupation user seeks a business license from the Town. The Town shall refuse to issue a registration and the business license if the home occupation use does not comply with the provisions of this Section. In addition, the Town shall keep a file of any written complaints received concerning the home occupation use, and based on the nature of said complaints and the actions that have been taken to address the complaints, the Town may exercise zoning enforcement procedures. 
(Ord. 16 §3, 1995; Ord. 30 §§2-7, 1998; Ord. 28, 2003; Ord. 13 §2, 2008; Ord. 33 §1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-28. - Supplemental regulations for "P" Public Zone District. 
    The following supplemental regulations shall apply to all development in the "P" Public Zone District. 
(1)  Site plan review requirements for "P" Zone District. 
a.  No new development shall occur in the "P" Zone District without site plan review approval. The site plan review approval shall comply with the requirements of Section 16-111, et seq., with the exception that a public hearing shall be required before both the Planning and Zoning and the Town Council and the application requirements shall satisfy the application requirements of Section 16-41, et seq., instead of the more detailed application requirements of Section 16-111, et seq., although the Town Planner may require any additional information reasonably required by the Town staff to review the application and to verify compliance with the provisions of this code. 
b.  The Town Planner shall have the authority to determine whether to have separate public hearings before the Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council or to have a combined hearing. Also, the Town Planner shall have the authority to determine whether to require a sketch plan review (either at separate or combined meetings) before more detailed plans are developed for the "P" zoned property. All such meetings shall be duly advertised public hearings unless the requirement for public notice is waived by the Technical Review Committee. 
c.  Through the site plan review process, the Town Council may place reasonable restrictions or limitations on any use or activity in the "P" Zone District. The Town Council may also determine that a specific use is not appropriate based on consistency with the Town Master Plan and compatibility with adjoining areas. The Town Council may establish conditions allowing for subsequent review by the Technical Review Committee to avoid unnecessary additional meetings before the Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council. 
d.  The government or public nonprofit entity may seek a site plan review exemption using the process in Section 16-111 for small structures requiring a building permit that are consistent with plans for the site (for example, a bathroom facility). 
(2)  Schedule of requirements. Buildings, structures and improvements existing as of December 1, 2001, shall be considered conforming buildings, structures and improvements for a use permitted in the "P" Public Zone District. Requirements for developments after December 1, 2001, shall be established through the site plan process. 
a.  Setbacks, height and number of stories shall be established through the site plan review process, provided: 
1.  No variance shall be granted to the minimum setbacks required by Article XXI concerning development in and around rivers, wetlands, and environmentally sensitive areas. 
2.  In no event shall more than four (4) stories above ground be permitted in a "P" Zone District and height exceed fifty (50) feet unless the Town Council makes the following findings: 
a)  The additional height is reasonably necessary in the circumstances for a use allowed in the "P" Zone District; and 
b)  The additional height would not injure the value of or use of or prevent the proper access of light and air to adjacent properties, nor be out of harmony with the intent and purpose of the Master Plan and this Chapter. 
The provisions of Section 16-182 regarding maximum height requirement exceptions will not apply to areas zoned "P." 
b.  Floor Area Ratio. The Floor Area Ratio shall be established through the site plan review process. 
c.  Open Space. The Minimum Required Open Space shall be established through the site plan review process. 
d.  Parking. The parking requirements shall be determined through the site plan review process following a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission based on the Town's parking requirement for uses outlined in Section 16-91 or for similar uses. However, the Town Council may apply a reduction based on hours of operation, mixed-use, access to on-street parking, transit availability and contribution to the social capital needs of the Town, including other public improvements, necessary infrastructure, basic Town service requirements. 
e.  Signage. The sign restrictions of the C-1 district will apply to areas zoned "P" with modifications permitted through the site plan review process. However, nothing shall prevent the Town Council from adding conditions and restrictions on signage to protect adjacent properties and to further the goals for the Town's Master Plan. 
f.  Lighting. The lighting requirements shall be established through the site plan review process. 
(3)  Uses. 
a.  Areas zoned in the "P" Zone District may be used for pubic uses and activities on property owned by a government entity or by a public nonprofit entity that satisfies the requirements of Sections 16-4 and 16-21(8). Said uses include, but are not limited to: administrative offices, transit facility, library, public works shop, museum, community center, churches, synagogues and other religious facilities, cemetery, active and passive recreation, schools, nature education center, water treatment facility, major utility, performing arts center, theater, and restricted housing that satisfies the Town's Community Housing Guidelines. 
b.  Uses and activities unanticipated in the site plan approval which are not customarily associated with the primary use and which are one-time or infrequent in the opinion of the Town Manager may be permitted by the Town through motion of the Town Council (e.g., a future "Battle of the Bands" site permitted by Council motion). 
c.  Accessory uses and activities which are not normally provided by the governmental entity or public nonprofit entity owning the property as defined herein, such as a for-profit gift shop, may be permitted on the "P" zoned property if approved by the owner of the property and said use or activity is consistent with the site plan approval granted by the Town Council. 
(Ord. 33 §6, 2001; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-29. - C-2 Downtown Business District. 
(a)  Zone district intent. The intent of the C-2 Downtown Business District is to promote the downtown area as a special activity center by encouraging a mixture of compatible commercial, office, residential, institutional and public uses and interesting street-level activity in buildings. This is accomplished by identifying certain uses and activities that help to create community vitality and ensuring that these uses remain a dominant element of the downtown area. The C-2 zone district also provides for site plan review for certain types of development activities to ensure that the downtown area is developed with special concern for the needs of the pedestrian, that there is continuity in the design and visual appearance of the district and that development furthers the 2007 Basalt Master Plan. 
(b)  Schedule of uses. The uses that are permitted by right or by special review and the uses that are prohibited in the C-2 zone district are listed in Table 1, which is provided below. Any use that is not specifically listed as permitted by right or by special review shall be deemed to be a prohibited use. 
Table 1 
Schedule of Uses in the C-2 Zone District 
Use Use-Specific Standards Permitted uses Retail business Community vitality use; see Section 16-29(c) Restaurant Community vitality use; see Section 16-29(c) Hotel and motel Community vitality use; see Section 16-29(c) Personal services Community vitality use; see Section 16-29(c) Movie and other theaters, pool hall and game room Community vitality use; see Section 16-29(c) Professional offices Business offices See Note 2, below, for real estate offices Banking and mortgage lending Offices for public and nonprofit uses See Paragraph 16-28(3) Parking garage See Subparagraph 16-29(e)(4)d.2. One or two apartments in conjunction with a business Permitted only on the upper floor(s) of the building; limited to no more than 1,400 sq. ft. per unit 3 . Apartments shall not be separated in ownership from the business use and may be used to satisfy community housing requirements for the business use with appropriate deed restrictions. Single-family residential units Permitted only where the residential unit fronts along Homestead Drive; limited to no more than 2,500 total sq. ft. per unit 3 Small day care or small total care Parks and recreation areas Temporary outdoor uses and vendors See Sections 6-14 and 16-181 Retail marijuana store Community vitality use: See Subsection 16-29(c): See Note 4. Uses permitted by special review Bed and breakfast establishment Community vitality use; see Section 16-29(c) Bowling alley and skating rink Clubs Gas station with or without food market Banking with drive-up window Dental or medical clinic Medical marijuana center Community vitality use; see Section 16-29(c). Temporary multi-family or lodge Multi-family dwellings Permitted only on the upper floors of the building; limited to no more than 1,400 sq. ft. per unit 3 Mobile home park Church School, public or private Public and nonprofit facilities, other than those typically occurring within an office building See Paragraph 16-28(3) Community center Large day care or large total care Transportation facilities, terminals Prohibited uses Wholesale business Automobile sales and services Campground Mobile home sales Extraction, processing and transportation of natural resource materials Lumberyard Small animal veterinary clinic Adult entertainment establishment Drive-in restaurant Medical center  
NOTES: 
1. See Section 16-29(b) which states that any use that is not specifically listed as permitted by right or special review shall be deemed to be a prohibited use. 
2. A real estate office that exclusively markets a single real estate development is prohibited to be located in the vitality zone. 
3. Total square feet is defined in Section 16-4. For the purposes herein, total square feet also includes any common storage space that is assigned to an individual unit but excludes any parking space that is assigned to the unit. 
4. Subject to compliance with the requirements set forth in Section 16-190 and the licensing requirements in Article V, Chapter 6. 
(c)  Community vitality uses and vitality zone. Table 1 also identifies certain uses permitted by right or permitted by special review that the Town classifies as "community vitality uses." The Town seeks to promote a continuous, pedestrian-friendly frontage of community vitality uses within the downtown core. Therefore, the Town hereby establishes an area to be known as the "vitality zone." Uses within the vitality zone shall be limited to those that are classified in Table 1 as community vitality uses. 
(1)  Vitality zone defined. The vitality zone includes the first twenty-five (25) feet in depth of the ground floor space of a property with frontage along the following roads: 
a.  Midland Avenue (from Town Hall to Riverside Drive); 
b.  Two Rivers Road (from Fire Access Lane in Ute Center to Midland Spur); and 
c.  Basalt Center Circle (commonly referred to as the "Clark's Market area"). 
(2)  Minimum depth may be reduced. The minimum depth of the vitality zone on a property may be reduced from twenty-five (25) feet to eighteen (18) feet if the resulting space within the building provides a minimum of five hundred (500) square feet of leasable area for community vitality uses. 
(3)  Existing uses may remain. Existing uses that are located within the vitality zone but are not classified in Table 1 as community vitality uses shall be permitted to remain. Such uses are not considered to be nonconforming uses and are not subject to Article XI of this Chapter. Instead, these uses shall be subject to the following limitations: 
a.  The use shall not be permitted to expand into the vitality zone but shall be permitted to expand into other areas of the property, such as a second floor space or a space that is behind the vitality zone. 
b.  If the use changes to a different use category in Table 1, the new use shall be a use that is classified in Table 1 as a community vitality use unless the use receives an exception pursuant to use review, as described in Paragraph (5) below. 
c.  If the use is discontinued for a period of nine (9) months, or if the portion of the building in which the use is located is destroyed by fire or any other cause, the space shall only be filled with a use that is classified in Table 1 as a community vitality use. 
(4)  Exemption for certain uses. The following uses are exempt from the requirement that uses within the vitality zone be devoted to community vitality uses: church or other religious assembly; school; public and nonprofit facilities; community center; and transportation facilities/terminals. 
(5)  Exception pursuant to use review. Business offices, professional offices and banking and mortgage lending institutions may obtain an exception from the requirement that spaces within the vitality zone be devoted to community vitality uses. An applicant seeking this exception shall submit an application for use review. The use review process involves the following steps: 
a.  The Town hereby establishes the inventory shown in Table 2 below, which represents the total linear frontage of business offices, professional offices and banking and mortgage lending institutions located in the vitality zone as of June 10, 2008. This inventory represents the maximum linear footage of each of these uses that the Town will permit to be established in each of the identified geographic areas in the future. 
Table 2 
Inventory of Certain Commercial Uses in the Vitality Zone 
Midland Avenue Two Rivers Road Basalt Center Circle Business offices 85 linear feet 25 linear feet 220 linear feet Professional offices 70 linear feet 0 100 linear feet Banking and mortgage lending institutions 145 linear feet 70 linear feet 0  
b.  For an applicant to establish a new business office, professional office or banking or mortgage lending institution in the vitality zone, or to expand any of these existing uses in the vitality zone, the applicant shall demonstrate to the Planning and Zoning Commission that at least an equivalent amount of linear footage of that particular type of use has been removed from the inventory in that particular geographic area and, therefore, the proposed new use would not cause the resulting total linear footage of that use in that geographic area to exceed the amounts listed in Table 2. The applicant shall also demonstrate to the Planning and Zoning Commission that the use satisfies the site plan criteria under Subparagraphs (e)(4)g. and i. of this Section to the extent possible, even if site plan review is not required. 
c.  In lieu of submitting an application for use review as described above, an applicant may instead submit a petition to the Town Council for an exemption from the limitation on the total amount of linear footage of each of these uses that is permitted in the vitality zone. 
1.  To obtain this exemption, the applicant shall demonstrate to the Council that filling the space with a community vitality use is not economically feasible based on objective factors at the current time as determined by the Town Council. One (1) example of how this demonstration could be made would be by showing that the space had not been able to be rented at market rates for an extended period of time. Applicants may use other methods to demonstrate to the Town Council that filling the space with a community vitality use is not feasible at the current time. 
2.  In granting an exemption on this basis, the Town Council may place limitations on the duration of the tenancy of the exempted use and may require that during the permitted tenancy the applicant shall continue to advertise the space for occupancy by community vitality uses. 
3.  The Town Council may also consider the location and relative prominence of the particular space along the street; the effect the exemption would have on adjacent uses; the level of pedestrian interest that is proposed to be provided; and the level of pedestrian activity that could be anticipated from the use that is proposed to occupy the space. 
4.  At a minimum, applicants for use exemptions will be required to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Town Council that the use satisfies the site plan criteria under Subparagraphs (e)(4)g. and i. of this Section to the extent possible even if site plan review is not required. 
(d)  Schedule of dimensional requirements. The dimensional requirements that are applicable to properties in the C-2 zone district are listed in Table 3, which is located below. 
____________ 
Table 3 
Schedule of Dimensional Requirements
in the C-2 Zone District 
Standard Dimensional Requirement Notes Minimum lot area 
  Nonresidential 
  Residential 
  Combined residential/ nonresidential 
1,500 sq. ft. 
6,000 sq. ft. 
2,500 sq. ft. Maximum building height or height to the highest point of a pitched roof. 
  
Maximum height to top of parapet 
30 feet 
  
33 feet May be increased to 35 feet by special review when a third story is allowed. Exceptions to maximum height limits are permitted pursuant to Section 16-182. 
  
May be increased to 38 feet by special review when a third story is allowed for a signature building pursuant to Subparagraph 16-29(e)(4)k. 
  
Also see Note 1 below. Maximum number of building stories A third story may be allowed by special review if any of the following occurs: 2 stories The entire building is a hotel or lodge and associated uses (which include employee housing units for the hotel or lodge); or 
The property includes an historic landmark; or 
The building had three stories built before June 10, 2009; or 
The building is located at the key intersection of Midland Avenue and Two Rivers Road and the first floor is retail or restaurant and the second and third floors are either office, retail and/or 100% category community housing; or 
The third story consists of 100% category community housing; the second story consists of 100% category community housing or other nonresidential C-2 uses; and the first story consists of C-2 uses as provided in Table 1 and the vitality zone provisions in Section 16-29(c). 
See Subparagraphs 16-29(e)(4)j. and k. for third story setbacks. Maximum floor area ratio 
  
Nonresidential 
  
Residential 
  
Combined residential/ nonresidential 
  
1.5 
  
0.5 
  
2.0 Minimum front yard setback 0 feet Minimum side yard setback 0 feet Minimum rear yard setback 10 feet 
  
25 feet If adjoining property is zoned C-2; or 
  
If adjoining property is not zoned C-2 or if a third story is permitted. Minimum lot width 25 feet See Section 16-4 for definition of lot. Minimum setback from rivers and other ESAs See Article XXI concerning development in and around rivers, wetlands and environmentally 
sensitive areas. Minimum percent landscaped open space 10% Open space credits may be given for pedestrian improvements, street furniture, etc., in a public right-of-way. See Subparagraph 16-29(e)(4)g. Minimum size of private open space 
  
  Nonresidential 
  
  Residential 
  
0 
  
50 sq. ft./unit See Subparagraph 16-29(e)(4)h.  
NOTES: 
1. Limitations on maximum height and maximum number of stories may not be varied via a PUD in the C-2 zone district. See also Subsection 16-63(b). 
____________ 
(e)  Site plan review for development in the C-2 zone district. 
(1)  Applicability. In addition to all other approvals required by this Code, site plan review shall be required before issuance of a building permit for all development in the C-2 zone district, provided that interior changes to an existing building that do not alter its exterior appearance shall be exempt from site plan review, even if the interior change would add square footage to the building. However, if the Town staff determines that some aspect of the proposed interior change would have an impact on the site, such as when an interior change would require additional off-street parking or a new or larger trash area to be provided, then site plan review shall be required. 
(2)  Review authority. Generally, site plan review shall be accomplished by the Planning and Zoning Commission, based upon a recommendation provided by the Town Planner. However, certain types of minor development activities may be approved by the Town Planner and certain activities shall be approved by the Town Council. The types of activities that may be approved by the Town Planner and those that require review by the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Town Council are summarized below. 
a.  The Town Planner is authorized to grant site plan approval to the following types of activities: 
1.  Any proposed change to the interior of a building that does not change the exterior appearance of the building but that the Town staff determines would require changes to be made to the site (such as changes to parking or the trash area). 
2.  Any proposal that would add no more than five hundred (500) square feet of nonresidential square footage to a lot or parcel, including proposals that alter the exterior appearance of the building or site in a minor manner. 
b.  The Planning and Zoning Commission is authorized to grant site plan approval to the following types of activities: 
3.  Any proposal that would add more than five hundred (500) square feet of nonresidential square footage to a lot or parcel or would add one (1) or more residential units (provided that such units are not listed as uses allowed by special review, in which case, the site plan would be reviewed by Town Council). 
4.  Any proposal to add square footage to a lot or parcel that would substantially alter the exterior appearance of an existing building or site or change the existing site features. 
5.  Any proposed addition to an historic landmark building or site. 
c.  The Town Council is authorized to grant site plan approval to the following types of activities: 
1.  Any development that also includes applications that require Town Council action, such as development that is subject to PUD review or for which the community housing mitigation requires Town Council action or development that involves a use that is permitted by special review in the C-2 zone district. 
2.  Any application that includes a proposal to alter or modify the use of Town-owned space, including public streets, alleys and rights-of-way. 
3.  Any site plan approval or denial that is appealed to the Town Council. 
(3)  Review procedures. The following procedures shall apply to site plan review: 
a.  An application for site plan review shall be submitted to the Town Planner. Prior to submission of the application, the applicant shall attend a preapplication meeting with the Town Planner so the applicant can become familiar with the submission contents, procedures and review criteria applicable to the project. 
b.  The site plan application shall contain the information listed in Section 16-43 of this Chapter, as applicable to the particular development proposal. If the site plan involves rehabilitation of, or additions to, an historic landmark, then the submission shall include: 
1.  A comprehensive graphic (or photographic) documentation of the exterior features of the historic building; and 
2.  A preservation plan that describes the preservation or rehabilitation methods to be employed on the site. 
c.  The staff will review the site plan application and determine whether the application is complete. If the application is incomplete, the staff will inform the applicant of any deficiencies that need to be rectified and will not take further action on the application until it is complete. 
d.  Following a determination that the application is complete, the staff will refer the application to the Technical Review Committee. Staff will assemble the comments of the Technical Review Committee and will prepare a written evaluation of the application, describing its compliance with the review criteria of Paragraph (4) below. 
1.  If the Town Planner is authorized to take final action on the application, the Town Planner may approve the application, approve the application with conditions or deny the application. The Town Planner may instead refer the site plan application to the Planning and Zoning Commission based on a determination that the issues involved should be acted upon by the Planning and Zoning Commission rather than by the staff. An applicant may appeal to the Town Council any decision by the Town Planner approving a site plan with conditions or denying the site plan. 
2.  If the application requires review by the Planning and Zoning Commission or if the application is referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission by the Town Planner, the Town Planner shall forward the written evaluation to the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
e.  For any application that is required to be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission or is referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission by the Town Planner, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the site plan application and the written evaluation prepared by the Town Planner at a duly noticed public hearing. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall approve the application, approve the application with conditions or deny the application. An applicant may appeal to the Town Council any decision by the Planning and Zoning Commission approving a site plan with conditions or denying the site plan. 
f.  For any application that is required to be reviewed by the Town Council, the Town Council shall consider the site plan application, the written evaluation prepared by the Town Planner and, when applicable, the recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission at a duly noticed public hearing. The Town Council shall approve the application, approve the application with conditions or deny the application. 
(4)  Review criteria. The application for site plan review shall be approved by the Town Planner, the Planning and Zoning Commission or Town Council as applicable if it meets all of the following review criteria: 
a.  The proposed development shall be consistent with the 2007 Basalt Master Plan. This shall include, but not be limited to, a finding that the proposed development in the C-2 zone district is consistent with: (1) Neighborhood Typology 2A from the 2007 Basalt Master Plan (Midland Avenue Commercial/Mixed Use) for areas northerly of Two Rivers Road; or (2) Neighborhood Typology 2B from the Master Plan (Town Center Commercial/Mixed Use) and the Riverfront Overlay where it is applicable. 
b.  The proposed site plan shall comply with the applicable elements of the Town of Basalt Complete Streets Design Manual. This shall include, but not be limited to, compliance with: (1) the Features and Street Characteristics for Complete Street Design, Town Center; and (2) the Site Design Guidelines Matrix, Town Center column. 
c.  The proposed site plan shall not result in an increase in the number of curb cuts on Midland Avenue. If an applicant proposes a new curb cut on Midland Avenue, that proposal must be accompanied by a proposal to eliminate an existing curb cut on Midland Avenue. In order to replace an existing curb cut with a new curb cut, the applicant shall be required to demonstrate that the proposal will enhance or will not cause any harm to the pedestrian experience on Midland Avenue. 
d.  Off-street parking and loading areas required for the proposed development shall comply with the applicable provisions of Article V, Off-Street Parking and Loading, provided that landmark properties may be exempted from the requirements pursuant to Section 16-394 of this Chapter. The visual impacts of off-street parking and loading areas shall be minimized. This shall be accomplished by: 
1.  Locating such areas, or the access to such areas, along the rear facade of the building whenever feasible (off-street parking shall not be permitted between the front facade of the building and the abutting street); or 
2.  Wrapping any structured parking within other permitted uses that have a minimum depth of eighteen (18) feet, designing the access to structured parking with the same attention to detail and materials as the primary building facade and integrating the access into the building's design. 
3.  The Midland Avenue loading zone shall be used to provide a loading area for the property wherever feasible. 
e.  Proposed signs shall comply with the applicable provisions of Article VII of this Chapter, including but not limited to Section 16-141, which provides a schedule of sign requirements for the C-2 zone district. 
f.  Exterior lighting proposed for the property shall comply with the applicable provisions of Article XX of this Chapter. 
g.  To the extent possible, the areas between a building and the adjacent street shall be visible space that is usable by customers of on-site business uses or pedestrians. These areas, and the required open space areas on the site, shall: (1) abut and be level with the public sidewalk; (2) be open to the sky (except for awnings, covered walkways, areas under a porch and covered outdoor seating); (3) be directly accessible to the public; and (4) be provided with appropriate ground cover treatment and landscaping. Placement of street furniture and public art in required open space areas is encouraged, as long as minimum pedestrian walkway width is maintained. Items such as street furniture, educational and interpretative displays, small play features and public art that is attractive and appropriate for use by young children is encouraged. The Town may give credits towards minimum open space requirements for pedestrian improvements, street furniture, fountains and similar improvements in a public right-of-way or other public spaces in the downtown. 
h.  At least fifty (50) square feet of private usable open space shall be provided for each dwelling unit. Private open space may include balconies above ground and lawn areas and patios behind the building. Private open space areas shall not be located in front of or adjacent to any portion of a building's vitality zone. The Town may reduce or waive a private open space requirement if the Town determines that the private open space area would interfere with the intent of the C-2 Business District. 
i.  Buildings within the vitality zone fronting the streets listed in Table 2 above shall incorporate a traditional storefront design, with windows suitable for retail goods display that are designed to attract pedestrian interest at the street level. The storefront windows along the facade of the vitality zone shall be transparent so as to permit the activities within the building to be visible to pedestrians along the adjacent street. 
j.  Special review approval is required to permit a third story on a building. Subparagraph k. below addresses the requirements for a three-story signature building at the intersection of Two Rivers Road and Midland Avenue. If a third story is proposed for other buildings, it shall be set back from the front building facade a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet and shall be designed to be simpler in form and more subdued in detail and color than the primary facade and shall be lower in height than the first floor plate height. However, the Town Council may authorize a lesser third story setback if the applicant provides a graphic simulation of the building that shows the effect of the third story from the adjacent streets and from surrounding properties and demonstrates that the design complies with the following criteria: 
1.  The traditional two-story main street view of the downtown business district shall be preserved as seen from Midland Avenue, Basalt Center Circle and Two Rivers Road. 
2.  The reduced setback shall not result in unacceptable massing or shading impacts on adjacent residential properties or adjacent public streets or public pathways. 
The Town Council may require the third story to also step back along the building's other facades to ensure that the third story does not cause such unacceptable impacts. 
k.  Special attention shall be given to any new building at the corner of Two Rivers Road and Midland Avenue, not only at the street level but also on its upper floors due to its prominent location at the entryway of the Midland downtown business district. Although it is not the intention of these provisions to require that the building be of a historic or period architecture, it should present a timeless design that makes a statement while maintaining an appropriate scale and mass to the Town. The Town Council may waive the requirement that the third story elements be set back a minimum twenty-five (25) feet from the front of the second floor if the Town Council finds that doing so is necessary for the building to make a design statement such that it will be a signature building at this central intersection. 
l.  The ground floor of any new structure in the vitality zone shall be at grade with any adjacent sidewalk or passageway, and there shall be no steps between the sidewalk and the primary building entry. However, in order to satisfy grade issues, steps may be included in the portion of the sidewalk closest to the street if the applicant demonstrates that providing steps is the best way to address grades on the site. 
m.  Utility boxes and trash/recycling service areas shall be located outside of the public right-of-way, along the rear or side facade of the building. To the extent possible, these facilities shall be located in a way that avoids or minimizes any negative impact on residential uses on the parcel and on adjacent parcels and does not interfere with pedestrian movement and experience. 
n.  Landscaping that is to be installed in the public right-of-way shall comply with the applicable provisions of the Public Works Manual. 
o.  If the site includes a historic landmark, the proposed development shall satisfy the requirements of Article XVIII of this Chapter, of this Code and all of the following additional criteria: 
1.  The project shall retain the historic character of the landmark building by accomplishing the following: 
a)  The proposal shall retain the distinctive materials, features, finishes and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship on the prominent facades of a landmark building. Demolition or removal of historic materials or features on the remainder of the building is to be minimized to the extent practical. Deteriorated historic features should be repaired rather than replaced to the extent possible. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of distinctive features, the new feature should match the old feature in design, texture and, where possible, materials. Any demolition or removal of materials or features that is allowed shall be done in accordance with Article XVIII. 
b)  The proposed new construction, addition and/or alteration shall be compatible with the landmark structure in its scale and massing and preserve the essential form of the landmark building along its prominent facades. The new construction shall be clearly distinguished from the historic fabric and shall be compatible with the historic materials and features, as well as the building's size. 
c)  The proposal shall respect the historic character of the building by limiting the addition of decorative elements to the historic portion of the building that confuse the authentic history of the building. 
d)  New accessory elements (such as awnings, planter boxes and lighting fixtures) proposed to be installed on the historic portion of the building shall be designed and/or selected to be compatible with the historic character of the building and be in character with the applicable elements of Neighborhood Typology 2A from the 2007 Basalt Master Plan (Midland Avenue Commercial/Mixed Use). 
2.  The project shall preserve, or shall not detract from, the historic character of the site by accomplishing the following: 
a)  The proposal shall allow the historic building to retain its prominence on the site, and any proposed alterations and/or additions shall not detract from that prominence. Any new construction that is proposed shall be sited to avoid obscuring the landmark structure or its significant features from the public. 
b)  The proposed new construction shall not substantially alter the character of the landmark building site or spatial relationships along the street, unless such changes are approved through special historic landmark review per Article XVIII of this Chapter. 
If compliance with Subparagraphs d.2., h., j. or l. of this Paragraph would damage, detract or otherwise diminish the historic character or integrity of the landmarked building, then compliance with that criterion can be waived for the landmark property. 
(Ord. 07 §§B4, B5, 2009; Ord. 12 §6, 2009; Ord. 14 §1(Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 24 §1(Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 22 §A(Exh. A), 2017) 
Sec. 16-30. - CSC Zone District. 
(a)  Intent and applicability. 
(1)  Statement of intent. The intent of the CSC Zone District is to combine the social capital objectives of the Town's Master Plan with the vitality objectives of the C-2 Zone District to produce tailored zoning controls for four (4) key redevelopment parcels in downtown Basalt in order to implement the results of the Our Town downtown planning process. The scale and character of development authorized in this zone district may allow buildings that are larger and more multi-faceted than areas zoned C-2 (Downtown Business) or P (Public). 
(2)  Applicability. This district is intended to apply to four (4) specific parcels of land commonly known as: 
a.  The CDC parcel; 
b.  The BCC parcel; 
c.  The Lions Park parcel; and 
d.  The Merino Park parcel. 
    The general boundaries of these four (4) parcels are shown on the following map. The exact boundaries of each parcel shall be established at the time the CSC Zone District is applied to that parcel. 

(b)  Threshold requirements. 
(1)  Development must be community serving. Since the intent of the CSC Zone District is to encourage social entrepreneurship in the development of community serving commercial projects, new development shall only be permitted to occur in the CSC Zone District if it is determined to be community serving. New development shall be considered to be community serving if it includes an anchor use or uses listed in Section 16-30(c)(1) below for the specific parcel indicated, and that anchor use or uses meets the applicable minimum size standard for that use in Section 16-30(c)(1) below. 
(2)  Qualifying organizations. In order to be eligible for rezoning to the CSC Zone District, the owner of the land to be rezoned must be a non-profit Community Development Organization, a similar non-profit organization where development activities are a stated part of its 501(c)(3) tax status, or a for-profit entity engaged in construction of a building or facility that is a community-serving anchor facility, as listed in Section (c)(1) below. A qualified Community Development Corporation is an entity which satisfies the requirements of Section 16-4 applicable to a "Public non-profit Entity, Community Development Corporation." A for-profit entity may include a group of owners which have agreed to be represented in the entity engaged in constructing the community-serving anchor facility. Notwithstanding the requirements above, after an anchor use has been established on a parcel listed in Section 16-30(a)(2) above, later applications for rezoning a different portion of the same parcel to the CSC Zone District may be filed with any person or entity authorized to file a rezoning application under Chapter 16 of the Basalt Municipal Code. 
(3)  Consistency with Master Plan. In reviewing whether a parcel is appropriate for CSC zoning, the Town will consider the future land use designation, neighborhood typology, and goals and objectives of the then current Master Plan, including but not limited to the Our Town Master Plan amendments. 
(c)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Permitted anchor uses. 
a.  Subject to Subsections (1)b. and (1)c. below, at least one (1) of the following anchor uses must occur on the CSC Zone District parcels indicated in the table below. 
Table 16-30-1: Anchor Use Table CDC Parcel
(West) CDC Parcel
(East) BCC Parcel Lions Park Merino Park Arts Center [1] Community Housing [2] Brewpub/Distillery [1] Entertainment [3] Grocery Store [3] Hotel [4] Condominium Hotel [4] Park/Open Space Small Business Incubator [2] Sports/Youth Center [1] Town Hall Community Center [1] [1] Must contain at least 6,500 sq.ft. of total floor area. 
[2] Must occupy at least 70% of the occupied total floor area developed on that CSC parcel. 
[3] Must contain at least 9,000 sq. ft. of total floor area. 
[4] Must contain at least 30 guest rooms. Guest rooms may include small kitchens.  
b.  The Town Council may approve an anchor use designated for one (1) CSC parcel as an acceptable anchor use for a different CSC parcel not indicated in the table above, with the exceptions that no anchor use other than a park or open space shall be designated for the eastern portions of the CDC and Lions Park parcels and a condominium hotel shall not be designated for the CDC parcel. 
c.  If an approved anchor use begins operation but later discontinues operation for a period of three (3) months or more, or if the portion of the building in which the anchor use is located is destroyed by fire or any other cause, the property owner may apply to change the approved anchor use to any other anchor use that meets the minimum size requirements listed in the table above. Any change to a substitute anchor use or another use permitted in the CSC zone district shall require review and recommendation by the Planning Commission following a public hearing, and shall require approval by the Town Council. 
(2)  Required Community Vitality Uses. On each CSC parcel, land uses in the designated Vitality Zone for that parcel are required to be Community Vitality Uses subject to exceptions included in Section 16-29(c) and the design guidelines for buildings included in Section 16-30(d)(7). 
(3)  Permitted secondary uses. The following secondary uses are permitted on each CSC parcel, provided that one (1) or more of the anchor uses designated in the table above (or approved by the Town Council) has already been established on same CSC parcel, or will be established on the same CSC parcel as part of the development containing the permitted secondary use. 
a.  An anchor use listed above in Table 16-30-1, regardless of whether it satisfies the minimum size requirements, unless prohibited elsewhere by this Subsection (C)(3) or by Subsection (C)(1)(b) above. 
b.  Uses and activities conducted by a government entity or by a public non-profit entity that meets the requirements of Sections 16-4 or 16-21(8) of this Chapter. Such uses include including but not limited to administrative offices and meeting rooms for non-profit and educational oriented organizations, transit facilities, museum, community center, educational facilities, performing arts center, and theater. 
c.  A local business chamber. 
d.  Community Vitality Uses as shown on Table 1 in Section 16-29 as Community Vitality Uses (in areas of the parcel other than the designated Vitality Zone). 
e.  Other commercial, office and retail uses allowed in the C-2 Zone District (but not including a condominium hotel on CDC parcel). 
f.  Fully-deed restricted community housing units meeting the requirements of this Chapter. On the CDC parcel, only fully-deed restricted community housing required to satisfy the commercial mitigation requirements of the CDC parcel is permitted. 
g.  Free-market multifamily residential uses (only on BCC and Lions Park parcels) where no unit exceeds one thousand four hundred (1,400) total square feet. 
h.  Makerspace/Craft Industry. 
i.  Public parking garage (on the BCC parcel only). 
j.  Public or private open space and park uses. 
k.  Day care that complies with state requirements regulating day care. 
l.  Accessory uses approved pursuant to CSC Development Plan Review Process. 
m.  Temporary outdoor uses and vendors, subject to the provisions of Chapter 6, Section 6-13 of the Town of Basalt Code. 
(4)  Limitations on permitted uses. Through the CSC Development Plan Review process, the Town Council may place reasonable restrictions or limitations on any use or activity in the CSC Zone District. The Town Council may also determine that a specific use is not appropriate based on the intent of the zone district, consistency with the Town Master Plan and compatibility with adjoining areas. The Town Council may establish conditions allowing for subsequent review by the Town Planner or Technical Review Committee to avoid unnecessary additional meetings before the Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council. 
(d)  Dimensional requirements. 
(1)  The dimensional requirements applicable to developments within the CSC Zone District shall be established through the CSC Development Plan review process, and shall be subject to the limitations listed in Table 16-30-2, below. 
Table 16-30-2: Dimensional Requirements Dimension Standard Comments CDC Parcel BCC Parcel Lions Park Parcel Merino Park Parcel Minimum Lot Area Maximum Building Height to Top of Parapet or Pitched Roof 2.5 stories; 38 ft. [1] 4 stories; 45 ft. [2] [3] [4] 2 stories; 25 ft. 4 stories; 45 ft. 2.5 stories means a third story is allowed if it is set back as required in applicable table notes. Front Yard Setback (along Two Rivers) Overhangs and other building features may encroach into the public-right of way if approved through the CSC development plan review process and a Town encroachment license is obtained Min. 0 ft. 0 ft. 0 ft. 0 ft. Max. 10 ft.[6] 10 ft.[5] [6] 10 ft.[6] N/A Front Yard Setback (along Midland Avenue and Midland Spur) Min. N/A 0 ft. 0 ft. 0 ft. Max. N/A N/A 10 ft.[6] 10 ft.[6] Min. Side Yard Setback Per Building and Fire Code Min. Rear Yard Setback Per Building and Fire Code Min. Setback from Rivers and other Environmentally Sensitive Areas See Article XXI Min. Landscaped Open Space 10% N/A Open space credit may be given for pedestrianimprovements per Section 16-30(e)(5)(b) [1] A 2.5 story building is allowed if the third story is set back at least 10 ft. from the lower facade facing Two Rivers Road street frontage, from Riverfront Park, and from the park on the east portion of the CDC parcel. 
[2] Any portion of the building containing a grocery store may have a maximum height of 49 ft. 
[3] Each building shall not exceed 2.5 stories or 38 ft. in height within 50 ft. of Two Rivers Road or Midland Avenue, or within 100 ft. of the Frying Pan River. 
[4] No new building shall exceed 2.5 stories or 38 feet in height until (a) at least 150 linear feet of the Two Rivers Road frontage is occupied by buildings meeting the minimum and maximum setbacks, or (b) the Town Council has approved a development plan showing that at least 150 linear feet of the Two Rivers Road frontage will be occupied by buildings meeting the minimum and maximum setbacks, or (c) the ground floor of the building or combination of buildings exceeding 2.5 stories or 38 feet contains the anchor use or portion of the anchor use and note [3] is satisfied. 
[5] Maximum building setback shall not apply to the 150 ft. of the BCC parcel along the Two Rivers Road frontage closest to Midland Avenue, measured from the light pole existing on March 31, 2016, at the intersection of the Two Rivers Road and Midland Avenue. 
[6] At least 80% of any street facing building must be built between the minimum and maximum front setbacks except for building located behind another street facing building or as provided in Notes [4] and [5] above.  
(2)  Town Council can reduce or waive in its entirety the requirement for a full ten-foot third floor setback on the park sides of the CDC parcel after a recommendation of the Planning and Zoning confirming that at least one of the following findings has been made. 
a.  An equivalent setback is provided on the first floor to provide a porch or deck that lessens the visual massing of the building by park users; 
b.  Requiring the setback would require the first floor of the building to be so large that it would negatively impact views required by Section 16-30(e)(1); 
c.  There is sufficient fenestration in the building to reduce the visual mass of the building so that the full top floor setback is not necessary; 
d.  The third floor setback is in an area not seen by park users because of vegetation, terrain change, intervening structures, or other factors; 
e.  The second floor of the building is set back from the first floor facade at least ten (10) feet or more on those frontages where a third floor setback is required in the table above. 
(3)  A land use application must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Town Council that the height requested is compatible with or complements the adjacent uses and heights of adjacent structures. The Town Council can allow a building height to exceed the maximum height requirements by no more than eight (8) feet after a recommendation of the Planning and Zoning confirming that at least one (1) of the following additional findings has been made. 
a.  Permitting the additional height allows for greater views or wider pedestrian-through connections to the river than otherwise would be achieved or the Applicant is willing to grant wider views to the river in exchange for the additional height; 
b.  The height is the minimum necessary to hide mechanical equipment that must be on the roof; 
c.  The additional height is necessary to allow underground parking. However no more than four (4) feet of underground parking structure height above approved grade may be exempted from the maximum height limitations. 
d.  The additional height will permit the addition of a feature improving the architectural interest of the building. However, no more than six (6) feet of additional height to accommodate the feature may be approved. 
(4)  The approved grade from which maximum height will be measured and first floor elevation(s) for the buildings within any CSC parcel will be proposed in the sketch plan application and established at Final Plan review based on each building's relationship to any adjacent street, sidewalk, public area or buildings, while factoring in other environmental considerations such as the water table. 
(e)  Other Site Development Standards. 
(1)  Openings to the river. The following openings shall be preserved for views to Roaring Fork River and for pedestrian passage by employees, occupants, or patrons of adjacent properties, and no new building shall be constructed in the areas designed as a view protection/pedestrian access zone. 
a.  Required View/Pedestrian Opening 1: On the Lions Park parcel and CDC parcel, buildings shall be sited so as to preserve views and pedestrian access from the corner of Midland Avenue and the Midland Spur to the Roaring Fork River as shown on the following map. 
b.  Required View Opening 2: On the CDC parcel, a view and pedestrian access from Two Rivers Road to the Roaring Fork River shall be provided along the western edge of the property, as shown on the following map. 
c.  Additional View Opening: To the maximum extent practicable, at least one (1) additional view from Two Rivers Road to the Roaring Fork River should be provided somewhere west of the intersection of Two Rivers Road and the Midland Spur. This view opening shall be located so that building frontages along Two Rivers Road comply with the building facade articulation standard in Section 16-30(f)(4) below. 

(2)  Pedestrian through-connections. Development on the BCC parcel shall incorporate at least one (1) pedestrian through-connection from the Midland Avenue frontage to the Frying Pan River frontage. The required pedestrian through-connection shall be located internal to the site (at least fifty (50) feet from the Two Rivers Road frontage). 
(3)  Vitality zone. Each CSC parcel except the Merino Park parcel shall include a designated vitality zone that shall be established by the Town in the sketch plan process. The permitted uses in the vitality zone are shown on Table 1 in Section 16-29 as Community Vitality Uses and the buildings are subject to the building design standards contained in Section 16-30(f) for buildings within the vitality zone. The Town Council will establish the vitality zone considering the following: 
a.  The pedestrian and connectivity goals of the area; 
b.  The nature of the desired streetscape; 
c.  Existing and proposed adjacent uses; 
d.  The then current Master Plan, including but not limited to the Our Town Master Plan amendments; and 
e.  The goals advocated by any non-profit applicant. 
(4)  Parking. Development in the CSC Zone District shall provide parking as follows: 
a.  Minimum requirements. 
1.  Hotel/Condominium Hotel-One (1) space per hotel room, plus two (2) for management and operations. 
2.  Residential-One (1) space per bedroom to a maximum of two (2) spaces per unit, where an efficiency unit is counted as one (1) bedroom. 
3.  All other uses-One (1) space per four hundred (400) square feet of floor area. With the exception of handicap spaces and car share spaces, parking spaces may not be reserved for individuals or private businesses. 
b.  Additional on-street parking constructed as part of the development will count for nonresidential parking included in the calculation of parking spaces to be provided. The applicant shall be permitted to purchase non-residential parking spaces pursuant to the requirements of Section 16-94. 
c.  The Town Council may apply a reduction of the non-residential parking requirements following a recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission based on hours of operation, mixed-use, access to on-street parking, availability of local public transit, availability of parking spaces in a public parking lot or garage, expected use of WE-Cycle or other bicycle sharing programs, contribution to or participation in a car share program that serves the community, creation of a Transportation Demand Management (TDM) plan to reduce traffic volumes and parking demands below expected levels, or contribution to other desired public improvements, necessary infrastructure, or other basic Town service requirements. The Town Planner may require a recommendation from a parking consultant as outlined in Section 16-92 in order for the staff and Planning and Zoning Commission to make a recommendation and the Town Council to make a decision on the appropriate parking reduction for the development. 
d.  The visual impacts of off-street parking and loading areas shall be minimized. The design of parking and loading areas shall ensure that they support and do not detract from the Town's vitality goals for the CSC Zone District, This shall be accomplished by: 
1.  Constructing structured parking primarily underground where such construction is feasible; 
2.  Prohibiting surface parking between any building on the CDC, Lions Park, and Merino Park parcels and the right-of-ways of Two Rivers Road, Midland Avenue, or the Midland Spur; 
3.  Locating parking and loading areas, or the access to such areas, along the rear facade or side of the building whenever feasible; or 
4.  Wrapping the facades of any structured parking within other permitted uses that have a minimum depth of eighteen (18) feet or wrapping the facades with building material, grading or landscaping to break up the view of the parking and parking structure lighting from public open spaces and other activity areas. When this design option is employed the access to the structured parking shall be designed with the same attention to detail and materials as the primary facade and the access shall be integrated into the building's design and wrapping. 
5.  Designating one (1) or more loading zones on the site plan and regulations to govern loading. 
e.  Except as described in subsections (a) through (d) above, parking areas and structures in the CSC Zone District shall comply with the requirements of Article V, Off-street Parking and Loading. 
(5)  Open spaces. 
a.  To the extent possible the areas between each building with a ground floor nonresidential primary use and the adjacent street shall be visible space that is useable by customers of on-site business uses or pedestrians. These areas, and the required open space areas on the site shall: 
1.  Abut and be level with the public sidewalk; 
2.  Be open to the sky (except for awnings, covered walkways, areas under a porch and covered outdoor seating); 
3.  Be directly accessible to the public; and 
4.  Be provided with appropriate ground cover treatment and landscaping. 
b.  Placement of street furniture and public art in required open space is encouraged, as long as a five-foot minimum pedestrian walkway width is maintained. Items such as street furniture, educational and interpretive displays, small play features and public art that are attractive and appropriate for use by young children are encouraged. The Town may give credits towards minimum open space requirements for street furniture, fountains and similar improvements in a public right-of-way or other public spaces in the downtown. 
c.  At least fifty (50) square feet of private usable open space shall be provided for each dwelling unit. Private open space may include balconies above ground and lawn areas and patios behind the building. Private open space areas shall not be located in front of or adjacent to any portion of a building's vitality zone. The Town may reduce or waive a private open space requirement if the Town determines that the private open space area would interfere with the intent of the CSC Zone District. 
d.  Building design and landscape features for the CSC development must take into consideration adjacent public park uses. CSC development shall complement but not detract from public park activities. Development outside of any designated vitality zone adjacent to a public park shall be designed to minimize the intrusion of the CSC development activities or impacts from private lands onto public parks and trails. Development within any designated vitality zone should be designed to optimize integrated public and private uses and activities. 
(6)  Signage. The sign restrictions of the C-2 District will apply to non-residential uses unless modifications to those standards are approved through the CSC Development Plan Review process. However, nothing shall prevent the Town Council from adding conditions and restrictions on signage to protect adjacent properties and to further the goals of the adopted Town's Master Plan, including without limitation the Our Town Master Plan amendments. 
(7)  Lighting. The lighting requirements of Section 16-431 shall apply to development within the CSC Zone District unless modified through the Exemption process outlined in Section 16-438 of the Town Code, Article XX, Exterior Lighting. 
(8)  Utility and trash facilities. Utility boxes and trash/recycling facilities servicing the building shall be located outside of the public right-of-way, along the rear or side facade of the building. To the extent possible, these facilities shall be located to avoid or minimize any negative impacts on residential uses on the parcel and on adjacent parcels and to avoid interfering with pedestrian movement and experience. This requirement shall not be construed to prohibit the placement of street furniture, such as public trash containers, within the public right-of-way. 
(9)  Environmentally sensitive areas. Development within the CSC Zone District shall comply with Article XXI (rivers, wetlands and environmentally sensitive areas), provided that the environmentally sensitive area review shall be conducted simultaneously with the CSC Development Plan Review if the Town Planner makes a finding that the development is within the development line established by the River Master Plan. 
(10)  Community Priority Scoring System. Development within the CSC Zone District shall be exempt from the requirements of Article XXII. 
(11)  Land dedications. The land and improvements, or fees in lieu, required to be provided under the provisions of Section 17-15 (Parkland Dedication) shall be calculated at one-half (1/2) the requirement for any deed-restricted community housing units; and the provisions of Section 17-16 (School Land Dedication) shall apply at the same discounted rate for deed restricted community housing units. The Town Council may exempt or further reduce such fees for free- market and community housing during the CSC Development Plan review process pursuant to Section 16-419. Any reduction or elimination of school impact fees will require approval by the school district. 
(12)  Development in the CSC Zone District shall meet or exceed the accessibility requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(13)  Landscaping in the public right-of-way. Landscaping that is to be installed in the public right-of-way shall comply with the applicable provisions of the Public Works Manual. 
(14)  Curb Cuts. Development in the CSC Zone must satisfy the design criteria of the C-2 Zone District in Section 16-29(e)(4)c. regarding curb cuts. 
(15)  Street and Streetscape Improvements. All street and streetscape improvements shall comply with the Town of Basalt Complete Streets Design Manual. 
(16)  Community Housing. Development within the CSC Zone District shall comply with Article XIX (Housing Mitigation). 
(f)  Building design. All buildings shall comply with the following requirements, if applicable: 
(1)  Building Typologies and Guiding Principles. The typologies from the Our Town amendments to the Town of Basalt Master Plan that the Town determines are most applicable to the type of development proposed in the project, as well as other building design standards and guidelines contained in the Our Town Master Plan amendments. Those guiding principles include: 
  Building scale compatible with historic downtown; 
  Variety of western roof forms; 
  Street level interest; and 
  Contemporary reinterpretations. 
(2)  Buildings within the portion of the site designated as the vitality zone (as that term is defined in Section 16-29 of this Code) shall incorporate a store-front design at the street level, with windows suitable for retail goods display that are designed to attract pedestrian interest at the street level. The storefront windows along the facade of the vitality zone shall be transparent so as to permit the activities within the building to be visible to pedestrians along the adjacent street. Commercial spaces at street level should have a ceiling height consistent with those within the historic downtown. 
(3)  Any new buildings constructed at prominent corners shall contain both ground floor and upper floor elements that reflect timeless design and visually emphasize the importance of the corner through vertical elements, changes in materials or color, changes in articulation patterns, or entryways, or similar features. 
(4)  Building facades along streets shall be designed to reflect the general twenty- to thirty-foot width of street facing building facades in older areas of downtown Basalt. Building facades wider than thirty (30) feet shall include vertical projections or insets from grade level to the eave of a pitched roof or the top of a flat roof or parapet at a linear spacing of no less than twenty (20) feet and no greater than thirty (30) feet unless waived or modified by the Town Council after recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission. This standard shall not prohibit the extension of an awning across the vertical projection or inset. 
(5)  Building facades along pathways that connect buildings to public spaces, and along alleys or other frontages with pedestrian traffic shall contain projections from or insets into the wall plane, windows, doors, or changes in material to ensure that no section of building wall longer than thirty (30) feet is of uniform materials, color, and appearance unless waived or modified by the Town Council after recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(6)  The ground floor of any new structure in the vitality zone shall be at grade with adjacent sidewalks or passageways, and there shall be no steps between the sidewalk and the primary building entry. However, in order to satisfy grade issues, steps may be included between the sidewalk and the street if the applicant demonstrates that providing steps is the best way to address grades on the site. 
(g)  Zone District review procedures and submission requirements. 
(1)  CSC Development Plan review procedures. No new development shall occur in the CSC Zone District without CSC Development Plan review and approval. CSC Development Plan review shall be conducted in two (2) stages, these being Sketch Plan review and Final Plan review. 
a.  Sketch Plan review. Sketch Plan review is intended to provide the Town with a general overview of the project including a description of existing conditions, proposed mix of uses, height, floor area and parking, as well as its relationship to neighboring properties and consistency with the Town's Master Plan, the River Master Plan and applicable Code provisions. Sketch Plan review shall involve the following procedural steps: 
1.  The initial step in Sketch Plan review shall be a determination of whether the proposed project is community serving and is eligible for rezoning to the CSC Zone District. This determination may be made administratively by the Town. Planner or the Town Planner may refer this matter to the Planning Commission and Town Council. If the determination is referred, then the Planning Commission and Town Council consideration may occur at a jointly held public hearing. Any project that is determined to be community serving and eligible for rezoning to the CSC Zone District may then proceed through Sketch Plan review. 
2.  With the exception of proposals for the Merino Park parcel, Sketch Plan review shall require a review by the Town's Parks, Open Space and Trails Committee. The Committee shall make recommendations on how the project satisfies Section 16-30(e)(1),(2) and (5) along with the Committee's findings of the project's consistency with the parks, open space and trails sections of the Town's master plan and the project's impact on any other adopted park plans. 
A Sketch Plan review will then require review by the Planning Commission. The Commission is authorized to recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the Sketch Plan application following a duly noticed public hearing. The Planning Commission review shall be followed by a review by the Town Council at a duly noticed public hearing. Following the closure of the public hearing, the Town Council may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. 
b.  Final Plan review. Final Plan review is intended to provide the Town with a more detailed description of the proposed development program, to respond to issues raised in the sketch plan review and to present additional information required in the Sketch Plan review. With the exception of proposals for the Merino Park Parcel, the initial step in the Final Plan review will be a review by the Parks, Open Space and Trails Committee. The Committee shall make recommendations on how the project satisfies Section 16-30(e)(1), (2) and (5) along with the Committee's findings of the project's consistency with the parks, open space and trails sections of the Town's master plan and the project's impact on any other adopted park plans. Final Plan review shall require a review by the Planning Commission. The Commission is authorized to recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the Final Plan application following a duly noticed public hearing. The Planning Commission review shall be followed by a review by the Town Council at a duly noticed public hearing. Following the closure of the public hearing, the Town Council may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. The Town Planner may schedule a joint meeting of the Planning Commission and Town Council prior to. the initial Final Plan review by the Commission. 
c.  Community Serving Subdivision. A property which is zoned CSC is eligible to be subdivided as a Community Serving Subdivision pursuant to the provisions of Section 17-84.5 of this Code provided no more than four (4) initial lots are created by the Owner. The Community Serving Subdivision shall be processed concurrently with the CSC Development Plan. However, nothing herein requires the qualifying non-profit organization to use the Community Serving Subdivision process if the owner would rather utilize another eligible subdivision process in the Code at the time of the subdivision. 
(2)  Sketch Plan submission contents. The application for the Sketch Plan stage of CSC Development Plan review shall include the following: 
a.  Completion of standard application forms and authorization from the owner for the filing and processing of the application and fees. 
b.  Description of existing conditions. 
c.  A legal description of the property, an ALTA survey and a copy of any easement or recorded document referenced on the ALTA survey. 
d.  A list with addresses of all property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the property. 
e.  A description of the development program including: major objectives of the development; proposed mix of uses with approximate square footages of each use and number of any free-market and community housing units and allowed locations; parking capacity, location and types; access locations and vehicle and pedestrian circulation; proposed phasing and timing; and plan for satisfying the goals of the development plan. Numbers can be provided in a range. 
f.  Schematic development plan (at a scale of at least one (1) inch per one hundred (100) feet) showing horizontal relationships of the proposed development with property boundary, setbacks and proposed uses. 
g.  Information and drawings and physical model (at a scale identified by Town Planner) providing a schematic level description and illustration of the height, scale and mass of proposed structures from important perspectives, as well as proposed open spaces narrative and graphic descriptions of the character and style of architecture in context with adjacent development. The Town Planner may allow an applicant to submit a computer model in lieu of the physical model. 
h.  Narrative addressing relationship of the project to neighboring properties and consistency with the Town's Master Plan, the River Master Plan; Streetscape Plan and any other long range planning documents as deemed appropriate by the Town. 
i.  Narrative description of how utilities are to be provided to and through the site by a licensed professional engineer along with an assessment as to the feasibility of the applicant's proposal. Describe whether any existing utilities or easements will need to be relocated or vacated, and generally the plan for accomplishing this. The engineer's assessment at a minimum must address potable water, sanitary sewer, drainage and storm sewer, electrical power, natural gas power, and flood protection where applicable. Describe whether the power lines will be below ground or overhead. The applicant may include maps depicting the alignment of utilities but it is not required at Sketch Plan. The engineer's assessment shall outline any known engineering and utility issues and generally describe how they will be addressed in the final site plan review. 
j.  Proof of ability to apply the CSC Zone District. 
k.  General statements describing how the elements of the development will satisfy the criteria required for the CSC Zone and explanation for any reductions in requirements allowed through the site plan process. 
l.  Statements addressing how the development intends to satisfy requirements that apply to the development found in other sections of the Code applicable to the type of development being proposed, including but not limited to: any annexation requirements; school and parkland dedication; floodplain development permit and regulations, and community housing, including any need for relocation housing. 
m.  Description of how the development addresses the Town's goals toward sustainable building, energy efficiency and waste reduction. 
n.  A study of the shading or shadow impacts that the proposed buildings may cause on public or private rights-of-way or other public spaces within or surrounding the project. 
o.  Additional information. Any additional information reasonably required by the Town to review the application and to verify compliance with the provisions of this Code. 
(3)  Final Plan submission contents. The application for the Final Plan stage of CSC Development Plan review shall include the following: 
a.  Same as above along with such additional or refined information and analysis as may be required by the Town Council in order to address issues raised in the Sketch Plan review or to verify compliance with the provisions of this Code. 
b.  Off street parking and loading areas, including the location, type and capacity of proposed parking areas, and written justification for any proposed reductions or fee-in-lieu of parking proposals. 
c.  The location of all ways for ingress and egress to all buildings and parking areas. 
d.  Service and loading areas and refuse and recycling collection areas. 
e.  Site/building program. 
f.  Development plan which meets the requirements of Section 16-66(3)b. Following Final Plan approval the applicant shall record a development plan containing the elements of the Town Council's approval. 
g.  Reserved. 
h.  Proposed schedule and phasing. 
i.  Identification of potential construction and maintenance easements needed for zero-lot line development and plan for obtaining such easements. 
j.  Draft Master Development Agreement which generally describes the public improvements to be constructed in connection with the project, the timing of such construction, the parties responsible for completion of the public improvements and the financial security to be provided. 
(4)  Building, engineering and site design review. Building, engineering and site design review is intended to provide the Town with the final architectural, engineering, landscaping and other technical documents that are a precursor to the actual construction of the project. Following approval of the final CSC Development Plan and any other associated land use actions and prior to issuance of a building permit for each lot or development site, the then-owner of a lot or development site shall comply with the following submission requirements and review procedures: 
a.  The owner shall prepare and submit architectural drawings, elevations and perspective drawings of all proposed structures and improvements intended to show the relationship of the proposed structures to the surroundings. Such drawings shall depict proposed building materials, fenestration, mechanical equipment (and screening of such equipment) and similar architectural details but need not be the result of final architectural design. 
b.  The owner shall submit final engineering documents, including plans and specifications for streets, water, sewer and drainage and the engineers' cost estimates for all public improvements to be installed on the lot or building site within dedicated land areas, rights-of-way or easements. 
c.  Following construction, the owner shall provide as-built mapping and diagrams for utility installations in an electronic computerized format of a type approved by the Town Engineer or Public Works Director. 
d.  The owner shall describe the character and type of landscaping, lighting and signage to be provided. The landscaping shall be indicated in tabular form, showing the type of plant material, minimum size and quantity. The approximate location of landscaping shall be indicated on a site plan. The lighting description shall describe how the lighting complies with the final site plan approval and any exemptions that will be necessary pursuant to Section 16-438 of the Town Code, Article XX, Exterior Lighting. The signage plan shall provide detailed information sufficient to determine whether the location, size, number and character of the proposed signs comply with the requirements of the Town Code, Article VII, Signs. 
e.  The owner shall provide an anticipated time table for completion of development including the anticipated dates for completion of any phase. 
f.  The owner shall provide a title insurance policy indicating that the property is free and clear of all ownership disputes, liens or encumbrances which would impair the property to be utilized for the uses approved. The title policy shall provide verification that all owners and lien-holders have approved the final subdivision plat. 
g.  The owner shall demonstrate compliance with Article II, Chapter 17, Design Standards and Requirements for Subdivisions. 
h.  The owner shall demonstrate compliance with Article V, Chapter 17, Public Improvements Acceptance and Guarantees. 
1.  The owner shall provide a Subdivision Improvement Agreement for public or quasi-public improvements to be constructed by the owner and other draft agreements and conveyances that apply to the development as whole or to community housing or other restrictions or requirements. 
2.  The owner shall provide a Construction Management Plan and shall submit a request for the use of any of the Town's property for construction or construction management purposes. 
3.  The owner shall demonstrate compliance with the Final CSC. Development Plan approval applicable to the application and any other Town approval. 
i.  The owner shall submit the information necessary to satisfy the foregoing requirements for review by the Technical Review Committee. TRC review shall take into consideration the project's compliance with the approval documents applicable to the development, relevant standards applicable to buildings, final subdivision plats and other Town code requirements for approval before building permit. The TRC may refer any portion of its review to the Planning Commission or Town Council for final action. In addition, in its final approval the Town Council may require that the Planning Commission or Council review specific items of the approval. 
(5)  Amendments to a Sketch Plan or Final CSC Development Plan. Amendments to a Sketch Plan approval or Final Plan shall be processed as follows: 
a.  Sketch Plan approval. After Sketch Plan approval an applicant may make insubstantial amendments to the approved sketch plan before submitting a Final CSC Development Plan for review. Substantial amendments shall be processed under the same procedures as used for the original adoption. "Substantial" shall have the same meaning as in Section 16-65(d)(2). The initial determination of whether an amendment is insubstantial or substantial shall be made by the Town Planner. 
b.  Final CSC Development Plan approval. After Final Development Plan approval, the TRC may review and approve of minor amendments to the approval documents necessary to effectuate the intent of the Final Plan Approval. The applicant shall have the ability to appeal a TRC decision on a minor amendment to the Town Council at a public meeting in which fifteen (15) days' written notice of the public meeting has been provided to the appellants. 
c.  Substantial amendments and amendments which the Town Planner determines are not minor amendments but are consistent with the Sketch Plan approval shall processed pursuant to the Final Plan submission and review procedures. Substantial amendments and any amendments which the Town Planner determines are not minor amendments and are not consistent with the Sketch Plan approval shall be processed pursuant to the Sketch Plan and Final Plan submission and review procedures. 
(Ord. 10 §B.3(Exh. B), 2012; Ord. 21 §B.1(Exh. A), 2016) 
Sec. 16-31. - Supplemental requirements for R-4 Mixed Density Residential District. 
(a)  The following supplemental regulations shall apply to development within the R-4 MD District. 
(1)  Applicability. 
a.  Any property under one (1) ownership at the time of initial zoning of at least twelve thousand (12,000) square feet in size and that is appropriate for mixed density residential may be zoned to the R-4 MD District. Only parcels with few development or environmental constraints and where utilities and services are existing or can be affordably provided are appropriate for this zone district because providing affordable or attainable community housing is the primary objective of this zone district. This zone district is best suited for property that is relatively flat and property where adequate fire protection exists or can be established. 
b.  The initial step in Sketch Plan review shall be a determination of whether the proposed project is appropriate to be zoned R-4 MD. This determination will be made administratively by the Town Planner. The Town Planner's determination of eligibility may be appealed to the Town Council. 
(2)  Site plan review. 
a.  No new development shall occur in the R-4 MD District without site plan review and approval. Site plan review shall be conducted in two stages, these being Sketch Plan review and Final Plan review. 
1.  Sketch Plan review. Sketch Plan review is intended to provide the Town with a general overview of the project including a description of existing conditions, proposed mix of uses, height, floor area and parking, as well as its relationship to neighboring properties and consistency with the Town's Master Plan, the River Master Plan and applicable Code provisions. Any project that is determined to be eligible for rezoning to the R-4 MD District pursuant to Section 16-31(a)(1)b, Supplemental Requirements for R-4 Mixed Density Residential District Applicability, may proceed through Sketch Plan review. The application requirements shall satisfy the application requirements of Section 16-41 et seq., Special Review Application Requirements and Procedures. The Town Planner may require any additional information reasonably required by the Town staff to review the application and to verify compliance with the provisions of this Code. Sketch Plan review shall require a review by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Commission is authorized to recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the Sketch Plan application following a duly noticed public hearing. The Planning and Zoning Commission review shall be followed by a review by the Town Council at a duly noticed public hearing. Following the closure of the public hearing, the Town Council may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. 
2.  Final Plan review. Final Plan review is intended to provide the Town with a more detailed description of the proposed development program, to respond to issues raised in the Sketch Plan review and to present additional information required in the Sketch Plan review. Final Plan review shall require a review by the Planning and Zoning Commission at a public hearing. The application shall satisfy the requirements of Section 16-111 et seq. the Town Planner may require any additional information reasonably required by the Town Staff to review the application and to verify compliance with the provisions of this Code. The Planning and Zoning Commission is authorized to recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the Final Plan application. The Commission's review shall be followed by a review by the Town Council at a duly noticed public hearing. Following the closure of the public hearing, the Town Council may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. 
3.  Joint meetings. The Town Planner may schedule a joint meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council at any time during the site plan review. 
4.  Findings. As part of its review of the proposed site plan, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Town Council shall consider the following factors: 
i.  Compliance of the application with the Code in general and Section 16-31 in particular. 
ii.  The site plan review criteria of Article VI. 
iii.  The compatibility of the proposed use with the character of the surrounding area. 
iv.  General conformity with the Master Plan. 
v.  Ability of the Application to satisfy the intent of the Zone District. 
b.  If the applicant for an R-4 MD Project concurrently applies for a subdivision sketch plan approval, the sketch site plan will also be reviewed concurrently with the subdivision if possible. However, it may be more practical to complete the final subdivision after the final site plan approval and the buildings are constructed. 
(3)  Dimensional Requirements. 
a.  The dimensional requirements applicable to developments within the R-4 MD District will be established through the site plan review process, and shall be subject to the limitations listed in Table 1 below. 
Table 1 
Single family detached Attached duplex and Town home Multifamily Minimum lot area (in square feet) 2,500 [ Note 1] 7,500 Maximum building height (feet) 24 24 33 Highest point to a pitched roof (feet) 28 28 35 Maximum Number of stories 2 3 3 Min. lot width 32 20 70 Front Yard Setback Applies to Individual lots Applies to Buildings Applies to Buildings  Major collector 10 10 10  Local 10 10 10 Rear Yard (feet) 10 
[Note 2] 10 
[Note 2] 10 
[Note 2] Side Yard (feet) 5 for conventional 
[Note 2] 5 
[Note 2] 5 
[Note 2] Max FAR [Note 3] [Note 3] [Note 3] Maximum lot coverage none none none Minimum landscaped open space 10% 10% 10% Maximum Unit Size -including all other floor area except for garages   3 bedroom 1,700 1,385 1,135   2 bedroom 1,700 1,385 1,135   1 bedroom 1,200 1,000 965   Efficiency 800 800 800   adu 500 See 16-31(c)2 
Note 3 na 
Note 3 na 
Note 3 (in square feet) Minimum Unit Size - excluding garage and any other accessory units or structures and not including adus 
Total square feet   3 bedroom na 1,000 1,000   2 bedroom na 750 750   1 bedroom na 580 580   Efficiency na 415 415   adu 300 Sec. 16-31(c)2 na na (in square feet) Note 5 Max Garage Size, excluded from maximum unit size (in square feet) 350 350 Note 4 Separation between buildings 10 15 down to 5 
[see 16-31(d)] 15 down to 5 
[see 16-31(d)] Note 1: Lot size will vary and will be approved through the subdivision process but shall not be lower than 1,250 sq. ft. 
Note 2: Zero lot line configurations such as a duplex may be approved on one side of the lot with the other side yard at a minimum of 10 feet provided there is a maintenance easement on the adjoining lot at the zero lot line to allow access. Lots created for a center townhome in a townhome configuration may have zero lot line configurations on both sides. Lots zoned R-4 MD that adjoin properties zoned to a zone district other than R-4 MD shall be required to maintain a required setback at least equal to the required setback of the adjoining property. 
Note 3: The maximum floor area is .5:1. The maximum floor area ratio shall be applied to the overall parcel only. Individual parcels within the master parcel shall receive their floor area allocations from the total floor area authorized for the master parcel during the site plan review process. A maximum floor area for the master parcel may be approved by the Town Council up to .8:1 through the special review process. A higher floor area ratio than .8:1 may be obtained by going through the PUD process. The maximum unit sizes stated in this table may not be attainable because the overall floor area permitted for the master parcel could restrict the unit sizes further. 
Note 4: The maximum garage size for multi-family development shall be established through the Site Plan Review process. The maximum size for a multi-family unit does not include exterior circulation such as common hallways outside a unit. 
Note 5: Unit sizes for development projects containing 100% deed-restricted affordable housing may be permitted the following maximum unit sizes by the Town Council: 
 1-bedroom unit: 700 total square feet 
 2-bedroom unit: 1,150 total square feet 
 3-bedroom unit: 1,530 total square feet 
 3-bedroom ADA accessible unit: 1,660 total square feet 
 4-bedroom unit: 1,675 total square feet  
b.  General. The following general provisions apply to development in the R-4 MD District: 
1.  The Code restriction of one (1) principal building on a property shall not apply. 
2.  Areas zoned R-4 MD are not subject to the Community Priorities Scoring System as this development is determined to satisfy the objectives of Article XXII, establishing the Community Priorities Scoring System, provided the following: 
i.  No more than 50 dwelling units may receive building permits in the area zoned R-4 MD in any one calendar year. 
ii.  The units are not permitted to be short-term rental units pursuant to Section 16-203(c), Renting of rooms and housing units: short-term rental of dwelling units. 
3.  Areas zoned R-4 MD are subject to the affordable housing mitigation requirements included in Article XIX, Housing Mitigation, of this Chapter. 
4.  Private open space. At least fifty (50) square feet of usable private open space shall be provided per dwelling unit. Private open space includes patios, decks, lawn areas, balconies and common areas with usable recreation facilities or community garden areas. The minimum area requirement of private open space may be reduced through the special review process based on a finding by the Town Council that public recreation areas meeting the needs of the residents can be safely accessed by the residents and that providing additional private open space would hinder the goals of the zone district. 
5.  The requirements of [Section] 16-185, Side yard requirements for corner lots, shall not apply. 
c.  Single family units are subject to the following: 
1.  Only lots five thousand (5,000) square feet or larger in size shall be eligible to request special review approval for an accessory dwelling unit. For the purposes of this district, an accessory dwelling unit is owned by the owner of the principle dwelling unit on the lot and an accessory unit is not permitted to be subdivided or condominimized from the principal dwelling unit on the parcel. A duplex may be owned by one (1) or more individuals. 
2.  Accessory dwelling units shall be restricted in size in accordance with the schedule of requirements, and in no case shall be less than three hundred (300) square feet or exceed five hundred (500) square feet of total floor area. 
d.  Attached duplex units, town home developments and multi-family development is subject to the following: 
1.  Residential buildings. The minimum distance between two (2) habitable structures that are not directly attached to each other is fifteen (15) feet. A lessor distance down to a minimum five (5) feet between multi-family buildings that are not directly attached to each other may be permitted in the site plan review process after review by the Fire District to ensure adequate fire safety. The site plan and subdivision plan shall show the building envelopes to establish adequate building separation and ensure compliance with the building and fire codes. 
e.  Other development standards. 
1.  Building and site design. All development shall comply with the following requirements if applicable. 
i.  The Town of Basalt Complete Streets Design Manual and the typologies from the Town of Basalt Master Plan that the Town of Basalt determines are most applicable to the type of development proposed in the project. 
ii.  Landscaping that is to be installed in the public right-of-way shall comply with the applicable provisions of the public works manual. 
iii.  Standards shall be included in the approvals to provide privacy of residences such special screening, specific design standards limiting window placement, and increasing the separation between the buildings. 
iv.  Standards shall be included in the approvals that address whether fences are permitted and where. The Town Code requirement for fencing shall be used as a minimum in developing a plan for fencing. 
v.  Standards shall be included in the approvals addressing whether garages and sheds, and other structures are permitted and in what locations. 
vi.  Special attention shall be given in the review process to ensure that children will have adequate play areas. 
vii.  Special attention shall be given in the review process to ensure that safe and pleasant sidewalks and pathways are provided to allow residents to move to and from areas within the neighborhood and to mass transit and other services outside the neighborhood. 
2.  Off-Street parking standards. The off-street parking standards for development in the R-4 MD Zone District shall be as follows: 
Efficiency or 
1-bedroom 1 space per unit 2 bedrooms 2 spaces per unit 3 bedrooms 2 spaces per unit 4 or more bedrooms 3 spaces per unit Additional requirement for multiple-family residential and mobile home parks with 3 or more units (guest parking) .25 spaces per unit  
( Ord. 04 §B.4(Exh. B), 2013; Ord. 04 §1(Exh. A), 2015; Ord. 24 § A(Exh. A), 2017) 
Secs. 16-32-16-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III - Special Review Application Requirements and Procedures 

Sec. 16-41. - Intent. 
    Each established zoning district is intended for a specific type or category of land use (e.g., single-family dwellings in an R-1 District). However, there are certain uses which may or may not be appropriate in a particular district, depending on the situation. For example, the location, nature of the proposed use, character of the surrounding area, traffic capacities of adjacent streets and potential environmental effects all may indicate that the circumstances of the development should be individually reviewed and approved only when they satisfy the goals and standards established in this Chapter. The special review process is established to provide for review to determine if these specific uses and allowances are appropriate without establishing numerous separate zoning classifications. It is the intent of this Chapter to provide a review of such uses and approval if appropriate so that the community is assured that the proposed uses are compatible with the location and surrounding land uses. 
(Prior code 70-15; Ord. 29, 2003) 
Sec. 16-42. - When allowed. 
(a)  Within each zoning district, certain land uses are permitted by right, by special review or prohibited. Special review uses may be permitted in designated districts upon approval by the Town Council. 
(b)  In addition, the Town Council may also permit certain flexibility to the Schedule of Requirements outlined in Section 16-22 established through the Town's Zoning Districts through special review when specifically provided for in this Chapter; and may provide for certain allowances to occur through special review approval when specifically provided for in this Chapter, an example of which is development on slopes greater than thirty percent (30%). 
(c)  The Town Council is not required to approve a special review application. The criteria for the Town Council's review and approval, denial or approval with conditions are established throughout the Code. 
(Prior code 70-16; Ord. 29, 2003) 
Sec. 16-43. - Site plan and supporting documents. 
(a)  There shall be filed with each special review application a site plan drawn to scale and an appropriate number of copies as determined by the Town Planner. 
(b)  Following approval by the Town Council, the applicant shall submit a reproducible copy of the approved site plan to the Town for the Town's permanent records suitable for recording in the public records in such formats as may be required by the Town Planner. 
(c)  The special review site plan and other information submitted with the application shall show or include the following: 
(1)  The location of all existing and proposed structures and other improvements on the real property. A building envelope may be used in lieu of showing the exact building or structure location to allow for minor variations in the location. 
(2)  A legal description of the property. 
(3)  A list of all property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the property. 
(4)  All off-street parking and loading areas. 
(5)  The location of all ways for ingress and egress to all buildings and parking areas. 
(6)  Service and refuse collection areas. 
(7)  Major screening proposals. 
(8)  The size, shape, height and character of all signs. 
(9)  The area and location of all open space and recreation areas. 
(10)  The location and type of outdoor lighting. 
(11)  A comprehensive landscaping and irrigation plan shall be submitted satisfying the requirements of Paragraphs 16-73(d)(2), (3), (5) and (9). 
(12)  The anticipated timetable for completion. If the project is to be completed in phases, then the data for completion of each phase shall be indicated. 
(13)  All owners and lienholders of the property shall sign the following agreement that will be placed on the original special review site plan: 
    The undersigned agree that the real property described on the site plan shall be developed only in accordance with the approved special review site plan and other provisions of the Zoning Regulations of the Town of Basalt. 
____________________ 
  
____________________ 
(14)  In addition to the site plan, a title policy shall be provided to the Town indicating that the property is free and clear of all ownership disputes, liens or encumbrances whatsoever, which would impair the property to be utilized for the uses approved. The title policy shall provide verification that all owners and lienholders have signed the special review site plan. The title policy shall be effective within twenty-four (24) hours after the date of approval by the Town Council. If the title policy is not provided to the Town Clerk within seven (7) days after action by the Town Council, the action by the Town Council may be voided. 
(15)  Other information as needed by the Town to analyze the feasibility and impacts of the special review use, which may include but not be limited to traffic analyses, soils or geological reports or drainage and engineering studies. 
(16)  A drawing or statement if determined adequate by the Town Planner regarding the building character, including height, square footage, number of bedrooms and floor area ratio or lot coverage. 
(17)  Drawings, computer visualization or models accurately depicting the proposed new construction in relation to existing and proposed buildings on the lot and adjacent properties and typography. 
(Prior code 70-17; Ord. 29, 2003; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 11 §6, 2011) 
Sec. 16-44. - Special review application approval procedures. 
(a)  Preapplication conference. The applicant shall schedule a conference with the Town Manager or his or her designated representative prior to submitting a formal application. This will serve to better acquaint the applicant with the Town's policies, requirements and procedures and the Master Plan objectives. The preapplication conference should be held before the applicant has entered into binding commitments or incurs substantial expense in the preparation of plans, surveys and other studies. 
(b)  Filing deadline. Applications for special review shall be filed at least thirty (30) days in advance of the meeting at which they are to be considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Town will provide the applicant with a list of filing deadlines and meeting dates. Applications that are incomplete at the time of filing will not be scheduled for review by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(c)  Fees. All persons filing a special review application shall be charged a fee to cover the cost of advertising and processing. The fees shall be in an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. 
(d)  Review by the Town Manager. The Town Manager shall review the application for compliance with the provisions of the Code, the site plan review criteria of Article VI and the standards of this Section, and for consistency with the Master Plan. The Town Manager shall receive comments from all other pertinent Town departments and other agencies and from the established Technical Review Committee. The Town Manager may then submit his or her recommendations and comments to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its consideration at its next regularly scheduled meeting. Copies of staff recommendations shall be available to the applicant prior to the Commission meeting. 
(e)  Action by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(1)  At a duly noticed public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the special review application and the comments and recommendations of the Town Manager. As a part of its review of the proposed special review use, the Commission shall consider the following factors: 
a.  Compliance of the application with the Code in general. 
b.  The site plan review criteria of Article VI. 
c.  The compatibility of the proposed use with the character of the surrounding area. 
d.  The desirability and need for the proposed use. 
e.  The potential for adverse environmental influences that might result from the proposed use. 
f.  Compatibility of the proposed use and site plan with the Master Plan. 
g.  The natural characteristics and constraints of the lot. 
(2)  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall then recommend to the Town Council that the matter be: 
a.  Approved; 
b.  Approved with modifications; or 
c.  Denied. 
(f)  Action by the Town Council. The Town Council shall, at a regular meeting following the Planning and Zoning Commission action, consider the special review request and the recommendations of the staff and the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Town Council shall then make the final decision to: 
(1)  Approve the application; 
(2)  Approve the application with modifications; or 
(3)  Deny the application. 
(Prior code 70-18; Ord. 12 §B35, 2003; Ord. 05 §D, 2012) 
Sec. 16-45. - Effect of special review approval. 
(a)  Following approval of a special review application, all real property described in the application must be improved, developed and used in accordance with the approved application, the site plan and any written proposals submitted therewith within the completion date or dates set by the Town Council. 
(b)  Any changes or modifications to the special review application or site plan shall be permitted only in accordance with the procedures stated in Section 16-46 of this Chapter. 
(c)  It is unlawful for the owner of any property subject to an approved special review application to fail to complete all improvements within the approved completion date or dates set by the Town or to use the property for any use not set forth in an approved special review application. Each day of violation shall be considered as a separate violation of the provisions of this Chapter. 
(d)  Upon approval of a special review application, the applicant shall comply in full with the parkland dedication requirement as set forth in Section 17-15 of this Code to the extent that special review approval allows construction or development in excess of that allowed as a right in the given zone district. 
(Prior code 70-19) 
Sec. 16-46. - Changes or modifications to approved application or plans. 
    Changes or modifications to an approved special review application and site plan shall be permitted by following the procedures of this Chapter for rescinding a special review application and securing approval of the original application, except as follows: 
(1)  For minor variations in the location of structures, improvements or open areas caused by engineering or other unforeseen difficulties, the Planning and Zoning Commission may authorize a modification to an approved site plan without public hearing. Such changes or modifications authorized by this Subsection shall not modify the use, character or density of an approved special review application or site plan. All site plans so modified shall be amended to show the authorized modifications. 
(2)  The Planning and Zoning Commission may also grant, without a public hearing, an extension of the time schedule for a period not to exceed six (6) months. Not more than two (2) such extensions may be granted without a duly noticed public hearing. 
(Prior code 70-20) 
Sec. 16-47. - Termination of approved applications. 
    Approved special review applications may be terminated as follows: 
(1)  By Town Council action. If construction is not completed and use not established on a property subject to an approved special review application in accordance with and within the time schedule set forth in the application, the Town Council may require the property owner to appear before it and present evidence establishing that he or she has not abandoned the use of the property as approved by the Town Council and that he or she has the ability to complete the development of the property. In the event that the Town Council finds that the conditions which existed at the time of the approval of the application have changed so that reasonable questions are raised regarding the property owner's ability and intention to comply with the application, it may withdraw its approval. Upon such rescission, all uses permitted by the application shall terminate. In its discretion and for good cause shown, the Town Council may extend the period of time for completion of construction and use of the property as provided in the application. 
(2)  By owner's action. The owner of a property subject to a special review application may petition the Town Council to rescind its approval of the special review application pertaining to his or her property or any part thereof. Such petition shall be signed by all the owners of the property and filed with the Town Clerk. The petition shall then be submitted to the Town Council for its consideration. The Town Council shall then consider the petition and determine whether or not to grant the same. If the petition is granted, all uses permitted by the special review application shall terminate as to the property described in the petition. 
(Prior code 70-21; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Secs. 16-48-16-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV - Planned Unit Developments 

Sec. 16-61. - Purpose; authority. 
    It is the purpose of the planned unit development ("PUD") regulations to promote the most beneficial and creative development of land areas in the Town. Through the use of the PUD process, it is intended to permit greater flexibility and innovation in the development of land in the Town. The objective of this Article is to encourage development which: promotes greater flexibility in the type, design and location of structures to take advantage of the features of a particular site; improves the design, character and quality of development; promotes more efficient use of land, public facilities, utilities and governmental services; promotes affordable housing for residents of the Town; preserves open space to the greatest extent practicable; achieves a compatibility of land uses within the development and with surrounding areas; encourages the preservation of natural and scenic features; promotes landscaping amenities; promotes safe and convenient pedestrian, vehicular and mass transit access and circulation; and promotes consistency with the Master Plan and other approved plans of the Town. This Article is authorized by Title 24, Article 67, C.R.S. 
(Prior code 70-22; Ord. 1, 1998) 
Sec. 16-62. - Where permitted. 
    A PUD may be permitted as overlay zoning in any zoning district within the corporate boundaries of the Town, subject to the review and approval requirements of this Article. 
(Prior code 70-23; Ord. 1, 1998) 
Sec. 16-63. - Uses permitted; allowed variances; residential density; findings. 
(a)  Uses permitted. Within each zoning district, a PUD may include those land uses designated as a permitted use by right or by special review in the underlying zone district. Additionally, in residential zone districts, the Town Council may approve neighborhood commercial uses which the Town Council finds appropriate to the proposed PUD, provided that such commercial uses in such residential zones are consistent with and further the standards, purposes and criteria provided in this Article and in the Master Plan. 
(b)  Allowed variances. The Town Council may, as part of the PUD approval process, allow variations from the schedule of requirements of the underlying zone district (Section 16-22), the subdivision regulations design standards (Chapter 17, Article II), the PUD design standards set forth in this Article (Section 16-73), the off-street parking requirements of Chapter 16, Article V, and the floor area and density calculation formulas of Section 16-187 (collectively, as used in this Article, "variations"). 
(c)  Residential density. The residential density permitted within a PUD shall be the same as that permitted for the property in the underlying zone district as calculated by dividing the total developable area for the property by the minimum lot area required by the schedule of requirements for the underlying zone district for the proposed residential development. Developable area shall have the meaning provided in Section 16-4. Newly developing areas shall have a gross density in excess of that permitted by the underlying zone district in unusual circumstances, provided such density is consistent with the recommended densities in the Master Plan. 
(d)  Findings. Upon and as a condition of approval of any sketch plan, preliminary plan and final plan for a PUD, the Town Council must make a finding that each of the following is satisfied: 
(1)  The PUD plan, including the variations, is in general conformity with the intent and purposes of this Chapter, the Subdivision Regulations and the Master Plan; 
(2)  The variations are designed for the PUD plan to accomplish the purposes of planned unit developments as described in Section 16-61; 
(3)  The PUD plan exceeds certain design standards (Section 16-22; Chapter 17, Article II; and/or Section 16-73) or contains certain exceptional and desirable features that enhance the overall PUD plan to the extent that the variations requested are clearly justified; 
(4)  The PUD plan satisfies one (1) or more of the purposes set forth in Section 24-67-102(1), C.R.S.; 
(5)  The PUD plan will not have adverse environmental impacts, excessively increase traffic hazards or congestion, overload utilities or otherwise be detrimental to the general welfare of the community; and 
(6)  The PUD plan will complement and be integrated with the existing development in the area. 
(Prior code 70-33; Ord. 1, 1998; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 07 §B6, 2009; Ord. 05 §E, 2012) 
Sec. 16-64. - Effect of designation. 
    The approval of a PUD constitutes a zone district amendment, and a PUD is established by rezoning an area in an existing zone district pursuant to the provisions of this Code and all applicable provisions of Section 31-23-301 et seq. , C.R.S., and of Section 24-67-101 et seq. , C.R.S. When a planned unit development is approved by the Town, the zoning designation for that lot, tract or parcel on the official zoning map shall include the term "PUD," the underlying zone district designation and the number of the ordinance approving the PUD. The PUD zoning and PUD plan, including all finally approved plan documentation, are inseparable and shall provide the development regulations for the property. To the extent a particular zoning issue (for example, side yard setbacks) is not addressed in the approved PUD plan documentation, such issue shall be determined by the schedule of requirements for the underlying zone district. 
(Prior code 70-25; Ord. 1, 1998) 
Sec. 16-65. - Approval procedures. 
(a)  Preapplication conference. 
(1)  Prior to submittal of a formal PUD application, the applicant is required to hold a preapplication conference with the Town Planner to present a tentative sketch plan for review. The preapplication conference should address the following: 
a.  The proper relationship between the proposed project and neighboring areas, the Master Plan and/or stated planning and development objectives; 
b.  The nature, design and appropriateness of the proposed land use arrangement for the size and configuration of the property involved; 
c.  The adequacy of open space area in existence and as proposed to serve the development; 
d.  The variations which may be necessary to accommodate the proposed project; and 
e.  The compliance of the proposed project with the purposes described in Section 16-61 and the findings required by Section 16-63(d). 
(2)  The conference should be held before the applicant has entered into binding commitments or has incurred substantial expense in the preparation of plans or other studies. 
(b)  PUD sketch plan review. 
(1)  The purposes of the PUD sketch plan review process are to acquaint the staff, Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council with the character of the proposed PUD; identify potential problems or conflicts between the PUD plan and the Town Code, Master Plan or other Town-approved plans; and to suggest methods of resolving any problem areas. 
a.  Filing deadline. Applications for PUD sketch plan review shall be filed at least thirty (30) days prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting at which the matter is to be heard. 
b.  Staff review. Within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the PUD sketch plan application, staff shall review the application for compliance with Section 16-66(1). Within such fifteen-day period, the staff shall certify the application complete or shall send the applicant written notice of any deficiencies in the application. The application shall not be reviewed by the Technical Review Committee, Planning and Zoning Commission or Town Council until it has been certified as complete by the Town staff. 
c.  Technical Review Committee. Prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting, the application shall be reviewed by the Technical Review Committee. The applicant or his or her representative shall be invited to attend this review session. The Technical Review Committee's comments shall be forwarded to the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
d.  Planning and Zoning Commission review. At a regularly scheduled meeting, not less than thirty (30) days after the certification by staff of the application as complete, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the PUD sketch plan and the comments of the Technical Review Committee. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall then forward its comments and recommendation to the Town Council. 
e.  Town Council review. Upon motion approved by the Town Council, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Town Council may hold a joint review of the sketch plan application at a regular or special meeting of the Commission or the Council. If the Town Council does not review the PUD sketch plan jointly with the Planning and Zoning Commission, then at a regularly scheduled meeting of the Town Council following the Planning and Zoning Commission review of the PUD sketch plan, the Town Council shall consider the PUD sketch plan application. The Town Council shall consider the character of the proposed development with respect to the policies of the Master Plan, the comments and recommendations of the Technical Review Committee and the Planning and Zoning Commission, the purposes of a PUD described above in Section 16-61 and the findings required by Section 16-63(d). The Town Council shall then provide comments and recommendations to the applicant as to the feasibility of the proposal. In light of such comments and recommendations, the Town Council shall by motion approve, approve with conditions or deny the PUD sketch plan application. 
(2)  Effect of approval. Approval by the Town Council of the PUD sketch plan shall not form the basis of any actionable reliance for the applicant or obligation for the Town Council to provide later approvals. Approval of the PUD sketch plan shall not constitute final approval or permission to proceed with development. Approval of the PUD sketch plan shall only constitute permission to proceed with additional development applications. 
(c)  PUD master plan and preliminary development plan. A PUD master plan is intended for those projects that will be developed in more than one (1) phase. The PUD master plan may be submitted and reviewed prior to or simultaneously with the preliminary development plan for the first phase of development. No PUD master plan or PUD preliminary development plan application shall be filed until after approval or approval with conditions of a PUD sketch plan for the property. 
(1)  Filing deadline. Applications for a PUD master plan and preliminary development plan shall be filed at least thirty (30) days prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting at which time the matter is to be heard. 
(2)  Staff review. Within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the PUD master plan and/or preliminary development plan application, the staff shall review that application for compliance with Section 16-66(2) and Section 16-66(3), the PUD design standards (Section 16-73), the zone district schedules of uses and requirements (Section 16-22) and the subdivision standards and requirements (Chapter 17, Article II). Within such fifteen-day period, the staff shall certify the application complete or shall send the applicant written notice of any deficiencies in the application. The application shall not be reviewed by the Technical Review Committee, Planning and Zoning Commission or Town Council until it has been certified as complete by the Town staff. 
(3)  Technical Review Committee. Prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting, the application shall be reviewed by the Technical Review Committee. The applicant or his or her representative shall be invited to attend this review session. The Technical Review Committee's comments shall be forwarded to the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(4)  Planning and Zoning Commission action. At a regularly scheduled public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the PUD master plan and/or preliminary development plan and the comments and recommendations of the Technical Review Committee. It shall be the applicant's responsibility at the commencement of the public hearing to demonstrate compliance with the public notice requirements of Section 16-269. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the application with respect to the criteria and standards for planned unit developments provided in this Article. The Planning and Zoning Commission may then recommend to the Town Council that the matter be: 
a.  Approved; 
b.  Approved with modifications; or 
c.  Denied. 
(5)  Town Council action. At a regularly scheduled Town Council meeting following the Planning and Zoning Commission action, the PUD master plan and/or preliminary development plan shall be considered by the Town Council. The Town Council shall consider the recommendations of the Technical Review Committee, the Planning and Zoning Commission, Town staff and the review criteria and standards for planned unit developments provided in this Article, including but not limited to the purposes, Section 16-61, and required findings, Section 16-63(d). The Town Council may then: 
a.  Approve the application; 
b.  Approve the application with modifications; or 
c.  Deny the application. 
(6)  Effect of approval. Approval by the Town Council of a PUD master plan and/or PUD preliminary development plan shall not form the basis of any actionable reliance for the applicant or obligation for the Town Council to provide later approvals. Approval of a PUD master plan and/or PUD preliminary development plan shall not constitute final approval or permission to proceed with development. Approval of the PUD master plan and/or PUD preliminary development plan by the Town Council shall only constitute permission to proceed with additional development applications. 
(d)  Final development plan. 
(1)  Filing deadline. Final PUD plans shall be submitted at least thirty (30) days prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting at which the matter is to be heard. 
(2)  Staff review. 
a.  Within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the final PUD development plan application, the staff shall review the application for compliance with Section 16-66(4), the PUD design standards (Section 16-73), the zone district schedule of uses and requirements (Section 16-22) and the subdivision standards and requirements (Chapter 17, Article II). Within such fifteen-day period, the staff shall certify the application complete or send the applicant written notice of any deficiencies in the application. The application shall not be reviewed by the Technical Review Committee, Planning and Zoning Commission or Town Council until it has been certified as complete by the Town staff. 
b.  If there are substantial differences between the final development plan application and the preliminary development plan approval, a revised preliminary development plan must be considered under the review process described in Section 16-65(c) above. Whether changes are "substantial" shall be determined by the Town Planner; provided, however, that any of the following (and other changes) may be considered a substantial change between the preliminary plan approval and the final development plan application: a change in the use or character of any portion of the development; any change which increases the trip generation numbers for the proposed development by ten percent (10%); a reduction by greater than ten percent (10%) of the open space; an increase of greater than ten percent (10%) in the approved gross developable commercial floor area; an increase by greater than ten percent (10%) of the approved residential density of the development; and any change which is inconsistent with a condition or representation of the project's preliminary development plan approvals or which requires granting a further variation. An applicant may appeal the determination of the Town Planner to the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(3)  Technical Review Committee. Prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission hearing, the application shall be reviewed by the Technical Review Committee. The applicant and his or her representative shall be invited to attend this review session. The Technical Review Committee's comments shall be forwarded to the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(4)  Planning and Zoning Commission action. 
a.  At a regularly scheduled public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the final development plan and the comments and recommendations of the Technical Review Committee. It shall be the applicant's responsibility at the commencement of the public hearing to demonstrate compliance with the public notice requirements of Section 16-269. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the application with respect to the criteria and standards for planned unit developments and special review applications, for consistency with the PUD master plan and PUD preliminary development plan and for consistency with the provisions of this Article, including but not limited to the purposes, Section 16-61, and required findings, Section 16-63(d). 
b.  If the final development plan is consistent with the PUD master plan and/or the preliminary development plan, the Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend to the Town Council that the matter be: 
1.  Approved; 
2.  Approved with modifications; or 
3.  Denied. 
(5)  Town Council action. At a regularly scheduled Town Council meeting following the Planning and Zoning Commission action, the final development plan for the PUD shall be considered by the Town Council. The Town Council shall consider the recommendations of the Technical Review Committee, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the review criteria and standards for planned unit developments provided in this Article, including but not limited to the purposes, Section 16-61, and the required findings, Section 16-63(d). The Town Council shall then: 
a.  Approve the plan; 
b.  Approve the plan with modifications; or 
c.  Deny the application. 
(6)  Effect of approval. Once a PUD final development plan is approved by the Town Council, all property within the area described in the application must be developed in accordance with the PUD plan. No modification, removal or release of the provisions of the final PUD plan shall be permitted except following compliance of the procedures included herein and upon a finding that the modification, removal or release is consistent with the efficient development and preservation of the entire planned unit development, does not affect in a substantially adverse manner either the enjoyment of land abutting upon or across a street from the planned unit development or the public interest and is not granted solely to confer a special benefit upon any person. Substantial amendments shall be processed under the same procedures as used for the original PUD adoption. "Substantial" shall have the same meaning as in Section 16-65(d)(2). Insubstantial modifications, removals or releases of a final PUD plan may be approved by the Town Council without repetition of the full PUD review process; provided, however, that this approval shall be considered by the Town Council at a duly noticed public hearing. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall provide a recommendation on the insubstantial amendment, unless the need for a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission is waived by the Town Planner. No building permits will be issued for the property unless a final PUD development plan is approved in accordance with this Chapter. 
(Prior code 70-26; Ord. 10 §2, 1991; Ord. 29 §2, 1996; Ord. 1, 1998; Ord. 16 §B, 2002; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-66. - Application requirements. 
    Applications for a planned unit development shall include the following: 
(1)  PUD sketch plan. The PUD sketch plan is intended to acquaint the Town staff, Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council with a development proposal in its initial stages. It is recommended that a sketch plan be submitted prior to the preparation of detailed planning or engineering studies. The following written and graphic materials are required as a part of the sketch plan application: 
a.  Written information. 
1.  A statement of the objectives of the PUD, including a spreadsheet outlining requested variations from the underlying zone district schedule of requirements, the PUD design standards and other applicable sections of Chapter 16 and 17 of this Code. Said spreadsheet shall be on a form provided by the Town staff. The statement should also include a listing of all enhancements offered by the proposal which are not required by this Code, to allow an objective analysis and comparison of the benefits and code variations. 
2.  A description of the proposed uses, including the number of dwelling units and approximate square footages, a list of commercial uses and approximate square footages of each use, calculation of open space and parks and proposed PUD zone district schedule of uses and requirements as appropriate. 
3.  A statement of how the proposal relates to the Master Plan, Three Mile Plan, master plans for adjoining counties when annexation is being requested and any other long range planning documents as deemed appropriate by the Town. 
4.  A statement of how utilities are to be provided, including an assessment by a licensed professional engineer as to the feasibility of said proposals. 
5.  The names of property owners and the planner, architect, engineer and surveyor. Authorization from the owner for the filing and processing of the applications. 
6.  The names and addresses of property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the property. 
7.  A preliminary economic analysis as to the costs and benefits of the project, prepared on a form provided by the Town staff. 
8.  A statement describing how the elements of the PUD satisfy each of the findings required in Section 16-63(d). 
9.  A general statement describing the geological characteristics of the land, soil types, slope stability and floodplain information. This information may be based on secondary data available from the Town, soil conservation service or other sources. The Town Manager may request that an environmental summary of the above characteristics be submitted in graphic form. 
b.  Graphic materials. 
1.  A vicinity map drawn to scale showing the location of the property with respect to the Town limits, the Town street system, major intersections, points of access, transit stops, significant natural features, irrigation ditches, major utility transmission lines, public facilities, adjoining subdivisions, property lines and density and land uses of adjoining properties. 
2.  A map drawn to a scale of at least one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet showing the size of the parcel, the location of the proposed uses, public and private open spaces, streets, topography, existing or proposed water and sewer lines to serve the project, phasing proposals, lots or block pattern and land subdivisions, if applicable. 
3.  A photo-reduced version of all graphic materials on 11" x 17" paper. 
c.  Additional information. Any additional information reasonably required by the Town to review the application and to verify compliance with the provisions of this Code. 
(2)  PUD master plan. A PUD master plan application comprised of written materials and site plans as provided below shall be required for all planned unit developments to be developed in phases: 
a.  Written information: 
1.  A legal description of the property. 
2.  A description of the existing and proposed zoning and the objectives of the PUD, including a spreadsheet outlining requested variations from the underlying zone district schedule of requirements, the PUD design standards and other applicable sections of Chapters 16 and 17 of this Code. Said spreadsheet shall be on a form provided by the Town staff. The statement should also include a listing of all enhancements offered by the proposal which are not required by this Code, to allow an objective analysis and comparison of the benefits and code variations. 
3.  A list of the names and addresses of all property owners and lienholders, the planner, architect, engineer and surveyor. Authorization from the property owners to file and process the application. 
4.  A statement of how the proposal relates to the Master Plan, Three Mile Plan, master plans for adjoining counties when annexation is being requested and any other long range planning documents deemed appropriate by the Town. 
5.  A statement indicating the owner's intentions with respect to future selling or leasing of all or portions of the planned unit development, including number and size of lots and dwelling units and anticipated price ranges. 
6.  A development schedule indicating the estimated timing and phasing of construction activities. The schedule shall include the estimated area allocations for each land use in each phase of development. The total area of common open space provided at any phase of the development shall be provided. 
7.  Quantitative data shall be provided for the following: 
a)  The total number and type of dwelling units and lots. 
b)  The proposed maximum residential density in each phase. 
c)  The maximum area and estimated building square footage of proposed nonresidential construction. 
d)  The development intensity expressed as the ratio of the floor area to the gross area of each tract or parcel. 
e)  The area of open space and the percentage of the open space to the gross site area. 
f)  The amount of off-street parking to be provided for each use within the PUD, including the number of spaces for residents and guests for residential use and for employees and customers for business or industrial uses. 
8.  A description of the means by which all open space and recreational areas, walkways and private streets are to be maintained. 
9.  A statement of intent regarding the dedication of open space and streets for public use. If streets are to be held in private ownership and maintenance, an easement shall be reserved for access rights for police, fire and other emergency services. 
10.  An updated economic analysis as to the costs and benefits of the project to the Town, prepared on a form provided by the Town staff. 
b.  site plans and supporting data. Site plans and supporting maps or data are required to show the details of the PUD plan, including: 
1.  A vicinity map drawn to scale showing the site and the surrounding area within a distance of at least one (1) mile, existing zoning, traffic circulation patterns, public facilities, density and types of adjacent residential areas, the Town limits, the Town street system, major intersections and points of access, transit stops, irrigation ditches, major utility transmission lines, adjoining subdivisions and property lines and density and types of nonresidential land uses on adjoining properties. 
2.  The existing site conditions, including topography, significant vegetation and unique natural features. 
3.  A site plan drawn at one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet on a twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inch sheet, or alternate formats approved by Town staff, illustrating the general location and proposed zoning for all existing and proposed land uses, including maximum heights, types of dwelling units, density, floor area ratios and types of nonresidential uses. 
4.  An eleven (11) inch by seventeen (17) inch photo reduction of the site plan. 
5.  The location, area and size of all land to be used for common open space, recreation areas, public parks, school sites or other public uses. 
6.  The existing and proposed vehicular circulation system, including arterial, collector and local streets, off-street parking areas, service and loading areas, major points of access to public rights-of-way, extension of existing Town street systems, including gridded streets, and demonstration of compliance with the Three Mile Street Plan. 
7.  The existing and proposed pedestrian circulation system, including the relationship with the vehicular traffic system, indicating proposed treatment at points of intersection. 
8.  Information and descriptions of the land areas adjacent to the proposed development with respect to land uses, zoning and traffic patterns. 
9.  Preliminary plans for storm drainage and water and sewer service prepared by a licensed professional engineer, for the proposed development. 
10.  Additional material, data or studies, as required by the Planning and Zoning Commission or Town Council, which will facilitate an understanding of the PUD master plan and the planning objectives of the unit development. These may include but are not limited to additional fiscal impact evaluations, market studies and transportation studies. 
c.  Additional information. Any additional information reasonably required by the Town staff to review the application and to verify compliance with the provisions of this Code. 
(3)  The preliminary development plan. A preliminary development plan shall consist of all applicable application requirements set forth above for the PUD master plan and the following additional items: 
a.  Written information: 
1.  A legal description with tie to an accepted survey monument. 
2.  A statement describing any deviations between the PUD sketch plan approval and the PUD preliminary plan application. Such statement shall explain the rationale for the changes. 
3.  A statement of the planning objectives of the PUD, and the existing and proposed zoning including a spreadsheet outlining requested deviations from the underlying zone district schedule of requirements, the PUD design standards and other applicable sections of Chapter 16 and 17 of this Code. Said spreadsheet shall be on a form provided by the Town staff, shall include a listing of all code enhancements proposed allowing an objective analysis and comparison of benefits and code deviations. The application should include a request for a zone district amendment rezoning the entire area included in the preliminary development plan. 
4.  Notes to indicate disposition, maintenance responsibility and service responsibility for water and sanitation, energy supplies and other services and areas which will serve the PUD. 
5.  Letters demonstrating a commitment to serve the PUD from all utilities and public agencies which will serve the PUD. 
6.  The proposed development schedule, indicating: 
a)  The approximate date on which construction of the project can be expected to begin. 
b)  The stages in which the project will be built, the approximate dates when the construction of each phase can be expected to begin and the approximate population of each phase. 
c)  An estimate of the anticipated rate of development (i.e., number of units per year, etc.). 
d)  The approximate dates when the development of each of the stages in the development will be completed. 
e)  The area and location of common open space that will be provided at each stage. 
7.  A list of all property owners and/or authorized agents and addresses, including architects, engineers and planners. A statement signed by all property owners authorizing this filing and processing of the application. 
8.  Draft agreements, conveyances, restrictions or proposed covenants which will govern the use, maintenance and continued protection of the PUD and any of its common areas. 
9.  A plan for unified control of common areas of the PUD, which shall include identification and description of corporations, partnerships, trusts, owners' associations or other legal entities having the right to assess individual landowners within the development and identification of the method proposed to enforce the required assessments. 
10.  Proposed terms of reservations and dedications of public rights-of-way, easements and other public lands. 
11.  The names and addresses of all property owners within three hundred (300) feet. 
12.  Reports concerning the following: 
a)  Geologic characteristics of the area affecting the land use. 
b)  Soils report, including: 
1)  Special physical and chemical characteristics of the soil. 
2)  Prediction of stability and erosion potential. 
3)  Suitability of the soil types for the land uses proposed for the PUD and any special engineering features necessary for the proposed development. 
c)  Preliminary stormwater drainage report. 
d)  Preliminary engineering for all major structural elements including bridges, retaining walls and similar features. 
e)  Report or study on wetlands areas, flood plains and river bank stabilization. 
f)  Wildlife impacts, critical habitat and the relationship to public lands and access. 
13.  Data, including: 
a)  Gross area in acres and square feet. 
b)  Total number and type of dwelling units. 
c)  Total bedrooms per each dwelling unit type. 
d)  Gross residential density. 
e)  Floor area ratio for the PUD as a whole and for each lot within the PUD. 
f)  Total acreage with a breakdown by land use. 
g)  Number of off-street parking spaces, including guest parking and common storage for recreation vehicles. 
h)  Area in square feet of common open space and as a percentage of gross area. 
i)  Area in square feet of recreational open space. 
j)  Area in square feet of private open space and as a percentage of gross area. 
b.  site plans and supporting documents, including the following: 
1.  The proposed lot lines and dimensions. 
2.  The tentative location of existing building and proposed building envelopes. 
3.  The location and dimensions for each area designated as common open space, recreational open space and private open space. 
4.  The location, length, width and use of all existing and proposed easements, utility rights-of-way, major utility facilities, intersections, bridges, culverts and drainageways (indicate all underground facilities). 
5.  Preliminary utility plans and engineering, to include the following: 
a)  A drainage and detention plan: The plan shall address existing and proposed drainage including stream courses, mudflow or debris flow, dry washes, flood plains and irrigation issues. The drainage plan, based on an engineering analysis of the catchment and the tributary area, shall include detailed drainage easements and structures necessary to accommodate a design one-hundred-year storm, mudflow or flooding. The drainage plan shall be provided by an engineer registered in the State. 
b)  Water and sewer service and other utilities: A utilities plan, corresponding to the preliminary plat, showing locations of the utilities lines and related facilities, sizes and gradients for the proposed development. The plan shall also show the relation of the proposed facilities to existing Town facilities and those of any special district. The utility plan shall also indicate underground distribution of electrical power and communications lines to be utilized, and a description of the system or systems shall be shown on the plan. The plans shall be prepared by an engineer registered in the State. 
c)  Flood protection: The plan shall address the location of the one-hundred-year flood plain and floodway, bank stabilization or protection measures and minimum elevations and related requirements for flood plain development permits if any should be required for development on the site. Additional studies and information may be required, and all flood plain and hydrologic analyses shall be prepared by an engineer registered in the State. 
d)  Fire protection: Plans for fire protection, including hydrant locations, minimum water pressure and sprinkling requirements, shall all be provided for review by the Town and the Basalt and Rural Fire Protection District. Where appropriate, all such plans shall be prepared by an engineer registered in the State or an individual with the appropriate training and qualifications for fire protection review and design. 
6.  Off-street parking areas, service areas, trash receptacles, loading areas and major points of access to public rights-of-way, with appropriate dimensions. 
7.  Existing and proposed streets with names. Length of street center lines, radii of curves, center-line grades and type of curb, gutter and sidewalks. Designation of street as private or public. 
8.  The location of temporary model homes, sales office and/or construction facilities, including temporary signs and parking lots. Also note length of time such temporary facilities will be in place and whether they will require sewer and water taps. 
9.  The location of pedestrian and bicycle paths. 
10.  The location, heights and size of proposed project-related or commercial signs, lighting and advertising devices, including real estate sale signs. Sign information shall include proposed colors, lighting, sizes, material and general statement of character. Lighting information shall include type and height of fixtures, wattage and intensity of light, and shall address energy efficiency. 
11.  The locations of pools, fences or accessory buildings. 
12.  The locations of low-income, elderly or other specialized housing. 
13.  The location of land intended to be conveyed, dedicated or reserved for public use as park sites, school sites, etc. Public tracts shall be dedicated by a statement on the plat; responsibility of maintenance of all tracts shall be described. 
14.  A general landscape plan, including: 
a)  The location, type and size of major existing trees and shrubs and their fate. 
b)  The location, general type, minimum size and quantity of proposed plant material. 
c)  The proposed treatment of the perimeter of the PUD. 
d)  The provisions for control of dust during construction. 
15.  Other graphics supporting information, including: 
a)  Street cross-section schematics for both public and private accessways. 
b)  Architectural intent drawings, elevations and perspective drawings of all typical structures and improvements, except single-family detached residences and their accessory buildings. Drawing may be required at the discretion of the Town for all elevations, window details, sample materials lists and sample floor plans. The drawings are intended to show the relationship of the proposed structures to the surroundings and need not be the result of final architectural design. 
c)  The Town may require building envelopes to be flagged, streets to be staked, building heights to be demonstrated by "story poles" and other significant features of the project delineated in the field. 
d)  The Town may require an analysis of the effect of the proposed development on solar access to neighboring properties, property within the proposed development and public and private rights-of-way. 
c.  Additional information. Any additional information reasonably required by the Town staff to review the application and to verify compliance with the provisions of this Code. 
(4)  Final development plan. The final development plan shall be consistent with the preliminary development plan and include all the written and graphic information required for the preliminary development plan. In addition, the following more detailed information is required for the final plan: 
a.  A statement describing any deviations between the PUD preliminary development plan approval and the PUD final plan application. Such statement shall explain the rationale for the changes. 
b.  The site plan shall include signatures, ownership certifications and title certifications as required for the filing of a final plat, as stated in Section 17-64. 
c.  A final summary data chart, including the information required for the preliminary development plan. This data must be updated based on the finalized site plan. 
d.  A detailed final landscape plan, including the following: 
1.  The location, type and size of existing trees and major shrubs which are to be retained. 
2.  The location, type, minimum size and quantity of proposed plant materials. The scale shown on the plan for plant materials shall reflect three-fourths (3/4) mature size. 
e.  Final utility plans. 
f.  A final PUD development plan agreement incorporating the terms and conditions of the final development plan submittal, any conditions of approval imposed or required by the preliminary or final development plan approval, including if appropriate the matters referred to in Section 17-64(b)(10)-(12). 
(Prior code 70-27; Ord. 1, 1998; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-67. - Development time limits. 
    The development shall be constructed in a timely manner. 
(1)  Master plan for the PUD. There is no time limit for initiating development. 
(2)  Preliminary development plan. Within a maximum of twelve (12) months of the approval of a preliminary development plan, an application for final development plan for all or part of the development area must be filed. If no final development plan is filed within the allowed time period, the approvals granted for the preliminary development plan shall expire. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the authority to extend this time period for good cause for not more than two (2) successive six-month periods. Any further extensions must be considered by the Town Council. Upon expiration of a PUD master plan or preliminary development plan, the Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council may, at duly noticed public hearings, consider the rezoning of the property to the underlying zoning as it existed prior to approval of the final PUD development plan. 
(3)  Final development plans. Each final development plan shall include a definite timetable for completion and construction of the development, including a time for expiration of approvals. Upon expiration of a final PUD development plan, the Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council may, at duly noticed public hearings, consider the rezoning of the property to the underlying zoning as it existed prior to approval of the final PUD development plan. This time period shall be established at the time of approval. 
(Prior code 70-28; Ord. 1, 1998; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-68. - Reserved. 
Sec. 16-69. - Spacing between structures or buildings. 
    The purpose of specifying space requirements between structures is to ensure adequate privacy, light, ventilation and fire protection while at the same time encouraging more creative design than is normally allowed with conventional setback requirements. It is the intent that primary living spaces should not face directly onto another living space unless there is adequate space between structures. 
(1)  Residential buildings. The minimum distance between two (2) residential structures is fifteen (15) feet. However, if the facing building walls both contain windows for major daytime or nighttime use, such as living rooms, dining rooms and bedrooms, efforts should be taken to ensure privacy of the residence by increasing the separation between the buildings or by special screening. 
(2)  Commercial or mixed commercial/ residential buildings. The minimum distance between commercial buildings shall be ten (10) feet. The minimum distance between a mixed use (commercial and residential) and any other building shall be twenty (20) feet. The minimum distance between a commercial building and a residential building shall be twenty-five (25) feet. 
(Prior code 70-30) 
Sec. 16-70. - Conveyance of open space, recreational areas, walkways and private streets. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to provide an acceptable program for the continuing maintenance of private open space, recreational areas, walkways and private streets within a planned unit development. 
(b)  The developer shall submit a legal instrument setting forth a plan providing for the permanent care and maintenance of open spaces, recreational areas and communally owned facilities and parking lots. The same shall be submitted to the Town Attorney and shall not be accepted until approved as to legal form and effect. If the common open space is deeded to a homeowners' association, the applicant shall file the proposed documents governing the association. Such documents shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The homeowners' association must be established before any properties are sold. 
(2)  Membership in the association must be mandatory for each property owner. 
(3)  Open space restrictions must be permanent. 
(4)  The association must be made responsible for liability insurance, taxes and maintenance of recreational and other facilities. 
(5)  The association must have the power to levy assessments which can become a lien on individual premises for the purpose of paying the cost of operating and maintaining common facilities. 
(c)  In the event that the organization established to own and maintain the open spaces and other common facilities fails to maintain the facilities in accordance with the approved plan, the Town Council shall direct a written notice to the property owners demanding that the deficiencies be corrected within thirty (30) days and that a hearing will be held on the matter within fifteen (15) days after the notice is given. If the deficiencies are not corrected within the time established by the Town Council, the Town may enter upon the properties and maintain the properties until the owners of the property show cause why maintenance by the Town is not required. The cost of maintenance by the Town shall be a lien against the common facilities of the planned unit development and the private properties within the development. The Town shall have the right to make assessments against the properties or the development on the same basis that the organization responsible for maintenance could make such assessments. Any unpaid assessment shall be a lien against the property responsible for the same, enforceable the same as a mortgage against such property. The Town may further foreclose its lien on the common facility by certifying the same to the County Treasurer for collection as in the case of collection of general property taxes. 
(d)  In the pursuit of any lien hereunder, all final development plans and final subdivision plats for planned unit developments shall provide on their face an executed consent to the Town's placement of lien under this Chapter, and such consent shall provide that the consent given is binding upon all heirs, successors and assigns of the owners of the property. 
(Prior code 70-31; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-71. - Relationship of PUD process to subdivision regulations. 
    When applicable, planned unit developments must comply with all of the application requirements and procedures relative to subdivisions and annexation. However, it is intended that certain requirements and hearing procedures not be duplicative. Therefore, applications may in certain instances be reviewed concurrently. 
(1)  A PUD sketch plan may be accepted as the sketch plan required for a subdivision or annexation. 
(2)  A PUD preliminary development plan may be accepted as satisfying all requirements for a preliminary subdivision plat, provided that all the application requirements (Section 17-63) and provisions of the subdivision regulations are met as a part of the PUD application. 
(3)  If a PUD involves a subdivision, the final subdivision plat must be approved by the Town Council prior to any sale of land or building permits being issued. 
(4)  Any subsequent subdivision of land approved as a PUD must be consistent with the PUD plans as approved. Any modifications of the PUD plans shall be subject to the hearing and review provisions of Section 16-65(c)(5) of this Code. 
(5)  Annexation of property proposed as a PUD in any zoning district may be finalized at any point in the process by the Town Council, provided that all the requirements for annexation, as specified in Chapter 15, have been satisfied. 
(Prior code 70-32; Ord. 1, 1998; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-72. - Approval standards and criteria. 
    The findings of the staff, Planning and Zoning Commission and the Town Council shall be based upon the following criteria, guidelines and performance standards: 
(1)  General considerations. 
a.  The planned unit development proposal is consistent with the master plan. 
b.  The plan conforms to the provisions of this Article. 
c.  The proposed development will not have adverse environmental impacts, such as excessively increased traffic hazards or congestion, overload utilities or otherwise be detrimental to the general welfare of the community. 
d.  The proposed development will complement and be integrated with the existing development in the area. 
(2)  Residential density. The maximum density permitted within a PUD shall be no greater than the density permitted in the underlying zone. Density shall be calculated as the total number of dwelling units divided by the developable area (as that term is defined in Section 16-4 of this Code) of the lot, tract or parcel. Newly developing areas shall have a gross density consistent with the recommended densities in the Town's master plan. 
(Prior code 70-33; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 05 §F, 2012) 
Sec. 16-73. - Design standards. 
(a)  Street standards. 
(1)  All streets to be dedicated to the Town must be constructed in accordance with the adopted street standards for the Town, except that the street width may be reduced in accordance with the conditions of Subparagraph (2) below. The right-of-way for dedicated public streets shall not be less than fifty (50) feet. 
(2)  Variations to the adopted street standards may be permitted subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Interior local streets. The width of public or private local streets within a PUD may be reduced to a minimum pavement width of twenty-eight (28) feet measured from flow line to flow line, provided that the conditions outlined below are satisfied: 
1.  A minimum of forty (40) feet of right-of-way is provided for private streets and fifty (50) feet of right-of-way for public streets. 
2.  Local streets are designed so that through traffic is discouraged. 
3.  No point of a local street is more than eight hundred (800) feet from a collector or arterial street. 
4.  Parallel parking is prohibited on at least one (1) side of the street. 
5.  Sidewalks (four [4] feet zero [0] inches in width) shall be provided as follows: 
a)  Both sides: within one (1) mile of any school or within one-fourth (1/4) mile of a shopping center or where the net density of surrounding developments exceeds eight (8) units per acre. 
b)  None: where alternative pedestrian circulating systems, such as mid-block walkways or separate paths, are provided. 
c)  One (1) side: in all other areas. The sidewalk should be on the same side as guest parking areas. 
For private streets, a further reduction of street width to a twenty-two (22) foot wide pavement measured from flow line to flow line may be allowed, provided that parallel parking is prohibited on either side and guest parking areas are dispersed throughout the development. 
b.  Cul-de-sac streets: 
1.  Street width. In a PUD, the pavement width measured flow line to flow line for a cul-de-sac street may not be less than twenty-two (22) feet if no parallel parking is provided on either side or twenty-eight (28) feet if parking is allowed on one (1) side only. In such cases, the minimum right-of-way for a private street shall be forty (40) feet and for a public street fifty (50) feet. 
2.  Maximum length. The maximum length of a cul-de-sac street shall be five hundred (500) feet measured from the right-of-way line of the connecting street to the center of the turnaround area at the closed end of the cul-de-sac. 
(b)  Parking. Planned unit development shall provide the parking spaces required by Article V, including guest parking spaces, in the ratio of twenty-five hundredths (0.25) space per unit located within one hundred (100) feet of the dwellings they are intended to serve. 
(c)  Open space. 
(1)  Common open space. At least thirty percent (30%) of the gross area of a residential PUD and twenty-five percent (25%) of a nonresidential PUD shall remain as landscaped open space for the common use of the residents or visitors to the area. 
(2)  Recreational open space. 
a.  Recreational open space shall comprise not less than seventy-five percent (75%) of the total required common open space. All areas to be considered recreational open space shall have a minimum dimension of thirty (30) feet, except for bicycle paths. No more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the required recreational open space shall have impervious surfacing. 
b.  Recreational open space shall not include slopes greater than twenty percent (20%). 
c.  Recreational open space shall not be obstructed except by improvements that enhance its usability. Recreational open space is that open space which provides for organized sports or includes playground apparatus, tennis courts, bicycle paths, swimming pools or similar active recreational areas. 
d.  All required recreational open space shall be planted in lawn or other appropriate ground cover suitable for foot traffic. 
e.  The open space areas should be readily accessible to all dwelling units and should maximize the pedestrian usage. 
f.  Special considerations and exceptions to the above requirements may be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission for open space that provides for public access to the Roaring Fork or Frying Pan Rivers. 
(3)  Private open space. At least one hundred fifty (150) square feet of private open space shall be provided for each ground level dwelling unit. Private open space shall include patios, decks, lawn areas and balconies. At least fifty (50) square feet of private open space shall be provided for aboveground units. 
(d)  Landscaping. 
(1)  A permanently maintained landscaped buffer zone shall be provided adjacent to arterial and collector streets and parking lots or between residential development and adjacent commercial, industrial or incongruent uses. The minimum width of the buffer zone shall be twenty (20) feet, to include landscaping and berming at a maximum slope of three (3) horizontal to one (1) vertical. The Planning and Zoning Commission may consider reducing the width of the buffer strip when dense landscaping or mature plant materials are provided. 
(2)  A comprehensive landscaping and irrigation plan shall be submitted designating all existing and proposed species, size and placement. The plan shall specify all irrigation features and a program for continued maintenance. The comprehensive landscaping and irrigation plan shall be reviewed and approved by the Public Works Director and the Town Planner. The Town develops and maintains a list of desirable trees for planting along streets. The list is available at the Town Hall. 
(3)  Shadow patterns of existing and proposed trees and other major vegetation which will affect the availability of incoming solar radiation in the immediate vicinity of each dwelling unit shall be shown on the comprehensive landscape plan. Selection and placement of new plant materials should complement solar uses. 
(4)  Plant material shall be in accordance with the following schedule: 
Type Minimum Size Standard deciduous trees 2 inches caliper Small ornamental and flowering trees 2 inches caliper Evergreen trees 8-10 feet in height Shrubs 3-4 feet in height  
(5)  Development of theme plantings is encouraged in order to provide visual continuity. Plantings should screen units from each other and from traffic and should be coordinated with mounding and fencing to visually tie dwelling units together. 
(6)  Open space should provide contiguous linkages which are capable of conducting the pedestrian from the residence to major points in the neighborhood. 
(7)  Existing healthy trees should be preserved to the maximum extent possible. If trees with a caliper of four (4) inches or greater are to be removed, they must be identified and located on the plan with a written justification presented for their removal. 
(8)  All plants shall comply with federal and state laws and regulations requiring inspection for plant disease, pests and weeds. All trees must be balled and burlaped. Nursery stock shall comply with American National Standard Institute (ANSI) requirements and the Colorado State Nursery Act. Plant names should meet the standards of International Code of Botanical Nomenclature (ICBN) and Plant Health Standards as set in the Basalt Public Works Manual. 
(e)  Energy conservation. 
(1)  Solar access shall be preserved as much as possible by orienting streets and buildings for maximum southern exposure for the living spaces. 
(2)  Consideration should be given for protection of solar access through solar easements for subdivision lots. 
(f)  Building design. 
(1)  The character of the building designs in the PUD should be compatible with and enhance the architectural character and scale of the surrounding neighborhood. 
(2)  Accessory buildings, detached garages and fences should be of a design compatible to the architectural character of the project and the surrounding neighborhood. 
(3)  The floor plan should be carefully organized to gain maximum daylight and direct access from rear and side yards. The outdoor space should be planned as a practical extension of indoor living space. 
(4)  Large amounts of glass should be avoided on the north side of dwelling units, and northern exposures should be protected with berming and landscaping. 
(Prior code 70-34; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 11 §7, 2011) 
Secs. 16-74-16-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V - Off-Street Parking and Loading 

Sec. 16-91. - Off-street parking spaces required. 
    The following numbers of off-street parking spaces shall be provided with the construction of or addition to any of the buildings and uses listed below: 
____________ 
Use Parking Requirement All residential units:   Efficiency or 1-bedroom 1.5 spaces per unit   2 bedrooms 2.0 spaces per unit   3 bedrooms 2.5 spaces per unit   4 or more bedrooms 3.0 spaces per unit   Additional requirement for multiple-family residential and mobile home parks with 6 or more units (guest parking) 0.25 space for each unit   Multiple-family housing for the elderly or for the handicapped 0.5 space per unit Motel or hotel 1 space per unit, plus 2 spaces for the owner's or manager's unit Temporary multi-family or lodge 1.5 spaces per unit, plus 2 spaces for the owner's or manager's unit Nursing homes, rest homes 1 space per 4 beds, plus 1 space for every 2 employees Drive-in restaurant 1 space for every 2 seats or 1 space for every 100 square feet, whichever is greater, plus 1 space for every employee on the largest work shift Animal hospitals 1 space for every 300 square feet of floor area Hospitals 1 space for every 2 beds, plus 1 space for each staff doctor and employee on the largest work shift Motor vehicle sales 1 space for every 500 square feet of floor area Motor vehicle service and repair 1 space for every 300 square feet of floor area Business and professional offices 1 space for every 250 square feet of floor area Medical, dental offices and clinics 1 space for every 200 square feet of floor area Restaurants and bars 1 space for every 4 seats or 1 space for every 300 square feet of indoor floor area, whichever is greater, and the restaurant may have additional outside seating up to one-half of the number of inside seats without any additional parking for the outside seating Retail business, except furniture stores and appliance stores 1 space for every 300 square feet of floor area Furniture stores, appliance stores 1 space for every 500 square feet of floor area Wholesale business and warehouses 1 space for every 1,000 square feet of floor area or 1 space for every 2 employees, whichever is greater Unfinished basement areas within the downtown parking district used exclusively for storage No parking requirement Industrial uses (excluding offices) not mentioned specifically under another use in this Section 1 space for every 500 square feet or .75 spaces for every one employee, whichever is greater Places of public assembly, such as churches, auditoriums, meeting rooms 1 space for every 4 seats in the principal place of assembly Libraries 1 space for every 400 square feet of floor area, plus 1 space for every 2 employees Educational facilities:   Preschool nurseries or childcare centers, kindergarten and elementary schools and middle schools 1 space per classroom, plus 1 space per employee   High schools 1 space per employee, plus 1 space for every four students, plus 1 space for every four seats in the principal place of assembly (bench capacity is determined as 1 seat per 20 inches)  
NOTE:  When determining the number of parking spaces to be required, fractions of spaces shall be rounded to the nearest whole number with 0.5 space being rounded up to 1 space. For example, if the calculation of parking spaces equals 27.25 spaces, then 27 spaces would be required. If the calculation equals 27.5 spaces, then 28 spaces would be required. 
(Prior code 70-35; Ord. 18 §1, 1992; Ord. 16 §2, 2003) 
Sec. 16-92. - Combination of uses; mixed use. 
(a)  When one (1) building is planned to include a combination of different uses, the minimum parking required will be determined by applying the above requirements based upon the floor area for each use. The minimum number of parking spaces required for the building shall be the sum of the requirements for each separate use. Upon recommendation of a traffic or parking consultant acceptable to the Town, the required parking for a building developed with a combination of uses may be reduced by a maximum of twenty-five percent (25%) by the Town Council at a public hearing. The Town Planner may require a recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission prior to Town Council review of the request for reduction in parking. 
(b)  When more than one (1) building is planned to be developed together with a mix of uses, the applicant may request a mixed use parking reduction only through the PUD process. 
(Prior code 70-36; Ord. 16 §3, 2003) 
Sec. 16-93. - Uses not listed. 
    For specific uses not listed, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall determine the appropriate number of parking spaces required based upon the type of activity, intensity, number of employees and similarity to listed uses. 
(Prior code 70-37) 
Sec. 16-94. - Off-site parking. 
    For any commercial or mixed use development, the off-street parking requirements may also be met utilizing the following alternatives if applicable: 
(1)  Off-street parking spaces may be provided on a site within three hundred (300) feet of the lot that generates the parking requirements, provided that the site is owned or under the control of the owner of the parking generator. 
(2)  The owner of the lot may participate in a parking district or joint venture that assures the Town that the off-street parking requirements will be met. All parking districts or joint ventures shall be subject to the approval of the Town. 
(3)  In order to address in a comprehensive manner the concern of parking within the downtown area, to facilitate and encourage capital improvements, interior remodeling and renovations, to maintain the viability of the Midland Avenue business area and to ensure its architectural and historical character, and to promote the implementation of the River Stewardship Master Plan, the following properties shall be designated as property in the Downtown Parking Area: 
a.  Zoned C-2 (Downtown Commercial) with street frontage on Midland Avenue between Homestead Drive and Highway 82 Business Route, and Midland Avenue Spur; 
b.  Two Rivers Road where public parking is available adjacent to the property; or 
c.  With frontage on the Roaring Fork River or the Frying Pan River. 
(4)  Within this Downtown Parking Area, commercial or mixed use development may meet the off-street parking requirements by paying a fee in lieu of parking subject to the following criteria: 
a.  An applicant must establish to the satisfaction of the Town that the proposed development is architecturally consistent, including but not limited to style, height, size and materials, with the architecture and historical character of the surrounding buildings and downtown area or consistent with the Basalt Master Plan Neighborhood Typologies. Compliance with this criteria shall be undertaken pursuant to and in compliance with the procedures set forth in Section 16-111 of this Code. 
b.  The off-street parking requirements or a portion of the parking requirements for lots in the Downtown Parking Area may be satisfied by fees in lieu of parking. Upon approval by ordinance of the Town Council, at a noticed public hearing, the Town Council may allow the applicant to provide up to one hundred percent (100%) of the off-street parking requirement by payment of fees in lieu of parking in accordance with the provisions of this Section. Such payment of fees in lieu of parking in the Downtown Parking Area may be made upon a finding by the Town Council that payment of fees in lieu of parking, instead of requiring on-site parking, will (to the extent applicable) allow the continuation of important building frontage on Midland Avenue, preserve existing public parking in the Downtown Parking Area, not cause a significant negative impact on the available parking in the area, and for river frontage lots, the proposed development is consistent with the River Stewardship Master Plan. The requirement for a noticed public hearing may be waived by the Technical Review Committee on a finding that the proposal will not have a negative impact on properties in the area. 
c.  All fees in lieu of parking shall be held in a restricted Downtown Parking Area Fund, which fund shall be used by the Town solely for the creation of new parking spaces, or improvement of existing parking in or adjacent to the Downtown Parking Area, or other improvements designed to serve or improve the parking situation in the Downtown Parking Area. 
d.  The Town Council by resolution shall regularly establish a dollar amount to be paid in lieu of each parking space required to be created. The amount to be paid for fees in lieu of parking set forth in the resolution approving such amount shall control until such amount is changed by subsequent resolution. 
e.  Approval by the Town Council of requests to pay fees in lieu of off-street parking shall be valid for a period of six (6) months from the date of approval to be used only in connection with the project for which it is requested. Ten percent (10%) of the fees in lieu of off-street parking shall be considered a nonrefundable administrative fee and shall be paid within ten (10) days of approval by the Town Council. The balance of the fees required by such approval shall be paid at the time of building permit issuance. Should the applicant fail to obtain a building permit and pay the required fees within the six-month period of approval by the Town Council, such approval shall expire. A maximum of one (1) three-month extension of the Town Council's approval may be requested in writing from the Town Council and must include evidence of the applicant's efforts and ability to proceed with the project. 
f.  In addition, should an applicant obtain a building permit and pay all required fees but fail to initiate construction within one hundred eighty (180) days of the issuance of permits, all permits and associated fees shall be forfeited and the building permit shall expire by limitation and become null and void. The fees in lieu of parking paid by the applicant shall be returned within a reasonable period of time, less the nonrefundable administrative fee. 
(Prior code 70-38; Ord. 29 §2, 1990; Ord. 4 §1, 1992; Ord. 9 §4, 1998; Ord. 16 §4, 2003) 
Sec. 16-95. - Parking area standards. 
(a)  All off-street parking areas shall be unobstructed and free of all other uses. 
(b)  All off-street parking spaces shall have unobstructed access to and from a street. 
(c)  All off-street parking areas, except those for single-family or two-family dwellings, shall be surfaced with asphalt or concrete. Other dustless or more environmentally sensitive surfaces such as washed road base or other pervious surface may be approved by the Town Council for parking areas, based on type of use, location, impact to the environment and impact to adjoining properties. 
(d)  Off-street parking areas with six (6) or more spaces shall be adequately screened from any adjoining residentially zoned lot by landscaping or solid fencing. 
(e)  Lighting from any parking area shall not be directed toward any adjacent residential area or public street. 
(f)  Off-street parking areas may be located to jointly serve two (2) or more buildings or uses, provided that the total number of spaces is not less than that required for the total combined number of buildings or uses. 
(g)  Off-street parking spaces shall be at least nine (9) by nineteen (19) feet, except that up to twenty percent (20%) of the required spaces in a parking area with ten (10) or more spaces may be designated for compact cars with a minimum space of eight (8) by sixteen (16) feet. If compact spaces are approved, designated areas shall be clearly marked by above-grade signage for small or compact cars only. 
(h)  Where off-street parking areas designed for parallel parking are established, the dimensions of such spaces shall be not less than twenty-two (22) by nine (9) feet. 
(i)  No more than twelve (12) parking spaces shall be permitted in a contiguous row without being interrupted by a landscaped area of at least six (6) feet wide and sixteen (16) feet long, or alternatively, landscaping buffers in a different configuration roughly proportionate to the preceding standard and approved in writing by the Technical Review Committee. 
(j)  In multiple-family areas, areas included in driveways or otherwise required to move cars in and out of parking spaces shall not be considered to meet off-street parking requirements. 
(k)  Minimum width of traffic aisles. 
(1)  Schedule. 
Stall Angle Direction of Traffic Min. Area (feet) Width (inches) 0° parallel One-way traffic 12 0 0° parallel Two-way traffic 24 0 30° One-way traffic 12 0 30° Two-way traffic 24 0 45° One-way traffic 14 0 45° Two-way traffic 24 0 60° One-way traffic 18 0 60° Two-way traffic 24 0 90° One-way traffic 22 0 90° Two-way traffic 24 0  
(2)  All off-street parking areas shall be served with paved ingress/egress having minimum width of twelve (12) feet zero (0) inches for one-way traffic and twenty (20) feet zero (0) inches for two-way traffic. 
(Prior code 70-39; Ord. 29 §§3, 4, 5, 1990; Ord. 16 §5, 2003) 
Sec. 16-96. - Off-street loading areas. 
    For all business and industrial uses, off-street loading spaces containing five hundred (500) square feet, with no dimension less than ten (10) feet, shall be required for new construction or major additions involving an increase in floor area as follows: 
(1)  New floor area between five thousand (5,000) and twenty thousand (20,000) square feet: one (1) off-street loading space. 
(2)  New floor area in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet: one (1) off-street loading space for each twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or fraction thereof. 
(3)  Relief from the above provisions can be granted by the final reviewing authority, including the Technical Review Committee when no Planning and Zoning Commission or Town Council review is required, where the applicant demonstrates that alternative loading zone options have been provided, including area within an alleyway, center lane loading areas on adjacent streets, or joint use loading agreements with adjacent properties. 
(Prior code 70-40; Ord. 16 §6, 2003) 
Secs. 16-97-16-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI - site plan Review Requirements and Standards 

Sec. 16-111. - Compliance required. 
(a)  All applications for a building permit for a permitted use, other than a single-family home or a two-family dwelling (i.e., duplex), shall be approved only upon compliance with Sections 16-112 and 16-113 and approval by the Town Manager, except as required by Subsection (b) below, and except that applications within areas zoned in the C-2 Downtown Business District are required to comply with the site plan review requirements of Subsection 16-29(e) of this Chapter. 
(b)  In lieu of compliance with Sections 16-112 and 16-113, prior to acceptance for review and approval of a building permit application, the applicant for a proposed building permit within the commercial, industrial and R-4 zone districts must comply with the procedures contained in Section 16-44, with the exception that the required duly noticed public hearing shall occur before the Town Council, not the Planning and Zoning Commission; the submittal requirements of Section 16-66, unless waived as unnecessary and inappropriate by the Town Manager; open space requirements of Section 16-70; and the design standards outlined in Section 16-73; in an Industrial Zone, the design standards contained in Sections 16-24 and 16-25; and receive approval by the Town Council. The Town Council shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the site development plan based upon the criteria set forth in Sections 16-72(a), 16-44(e) and 16-111(c)(1-4). In addition, the developer shall demonstrate financial ability to the Town to complete the site plan development as proposed, to include a financial statement, performance bond, letter of credit or other security acceptable to the Town. For purposes of this Section only, where the words "Planned Unit Development," "PUD," "Preliminary Development Plan" or "Special Review" appear in the above Sections, the word "site plan Development" or "SPD" shall be substituted. 
(c)  Any applicant for a proposed building permit that is subject to the provision of Section 16-111(b) may petition for exemption from the requirements of Section 16-111(b) if, and only if, the applicant shows to the Town Council: that the proposed building is four thousand (4,000) square feet or less in size and to be located upon a lot ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less in size; that compliance would cause an unnecessary financial burden compared to the economic benefit of the proposed structure; and that the proposed structure: 
(1)  Is architecturally consistent, including but not limited to style, height, size and materials, with the architecture of the surrounding buildings; 
(2)  Will not increase the use of the public streets and public parking areas for parking in connection with the proposed structure or substantially adversely affect traffic flows or traffic patterns; 
(3)  Has a landscape plan that meets the criteria set forth in Section 16-73(d); and 
(4)  Does not have the potential to cause adverse environmental impacts, including but not limited to noise, dust, sight plane interference, interference with adjoining land uses, drainage, etc. 
An applicant for an exemption shall submit a written request, containing the information required in Section 16-112 and 16-113, and for Industrial Zones, the information required by Sections 16-24 and 16-25, and a statement justifying the exemption pursuant to the criteria set forth above, to the Town Council which shall consider such request at its next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(d)  All building permit applications shall be consistent with the plan submissions approved by the Town Manager pursuant to Sections 16-112 and 16-113, the site plan development approvals of Town Council obtained pursuant to Section 16-111(b), or the site plan development exemption approval obtained pursuant to Section 16-111(c). 
(e)  In any PUD approved after the effective date of this ordinance, compliance with this Article shall not be required so long as any building permit application is consistent with the PUD plan as approved by the Town. 
(Prior code 70-44; Ord. 10 §3, 1991; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 07 §B8, 2009) 
Sec. 16-112. - Site plan submission. 
    The site plan shall be drawn to scale in a form acceptable to the Town Manager, showing the following: 
(1)  The location of all buildings. 
(2)  Parking areas. 
(3)  Ingress and egress points to and from the public street. 
(4)  Signs. 
(5)  Lighting. 
(6)  Landscaping. 
(7)  Tabulations showing the area of the site, number of dwelling units, number of parking spaces and percentage of open space provided. 
(Prior code 70-45; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-113. - Standards for review. 
(a)  Lights and signs shall be located in a manner that will not be distracting to adjoining properties or passing motorists. 
(b)  Landscaping shall be provided in areas near the public right-of-way and located with consideration for energy conservation. An acceptable plan must be provided for the maintenance of the required landscaped areas. 
(c)  Control of storm drainage shall be provided so as to not damage adjoining properties. The plan must be approved by the Town Engineer. 
(d)  Site design and building plans shall include provisions of or the need of the handicapped individuals as required by the building code adopted in Chapter 18 of this Code or other ordinances of the Town. 
(e)  Approved landscaping or solid fencing capable of screening adjacent properties shall be provided when commercial uses abut residential uses. 
(f)  Commercial and industrial uses shall conform to the following performance standards: 
(1)  No dust, odor, gas, fumes, glare or vibration shall extend beyond lot lines. Glare pertains to sunlight reflected from windows or other integral portions of buildings as well as from lighting fixtures and signs. 
(2)  Smoke shall not be emitted at a density greater than No. 1 on the Ringelmann Scale. 
(3)  No particles of fly ash shall exceed two-tenths percent (0.2%) grains per cubic foot of flue gas at a stack temperature of fifty degrees Fahrenheit (50?F). 
(Prior code 70-46; Ord. 13 §6, 2008) 
Secs. 16-114-16-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII - Signs 

Sec. 16-131. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of these regulations to provide for the proper control of signs in the Town. It is recognized that signs are a necessary means of visual communication for the convenience of the public and also for the benefit of businesses. It is intended to provide for a reasonable balance between the right of the individual to identify his or her business and the right of the public to be protected against visual discord and clutter resulting from the unrestricted proliferation of signs. It is further intended that the public be protected from signs that are structurally unsafe, obscure the vision of motorists or conflict with necessary traffic signals and signs. 
(Prior code 70-47) 
Sec. 16-132. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the display, construction, erection, alteration, use, maintenance and location of all signs within the Town. All signs displayed, constructed, erected or altered after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter shall be in conformance with the provisions of this Chapter. All signs that are existing at the time of adoption of this Chapter shall not be altered or enlarged without being in conformance with this Chapter. The Building Inspector is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 70-48) 
Sec. 16-133. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Building frontage means the horizontal, linear dimension of that side of a building which abuts a street, parking area, mall or other circulation area open to the general public. Where more than one (1) use occupies a building, each such use having a public entrance or main window display shall be considered to have its own building frontage, which shall be the front width of the portion of the building occupied by that use. 
    Corner building means a building adjacent to and located at the intersection of two (2) dedicated public rights-of-way. 
    Industrial center means a group of businesses or shops occupying a building or group of buildings located in an industrial zone district on one (1) commonly owned or controlled parcel or subdivision of land provided with privately controlled and maintained parking areas. 
    Shopping center means a group of retail businesses occupying a building or group of buildings located on one (1) commonly owned or controlled parcel or subdivision of land provided with privately controlled and maintained parking areas. 
    Sign means any written, pictorial representation, form, emblem, flag, banner or figure of similar character, which has the following characteristics: 
a.  Is a structure or part thereof. 
b.  Is written, printed, projected, painted, constructed or otherwise placed or displayed upon or designed into a building canopy, awning or vehicle. 
c.  Is designed to attract attention or used as a means of identification or advertisement. 
    Sign face means the surface of a sign upon, against or through which the message is displayed or illustrated. 
    Signs, character of : 
a.  Freestanding sign means a sign that is supported by one (1) or more columns, uprights or poles extended from the ground or from an object on the ground or a sign that is erected on the ground. No part of the sign may be attached to a building. 
b.  Projecting sign means a sign attached to a building and extending in whole or in part fifteen (15) inches or more horizontally beyond the surface of the building to which the sign is attached. 
c.  Wall sign means a sign displayed upon or against the wall of an enclosed building where the exposed face of the sign is in the plane parallel to the plane of the wall and extended not more than fifteen (15) inches from the face of the wall. 
d.  Suspended sign means a sign suspended from the ceiling of an arcade, marquee or canopy. 
    Signs, types of : 
a.  Business sign means a sign which identifies and directs attention to the business, service, profession or activities conducted. 
b.  Construction sign means a temporary sign identifying a subdivision, development or property improvement by a builder, contractor or other person furnishing materials, labor or services to the premises. 
c.  Identification sign includes nameplates; signs or symbols establishing the identity of a building; combination of name and street address; landmark or natural features; and plaques that are an integral part of the structure. 
d.  Joint identification sign means a sign that serves a common or collective identification for two (2) or more businesses or industrial uses. 
e.  Real estate sign means a sign indicating the availability for sale, rent or lease of a specific lot or building. 
(Prior code 70-49) 
Sec. 16-134. - Exemptions. 
    The following signs shall be exempt from the provisions of this Chapter: 
(1)  Official government notices posted by government officers in the performance of their duties to control traffic, to provide warning or to provide necessary information or direction. Identification signs or bulletin boards accessory to government buildings are not exempt from the provisions of this Chapter. 
(2)  Temporary decorations or displays which are clearly incidental to and are customarily associated with any national, local or religious holiday or celebration. 
(3)  Temporary or permanent signs erected by a public utility company or construction company to warn of dangerous or hazardous conditions. 
(4)  Real estate signs located on the specific lot, parcel or building offered for sale, so long as the area of the sign does not exceed eight (8) square feet or three (3) feet, six (6) inches in height or more than one (1) sign. 
(5)  Commercial informational signs. Signs announcing business hours, vacancy status, "open" and "closed" signs and informational and directional signs not exceeding two (2) square feet in area. 
(6)  Temporary signs used exclusively for quoting prices, announcing sales, civic community events and the display of menus not to exceed eight (8) square feet. 
(7)  Signs giving official public notice as required by municipal, county or state regulations. 
(8)  Signs identifying religious meeting places, fraternal meeting places or halls, or similar public and semi-public facilities and functions, not to exceed a maximum of eight (8) square feet, may be exempted subject to approval by the Town Council. 
(Prior code 70-50; Ord. 10 §4, 1991; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-135. - Prohibited signs. 
(a)  There shall be no flashing lights connected to or a part of any sign. 
(b)  There shall be no freestanding signs placed at the intersection of two (2) streets within the triangular area defined by a line extending from a point thirty (30) feet from the intersection of curblines along one street to a point thirty (30) feet from the intersection along the other curbline. 
(c)  There shall be no signs with visible moving, revolving or rotating parts, other mechanical movement or apparent movement achieved by electrical, electronic or mechanical means, except for time-temperature and date signs. 
(d)  Signs shall be prohibited that are structurally unsafe or constitute a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance or dilapidation. 
(e)  Signs shall be prohibited that create an unsafe visual distraction or obstruct the view of motor vehicle operators. 
(f)  Wall and projecting signs which extend beyond or above the roof line of a building shall be prohibited. 
(g)  There shall be no signs erected on a roof area between the intersection of the wall and roof of a building, extending up to and including the roof peak or ridge. 
(h)  Signs or billboards not located upon the property or business identified or advertised by the sign shall be prohibited. 
(Prior code 70-51) 
Sec. 16-136. - Setback requirements for freestanding signs. 
(a)  Freestanding signs in any zoning district shall be set back from the front property line in the following manner or distances: 
Zone Minimum Front Setback (feet) R-1, R-2, R-3 10 R-4 20 C-1 25 C-2 May not project into or over public rights-of-way C-3 25 IN 25  
(b)  No portion of any sign shall extend into the setback area. 
(c)  The side yard and rear yard setbacks shall be the same as the building setbacks in the applicable zone district. 
(Prior code 70-52) 
Sec. 16-137. - Permits required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to display, erect, relocate or alter any sign without first obtaining a sign permit from the Building Official, except as provided in Section 16-134. 
(b)  Once a sign permit has been issued, it shall be unlawful to change, modify or deviate from the terms or conditions of the approved permit without the consent of the Building Inspector. 
(c)  The application for a sign permit shall be made by the owner or tenant of the property on which the sign is to be placed or the authorized agent of the owner or tenant. The application shall be made on forms provided by the Building Official and shall be signed by the applicant. 
(d)  The application shall include applicable information as to the size, character, construction, height and proposed location of the sign. 
(e)  Permit fees shall be in an amount to be approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. 
(Prior code 70-53; Ord. 12 §B36, 2003) 
Sec. 16-138. - Structural requirements. 
    Signs and structures for signs shall be designed in conformity with the building code adopted in Chapter 18 of this Code adopted in Chapter 18, including but not limited to consideration for wind loads, seismic loads, allowable stresses, materials and anchorage requirements. 
(Prior code 70-54; Ord. 13 §6, 2008) 
Sec. 16-139. - Schedule of sign requirements: residential zones. 
    The sign requirements for the residential zones are as follows: 
____________ 
Zoning District Types Permitted Character of Signs Permitted Maximum Area (square feet) Maximum Number of Signs Maximum Height of Freestanding Signs R-1 Identification Wall, projecting, freestanding 1 1 3 feet 6 inches Real estate Freestanding 8 1 3 feet 6 inches R-2 (Same as R-1 District) R-3 (Same as R-1 District R-4 Identification, real estate (multiple-family residential project only) Wall 
  
Freestanding 16 
  
30 1 
  
1 6 feet Single-family real estate Same as R-1, R-2, R-3 8 1 3 feet 6 inches  
(Prior code 70-56) 
Sec. 16-140. - Schedule of sign requirements: C-1 District. 
    The sign requirements for the C-1 District are as follows: 
Zoning District Types Permitted Character of Sign Permitted Maximum Area (sq. ft.) Maximum Number of Signs Maximum Height of Freestanding Signs Supplemental Requirements C-1 Neighboring Commercial Business identification, Joint identification, construction Wall or projecting Wall signs shall not exceed 0.5 sq. ft. for each linear foot of building frontage or a maximum of 20 sq. ft. per business; projecting signs shall not exceed 16 sq. ft. per face 1 wall or 1 projecting per business Projecting signs shall not project more than 48 inches from the building nor be less than 10 feet above the sidewalk Suspended A suspended identification sign may be permitted only if an arcade or canopy is provided. These signs shall be limited to 4 sq. ft. per face 1 per business Freestanding Each neighborhood commercial center may have a joint identification sign that is freestanding, provided that the total area does not exceed 50 sq. ft. 1 freestanding sign for each neighborhood center 10 ft. Real estate (temporary) Freestanding 8 sq. ft. 1 3 ft. 6 in.  
(Prior code 70-57) 
Sec. 16-141. - Schedule of sign requirements: C-2 District. 
    The sign requirements for the C-2 District are as follows: 
Zoning District Types Permitted Character of Sign Permitted Maximum Area (sq. ft.) Maximum Number of Signs Maximum Height of Freestanding Signs Supplemental Requirements C-2 Business identification, Joint identification, construction Wall or projecting 1 wall or projecting sign, except that a corner building is allowed 2 signs, 1 for each face, for a total of 50 sq. ft. of wall signs or 32 sq. ft. of projecting signs 1 wall or projecting sign, except that a corner building is allowed 2 signs, 1 for each face, for a total of 50 sq. ft. of wall signs or 32 sq. ft. of projecting signs Same for C-1 District Suspended These signs may be permitted only if an arcade, canopy or covered walkway exists. Area shall not exceed 4 sq. ft. per face or a total of 8 sq. ft. 1 sign per business Freestanding 50 sq. ft. per face; 100 sq. ft. total 1 sign per building 15 feet Each independent building in a shopping center permitted 1 sign for joint identification or business purposes Real estate (temporary) Freestanding 8 sq. ft. 1 3 ft. 6 in.  
(Prior code 70-58) 
Sec. 16-142. - Schedule of sign requirements: C-3 District. 
    The sign requirements for the C-3 District are as follows: 
Zoning District Types Permitted Character of Sign Permitted Maximum Area (sq. ft.) Maximum Number of Signs Maximum Height of Freestanding Signs Supplemental Requirements C-3 Community Service Commercial Business, identification, construction Wall or projecting Wall signs shall not exceed 1 sq. ft. for each linear foot of building frontage or a maximum of 50 sq. ft. per business; projecting signs shall not exceed 16 sq. ft. per face 1 wall or 1 projecting sign, except that a corner building is allowed 2 signs, 1 for each face for a total of 50 sq. ft. of wall signs or 32 sq. ft. of projecting signs Freestanding Freestanding individual identification signs shall be limited to 25 sq. ft. per face or a maximum of 50 sq. ft. 1 per building 10 feet Joint identification Freestanding Freestanding signs for commercial shopping centers shall not exceed 75 sq. ft. per face or a total of 150 sq. ft. when permitted. No other freestanding signs shall be permitted in the shopping center 1 per shopping center 20 feet  
(Prior code 70-59) 
Sec. 16-143. - Schedule of sign requirements: Industrial Zone District. 
    The sign requirements for the Industrial Zone are as follows: 
Zoning District Types Permitted Character of Sign Permitted Maximum Area (sq. ft.) Maximum Number of Signs Maximum Height of Freestanding Signs IN Industrial Business identification, construction Wall or projecting Wall signs shall not exceed 1 sq. ft. for each linear foot of building frontage or a maximum of 50 sq. ft. per business; projecting signs shall not exceed 16 sq. ft. per face 1 wall or 1 projecting, except that a corner building is allowed 2 signs, 1 for each face for a total of 50 sq. ft. of wall signs or 32 sq. ft. of projecting signs Freestanding Freestanding individual identification signs shall be limited to 25 sq. ft. per face or a maximum of 50 sq. ft. 1 per building * 8 ft. Joint identification Freestanding Freestanding signs shall not exceed 75 sq. ft. per face or a total of 150 sq. ft. when permitted. No other freestanding signs shall be permitted in the industrial center 1 per industrial center 12 ft.  
* Supplemental Requirements: Must be only business on lot or comply with joint identification. 
(Prior code 70-59.5) 
Sec. 16-144. - Sign lighting. 
    Lighting for commercial signage is addressed in Section 16-436, Sign lighting, and Section 16-135, Prohibited signs. 
(Ord. 14 §1(Exh. A), 2012) 
Secs. 16-145-16-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII - Mobile Home Parks, Standards 

Sec. 16-161. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of this Chapter to provide for orderly and creative development of mobile home parks within the Town. It is further intended that a high quality of design be encouraged with design standards required and amenities provided that are equal to or greater than conventional single-family or multiple-family developments. These regulations are also intended to require minimum safety standards for utilities, fire protection and protection from excessive winds. 
(Prior code 70-60) 
Sec. 16-162. - Special review application required. 
    All mobile home parks shall require that a special review application be filed in accordance with the procedures and requirements of Article III. Mobile homes shall be permitted only in the R-3, R-4, C-2 and C-3 districts as a special review use within designated mobile home parks and/or as a part of a planned unit development. 
(Prior code 70-61) 
Sec. 16-163. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply to this Article in addition to the definitions of Section 16-4: 
    Mobile home or camper sales lot means a plot of land that is used primarily for the sale of mobile homes or campers. Such uses are permitted only in commercially zoned areas and not as part of mobile home parks or subdivisions. This definition does not apply to any mobile home which is being sold by the person actually residing in the unit. 
    Mobile home park means a plot of land of at least five (5) acres in area where two (2) or more mobile homes are located for permanent dwelling purposes. 
    Mobile home space means a plot of ground within a mobile home park designated for the accommodation of one (1) mobile home and its accessory structures. 
(Prior code 70-62) 
Sec. 16-164. - Permits and licenses required. 
    The following permits and licenses shall be required: 
(1)  Mobile home park license. A mobile home park license is required to operate and maintain a mobile home park in the Town. The annual license fee for a mobile home park is set forth in Section 6-51. No license shall be issued without the prior approval of the special review use of the property as a mobile home park. 
(2)  Application for a mobile home park license shall be filed with the Town Clerk and such license issued by the Town Council upon the approval of the application by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Said application shall be in writing, signed by the property owners and applicant and shall contain the following: 
a.  The name and addresses of the property owner and applicant. 
b.  The location and legal description of the property. 
c.  A copy of the approved special review site plan in accordance with the provisions of Article VI. 
(3)  All mobile homes and mobile home parks in existence upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter shall obtain such a license and in all respects comply fully with the requirements of this Chapter, except as follows: 
a.  Special review approval of existing mobile homes and mobile home parks shall not be required unless the use is proposed for expansion. 
b.  Building permits will not be required for existing units unless the units are to be moved or altered. 
(4)  Building permit. 
a.  All buildings and utilities constructed, altered or repaired in a mobile home park shall be in conformance with applicable Town and state codes and shall require a building permit. 
b.  A building permit shall also be required for installing individual mobile homes in a mobile home park or subdivision, for tying down of a previously installed mobile home and for the construction of accessory structures. 
(Prior code 70-63; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-165. - Application of regulations. 
(a)  General. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to construction, alteration, extension, location, installation, use and maintenance of all mobile homes and mobile home parks in the Town. It shall be unlawful for any persons to construct, alter, extend, install, use or maintain a mobile home, mobile home park or mobile home subdivision within the Town except in compliance with this Chapter. 
(b)  Existing mobile homes and mobile home parks. 
(1)  Whenever a mobile home or mobile home park was in existence in the Town on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter or was annexed to the Town after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter and the mobile home was in compliance with the applicable codes then in effect, the mobile home or mobile home park is said to be legally nonconforming. Such mobile homes or mobile home parks shall not be subject to the provisions of this Article except for the licensing provisions and Section 16-166(p) relating to utilities when such public services are available. However, if the existing mobile home or mobile home park is proposed to be altered or expanded, then the alteration or expansion must be in accordance with this Article. 
(2)  In the event that an individual mobile home within a nonconforming mobile home park is destroyed or damaged, the mobile home may be rebuilt or replaced, provided that the restored unit is in compliance with the licensing provisions of this Article. If a single nonconforming mobile home use on an individual lot or a mobile home park is damaged or destroyed to an extent that the cost of replacement exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the estimated cost of the unit, then the tract may only be used for uses that are in conformance with the applicable zoning district regulations. 
(3)  If a nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of six (6) consecutive months or more, then the mobile home shall not be reoccupied until it is in conformance with all applicable regulations herein. 
(Prior code 70-64) 
Sec. 16-166. - Development standards. 
(a)  Location. The mobile home park shall be located on a well-drained site and shall be located so that its drainage will not constitute an unreasonable hazard or nuisance to persons, property or water supply in the immediate vicinity of the site. The site shall be free from marshes, swamps or other potential breeding places for insects or rodents. Mobile home park sites shall not be subject to undue flooding, fire or safety hazards and shall not be exposed to nuisances such as undue noise, smoke, fumes or odors. The topography of the site should be favorable to minimum grading, mobile home placement and ease of maintenance. Initial site grades shall not exceed eight percent (8%). 
(b)  Site design. The site design shall provide for a desirable residential environment for mobile home residents which is an asset to the community and the neighborhood in which it is located. Site planning and improvements shall provide facilities and amenities which are appropriate to the needs of the residents; safe, comfortable and sanitary use by the residents under all weather conditions; and practical and efficient operation and maintenance facilities at reasonable costs. Innovative and imaginative design shall be encouraged. 
(c)  Minimum area required. The minimum area required for a mobile home park is five (5) acres. 
(d)  Maximum density. The maximum gross density for any mobile home park is seven (7) units per acre. 
(e)  Recreational area and open space. Not less than thirty percent (30%) of the total site area shall be used for recreation facilities and landscaped open space. All open space areas and recreational areas shall be in convenient locations from mobile home lots or spaces. Recreation areas may include space for community use facilities and buildings, swimming pools and tennis courts. 
(f)  Mobile home spaces. 
(1)  Mobile home spaces within a mobile home park shall be adequate to provide for: 
a.  A minimum of fifteen (15) feet between mobile homes. 
b.  A minimum of two (2) feet from the tongue of the mobile home to any sidewalk. 
c.  A minimum of ten (10) feet from any other point on the mobile home to the pavement of any adjacent access road serving more than one (1) mobile home space. 
d.  An outdoor living and service area on the mobile home space of not less than three hundred (300) square feet, with a least dimension of fifteen (15) feet. Such area may include a paved patio area. 
(2)  In determining the required yard and space areas, the use of double-wide mobile homes and accessory structures shall be taken into consideration. The area required for mobile home space shall not include additional area required by this Chapter for access roads, off-street parking, storage areas, service buildings, recreation areas, office and similar mobile home park needs. 
(g)  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area for a mobile home shall be four thousand (4,000) square feet. 
(h)  Travel trailers, campers, motor homes, camper buses, non-HUD certified mobile homes, trailers, manufactured homes, and dependent trailers are not allowed except in storage areas described in Subsection (n) below. Required areas within the mobile home park for accommodation of travel trailers, campers and the like, on a temporary occupancy basis, shall be provided in a location where the parking, use and occupancy of such vehicles do not constitute a nuisance to other residents of the mobile home park. Travel trailer areas shall be screened from the rest of the mobile home spaces in such a manner that undue noise and other disturbances are reduced. Furthermore, such areas shall be conveniently located to community service and sanitary facilities, and utilities provided on the spaces shall comply with all applicable health and safety regulations of this Chapter and other ordinances of the Town. Anchors and cables with turnbuckles shall be provided for tying down travel trailers. 
(i)  Setbacks. 
(1)  Mobile homes shall be set back at least twenty-five (25) feet from the perimeter of the boundaries of the mobile home park. 
(2)  No mobile home shall overhang or obstruct any driveway, access road or walkway. 
(j)  Screening. All mobile home parks or subdivisions adjacent to other residential uses or to commercial or industrial uses shall be provided with screening, such as solid fencing or landscaping, along the property boundary separating the mobile home development from the adjacent use. 
(k)  Windbreaks. Where any mobile home park is located on flat open land without natural barriers (such as hills, bluffs or large stands of trees) to strong winds, windbreaks shall be required to protect mobile homes from the effects of such winds. Windbreak design and location shall be relative to known wind velocities and direction and to the existing and proposed topography and vegetation, and shall be subject to landscape review and approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission. One (1) or more of the following techniques shall be used in providing windbreak screening: 
(1)  Landscape buffering: a combination of trees and understory shrubbing of dense deciduous or evergreen plant material, with mature shrub heights ranging from four (4) to twelve (12) feet; or clustered or row-planted tree and/or shrub hedging. 
(2)  Earth berming, in combination with landscape buffering. 
(3)  Fencing: opaque (eighty-five percent [85%] or more opacity) wood or masonry screening. (Such fencing shall comply with Building and Zoning Code requirements.) 
(l)  Streets. 
(1)  The mobile home park site shall have at least two (2) direct accesses to a public street or highway, and access roads shall be provided to each mobile home space. 
(2)  All streets and accessways providing ingress to and egress from the mobile home park and circulation within the mobile home park shall be constructed in accordance with specifications of the Town for like streets and accessways on public ways and shall be completed within a period of one (1) year after the date of issuance of the mobile home park permit. All such streets and accessways shall include sidewalk, curb and gutter. 
(m)  Walkways and lighting. 
(1)  Paved walkways at least four (4) feet wide shall be provided from all mobile home spaces to service buildings and other community areas, and along all access roads. 
(2)  Pedestrian circulation areas shall be lighted at night by seven thousand (7,000) lumen lighting standards (equal to one hundred seventy-five [175] watt mercury vapor bulbs) spaced not more than three hundred (300) feet apart, with a maximum height of twenty-five (25) feet; or by other lighting methods producing an equivalent level of light at the ground level. 
(n)  Storage areas. Storage areas for boats, boat trailers, travel trailers, tent trailers, horse trailers and detachable pickup campers shall be provided within the mobile home park in any amount equal to one hundred (100) square feet per mobile home space. Such areas shall be screened from adjacent residential properties and public streets by means of opaque fencing or landscaping, and tie-down anchors shall be provided. 
(o)  Off-street parking. Parking shall be provided as required by Article V. 
(p)  Public utilities. All mobile homes and mobile home parks shall be served by a public water and sewer system and meet all state laws for public services, refuse disposal and public health considerations. 
(Prior code 70-65) 
Sec. 16-167. - Revocation of license. 
    The Town Council may, after a public hearing, revoke any license to operate and maintain a mobile home park when the licensee has violated any rules or regulations of the Town or any provision of this Chapter. After such revocation, the licensee may have the license reissued by the Town Council if the circumstances causing such violation have been remedied or corrected. 
(Prior code 70-66; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-168. - Posting of license. 
    The license certificate shall be conspicuously posted in the office or premises of the mobile home park at all times. 
(Prior code 70-67) 
Sec. 16-169. - Additional regulations. 
    In addition to the requirements of this Article, all mobile homes and mobile home parks and facilities shall be operated in compliance with the existing laws of the State, ordinances of the Town and such codes and regulations as may be adopted by the Town Council. 
(Prior code 70-68; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Secs. 16-170-16-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX - Supplementary Regulations 

Sec. 16-181. - Temporary uses. 
    Upon application to the Town Clerk and approval by the Town Council, a temporary use permit may be issued for the following uses for the period of time indicated. Such permits shall be valid only for the period of time specified. Extensions of time may be granted by the Town Council. 
(1)  Construction offices and yards incidental thereto for construction on the premises: nine (9) months. 
(2)  Carnivals, circuses, bazaars and fairs: one (1) week. 
(3)  Tent meetings and crusades: two (2) weeks. 
(4)  Parking for authorized temporary uses. 
(Prior code 70-75; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-182. - Maximum height requirement exceptions. 
(a)  Renewable energy devices may exceed the maximum height allowances in the zone districts not to exceed ten (10) feet above the height permitted, provided that written approval is granted by the Technical Review Committee, which shall have found that the use would not impair the use of, or prevent the proper access of light, air or solar access to, adjacent properties, nor be out of harmony with the intent and purpose of this Chapter. 
(b)  The following uses may be excepted from the maximum height requirements, provided that written approval is granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission, which shall have found that the use would not impair the use of, or prevent the proper access of light, air or solar access to, adjacent properties, nor be out of harmony with the intent and purpose of this Chapter: 
(1)  Church towers; 
(2)  Elevator enclosures; 
(3)  Monuments; and 
(4)  Renewable energy devices more than ten (10) feet above the allowable zone district height limit. Further, the entity seeking approval of a renewable energy device denied by the Technical Review Committee may appeal to the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(c)  Major utility facilities may be exempted from the maximum height requirements in the zone districts where they are permitted, provided that approval is granted through a special review process. In granting the height exception for major utility facilities, the Town Council shall consider the following additional review criteria in addition to the special review criteria: 
(1)  The additional height is reasonably necessary in the circumstances for the major utility facility; and 
(2)  The additional height will not injure the value of or use of or prevent the proper access of light and air to adjacent properties, and the additional height will not be inconsistent with the intent and purpose of the master plan and this Chapter. 
(Prior code 70-76; Ord. 10 §5, 1991; Ord. 9 §B, 2002; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 27 §B1, 2005) 
Sec. 16-183. - Setback requirement exceptions. 
    The following features shall be excepted from setback requirements, provided that exceptions to the required river setback shall be subject to supplemental regulations applicable to the river setback. 
(1)  Unroofed and completely unenclosed terraces, patios and decks, eighteen (18) inches or less above existing grade, provided that no more than forty percent (40%) of the setback area is covered. A railing no more than forty-two (42) inches in height may be constructed in conjunction with the terrace, patio or deck. 
(2)  Unenclosed fire escapes up to a distance of four (4) feet into any required yard, for preexisting buildings only. 
(3)  Awnings or shading devices, a maximum of four (4) feet into any required yard. This provision shall apply only to devices which are solely supported by attachment to the building. 
(4)  Architectural features including sills, belt courses, eaves and similar features, a maximum of twelve (12) inches into any required yard. 
(5)  Below-grade heating or cooling conduit or infrastructure such as a ground-source heat pump system, below-grade dry wells or other at-grade or below-grade drainage and similar infrastructure. The minimum projection necessary to accommodate exterior mounted utility junctions, meters, cable boxes, vent flues, standpipes, and similar apparatus and including any protective structure as may be required by the utility provider. 
(6)  Heating and air conditioning equipment as provided below. 
a.  For single-family, duplex, and multi-family residential development receiving a certificate of occupancy on or before March 11, 2014, heating and air conditioning equipment and other similar mechanical equipment proposed in the required setbacks shall meet the following requirements: 
1)  Not exceed forty (40) inches above or below finished grade, but may be up to forty (40) inches above and below finished grade simultaneously; and, 
2)  Be placed within non-street facing setbacks; and, 
3)  If the manufacturer's specifications for a heating or air conditioning unit exceed fifty (50) decibels, a noise mitigation plan shall be submitted and approved to the satisfaction of the Town Building Official and implemented upon the installation of the equipment. 
Acceptable types of noise mitigation may include, but not be limited to, the installation of sound blankets or enclosures that are reasonable in size as determined by the Town Building Official. 
Exceptions to the requirements herein may be considered pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 16-44, special review application procedures. Heating and air conditioning equipment and similar mechanical equipment that is proposed in conformance with the setback requirements is regulated pursuant to Town Code Section 16-207, heating and air conditioning equipment. For clarification, portable devices such as window units are not considered equipment and may be located in windows. 
b.  For new single-family, duplex, and multi-family residential development that has not received a certificate of occupancy on or before March 11, 2014, heating and air conditioning equipment shall comply with the required setbacks and Town Code Section 16-207, heating and air conditioning equipment. For clarification, portable devices such as window units are not considered equipment and may be located in windows. 
(Ord. 10 §6, 1991; Ord. 06 §1(Exh. A), 2014) 
Sec. 16-184. - Accessory buildings and uses. 
(a)  All detached accessory buildings shall be located in the rear half of the lot. 
(b)  An accessory building may be located within a required rear yard setback area on an interior lot, provided that not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the required rear yard area is covered by such building and that a minimum setback of ten (10) feet from the rear lot line shall be maintained, and provided further that in all cases all required side yard setbacks shall be maintained. 
(c)  On double frontage or through lots, the minimum setback from the rear property line shall be the same as the front yard setback for principal uses within that district. 
(d)  On corner lots, the accessory buildings shall not be located closer to the street side property than required for the principal use. 
(e)  Accessory buildings for vehicular storage with improved vehicular access from the building to a public street shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height, and accessory buildings for all other uses shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height. 
(f)  The floor area of accessory uses shall be included in the determination of the maximum lot coverage. 
(g)  A non-habitable structure, regardless of whether it requires a building permit or not, requires a review and approval of a site plan by the Town Building Official to ensure that it complies with the zoning requirements. 
(Prior code 70-78; Ord. 29 §§6, 7, 1990; Ord. 06 §1(Exh. A), 2014) 
Sec. 16-185. - Side yard requirements for corner lots. 
(a)  Side yard setbacks adjacent to a street, except for an arterial street, shall be equal to the greater of fifteen (15) feet or the side yard requirement based on height of the building in the zoning district. 
(b)  Side yards abutting arterial streets shall have the same setback as required for front yard setbacks on arterial streets in the same zoning district. 
(Prior code 70-79) 
Sec. 16-186. - Lots restricted to one (1) principal building. 
    Only one (1) principal building may be permitted on the same lot unless approved as a part of a planned unit development or through the special review procedures of Article III. 
(Prior code 70-80) 
Sec. 16-187. - Hillside and steep slope regulations. 
(a)  Purpose. As part of the 2007 Basalt Master Plan, the Town adopted a goal to protect and enhance its natural environment, recognizing that the environment is the source of the community's physical and economic wealth. The Town also adopted a set of Master Plan Typologies, including a Hillside Overlay, setting forth guiding principles for development on steeper slopes within the Town. 
    The Town intends to implement the goals and objectives of the master plan by adopting these steep slope regulations. These regulations are intended to achieve the following purposes: 
(1)  Preserve the visual and aesthetic qualities of Basalt's hillside areas; 
(2)  Ensure that development fits with the natural contours of the land so as to minimize the impacts of cutting, filling and grading on hillsides and steep slopes; 
(3)  Control activities that would cause scarring and erosion on steep slopes and that could degrade water quality; and 
(4)  Protect the public from the natural hazards associated with unstable slopes and hillside development, including those from geologic hazards and wildfire hazards. 
(b)  Applicability. The provisions of Section 16-187 shall apply to development as specified in the table entitled "Applicability of Section 16-187 to Proposed Activities." 
(c)  Procedures. 
(1)  Administrative review. The review of all development that is subject to the provisions of this Section 16-187 shall be accomplished administratively by the Town Planner, except as provided for herein. However, for any property that is also the subject of an application for PUD, subdivision, special review, site plan review, or any other land use review procedure, the provisions of these steep slope regulations shall be consolidated with and addressed concurrently with the land use review procedures applicable to such approvals and shall not occur administratively. For PUD and subdivision applications which involve more than one (1) review step, consideration of the project's compliance with the steep slope regulations shall be determined at the sketch plan stage of the process. 
Applicability of Section 16-187 to Proposed Activities 
Activity Section C. Procedures Section D. Formulas Section E. Standards 1. Development on a site where no slopes are 30% or greater No, this section does not apply No, this section does not apply No, this section does not apply 2. Development on a site containing 30% slopes but development is not proposed on a 30% slope area and is more than ten feet (10') from the top of the slope Not Located in Hillside Overlay - No, this section does not apply, but the applicant may be required to submit a drawing demonstrating the setback from the top of slope No, this section does not apply Not Located in Hillside Overlay - This section does not apply if development (including retaining walls, cutting, filing or grading, etc. per Section 16-4) does not occur in the 30% slope area Located in Hillside Overlay - this section applies Located inside Hillside Overlay - Section E.4 applies 3. Development on a slope of 30% or greater Yes, this section applies Yes, this section applies Yes, this section applies 4. Structure that is set back by less than ten feet (10') from the top of a slope that is 30% or greater Yes, this section applies Yes, this section applies Yes, this section applies 5. Interior remodeling or restoration of an existing structure which does not alter the exterior of the structure and does not involve grading or other land disturbing activities on a slope of 30% or greater No this section does not apply This section only applies if the original construction involved development, such as grading or other land disturbing activities on a slope of 30% of greater. No, this section does not apply 6. Exterior remodeling or expansion of an existing residence located on a slope of 30% or greater or that is set back by less than 10' from the top of a slope that is 30% or greater that does not involve grading, foundation expansion or other land disturbing activities Not Located in Hillside Overlay - No, this section does not apply Yes, this section applies Not Located in Hillside Overlay - No, this section does not apply Located inside Hillside Overlay - This section applies Located Inside Hillside Overlay - Section E.4 applies  
(2)  Submission requirements. In addition to any other materials required for the development, the applicant shall submit the materials listed below to permit a determination to be made of the project's compliance with these steep slope regulations. The Town Planner may, however, waive or modify any of these requirements if determined to not be applicable to the proposed development or if the materials are not needed at that stage of review in a multi-step review process. 
a.  A drawing shall be provided depicting topography and other significant topographic features throughout that portion of the property where development is planned. Topography shall be shown at no less than two (2) foot contour intervals. A slope category analysis shall also be provided, prepared by a surveyor or other qualified professional, identifying the areas of the property with slopes of zero percent (0%) to 29.99 percent, thirty percent (30%) to 44.99 percent and forty-five percent (45%) and greater. If applicable, the slope category analysis shall also identify the top of slope and toe of slope and shall identify any significant geologic hazards, including major rock outcroppings and areas of unstable slope. During the review of the application the Town Planner shall verify the accuracy of the top of slope and toe of slope designations through field observation and desktop evaluation of the slope drawing. 
b.  A drawing showing the proposed development shall be provided, including planned structures, roads and proposed grading, if any. A landscape plan for revegetation of any disturbed slopes shall also be submitted, along with a tabular schedule, listing the type, approximate number and approximate size of plants to be installed and the grass seed mix to be used for revegetation. A plan for providing irrigation water to the new plantings shall also be submitted. 
c.  When development is proposed on a slope of thirty percent (30%) or greater, a letter shall be submitted, prepared by a licensed professional geologist or engineer, demonstrating that the proposal will not create hazardous conditions for residents of the subject property or surrounding properties and finding that the proposal will not cause slope instability or increase the potential for slope failure. The letter shall also list any conditions the applicant must comply with to ensure the safety of the proposed development. 
d.  A written response shall be provided to the applicable site planning standards of Section 16-187(e). 
(3)  Procedural steps. Development that is subject to the provisions of these steep slope regulations shall be reviewed according to the following procedural steps: 
a.  A pre-application meeting with the Town Planner is recommended but is not mandatory prior to submission of an application unless the application is being consolidated with another type of land use application for which a pre-application meeting is mandatory. The purpose of the pre-application meeting is for the staff to explain the submission requirements, review procedures and site planning standards that will apply to the project and to respond to any questions the applicant may have. 
b.  Following submission of an application by the applicant and a determination by the Town Planner that the application is complete, the Town Planner shall review the application to determine its compliance with the provisions of this Section 16-187 and other applicable provisions of the Code. The Town Planner may conduct a site visit as part of this review and may solicit referral comments from other Town staff. 
c.  The Town Planner shall publish a public notice of the receipt of the application in a newspaper of general circulation within the Town, specifying a period of fifteen (15) days from the date of publication for the submission of comments. The Town Planner shall also provide the applicant a sign describing the nature of the request which shall be posted on the property for a period of at least fifteen (15) days and shall specify a date by which public comments shall be submitted. 
d.  The Town Planner shall then issue a written administrative determination approving, approving with conditions, or denying the application unless the application has been consolidated with another type of land use application, in which case this determination shall be made by the review body responsible for the final action on that application. The determination shall specify any site planning standards or other applicable provisions of this Code that have not been met, if any. 
(4)  Appeal. Where review under Section 16-187 is the only applicable review procedure, an applicant or other adversely affected person may appeal the Town Planner's denial of an application submitted under these steep slope regulations or the Town Planner's approval of an application with conditions. The appeal shall be submitted in writing to the Town Planner within fifteen (15) days after the written decision of the Town Planner is issued. 
a.  The appeal shall be heard by the Town Council at a regular meeting with prior notice given to the applicant and any other party who participated in the proceedings before the Town Planner. The Council's review shall be based upon the record before the Town Planner, unless the Council determines, for good cause shown, that it is necessary to admit additional evidence for a just determination of the appeal. The applicant and interested members of the public shall be permitted to make arguments to the Council based solely on the record before the Town Planner, unless the Council determines to admit additional evidence. 
b.  The Town Council decision to grant or deny the appeal shall be based upon a determination of whether the Town Planner's decision: (1) was contrary to the evidence; (2) exceeded the Town Planner's legal authority; (3) was based on an erroneous interpretation of the applicable regulations; or (4) denied the applicant or other interested party procedural due process. The Town Council may affirm, reverse or modify the Town Planner's decision and it may remand the matter to the Town Planner for further consideration, with instructions when deemed appropriate by the Town Council. The Town Council is also authorized to refer the matter to the Planning Commission for a recommendation prior to taking action on the appeal. 
c.  In making its determination on any appeal, the Town Council may grant relief from the strict application of the requirements of Section 16-187 where necessary to relieve the applicant from a significant hardship which was not created by the applicant and where such relief is necessary to permit a reasonable economic use of the property. Such relief shall not be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that the development of the property will not pose an unreasonable risk to the health and safety of the public or other property owners. The applicant's ability to pay for mitigation measures required by these regulations shall not be considered in determining if there is a hardship. 
(d)  Density and floor area calculation formulas. The following density and floor area calculation formulas shall apply to any property that contains slopes of thirty percent (30%) or greater, regardless of whether development is proposed on those slopes. 
(1)  PUD's and subdivisions. The density and floor area calculations applicable to proposed PUD's and subdivisions, PUD's and subdivisions which were approved subsequent to December 22, 1982 (the date on which the Town adopted a floor area exclusion for thirty percent (30%) slopes), and amendments to approved PUD's and subdivisions shall be as follows: 
a.  Lands with a slope of less than thirty percent (30%): One hundred percent (100%) of land area counts towards density and floor area calculations. 
b.  Lands with a slope of thirty percent (30%) or greater: Zero percent (0%) of land area counts towards density and floor area calculations. 
c.  For subdivisions and PUD's approved subsequent to 1982, the floor area shall be as permitted in the Town's subdivision or PUD approval. 
(2)  Other lots and parcels. The density and floor area calculations applicable to all other lots or parcels that were legally created and of record on April 19, 2012, shall be as follows: 
a.  Lands with a slope of less than thirty percent (30%): One hundred percent (100%) of land area counts toward density and floor area calculations. 
b.  Lands with a slope of thirty percent (30%) to forty-five percent (45%): Seventy-five percent (75%) of land area counts toward density and floor area calculations. 
c.  Lands with a slope of more than forty-five percent (45%): Zero percent (0%) of land area counts towards density and floor area calculations. Provided, however, that in no case shall the resulting allowable floor area for the lot or parcel be less than two thousand one hundred (2,100) square feet (unless the lot or parcel's allowed floor area prior to applying this formula is already less than two thousand one hundred (2,100) square feet, in which case that lower number shall be the lot or parcel's allowed floor area) and provided the proposed development complies with the applicable site planning standards in subsection (e), below. Provided also that the floor area reduction formula shall not apply to any lot or parcel on which: (1) no development is proposed on a slope that is thirty percent (30%) or greater; (2) the closest façade of any building or structure is located ten (10) feet or more from the top of slope; and (3) the proposed development does not require the applicant to submit any other land use application for which Town Council approval would be required. 
(3)  Relief from formulas. An applicant who wishes to obtain relief from the restrictions of the density and floor area calculation formulas on his lot may do so by submitting an application for special review pursuant to Chapter 16, Article III or by obtaining a variance through the PUD process pursuant to Chapter 16, Article IV of this Code. 
(e)  Site planning standards. Applications that are subject to these steep slope regulations shall demonstrate their compliance with the following site planning standards. 
(1)  Overall site plan. 
a.  Setback from top of slope. When development is placed on the top of a slope that is greater than thirty percent (30%), the façade of any structure shall be set back by a minimum of ten feet (10") from the top of that slope. 
b.  Development to occur on lesser slopes. When a property contains some lands with a slope of less than thirty percent (30%) and some lands with a slope of greater than thirty percent (30%), the area of the property having a slope of less than thirty percent (30%) is the preferred portion of the site in which to accommodate the development and shall be utilized to the extent practical. However, development may occur along the toe of a thirty percent (30%) slope, (or if it is not practical to develop on a slope of less than thirty percent (30%), then along the slope itself) if the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Town Planner or other applicable review body that the development is reasonable and safe from an engineering and slope stability standpoint and does not cause unnecessary impacts on the slope onto which it is being built. In doing so, the applicant shall demonstrate that the development has been designed to appropriately account for the following factors, as applicable to the site in question: 
1.  The stability of the slope and whether disturbing that slope could pose a hazard to occupants of the property or neighboring properties. 
2.  The presence or absence of vegetation on the slope and whether development on the slope would result in the loss of mature vegetation that helps to stabilize the slope. 
3.  Whether there are natural or unique features or valued neighborhood characteristics on the flat portions of the site that could be preserved by locating some of the development at the toe of the slope or on the steeper slopes. 
4.  The prevailing development pattern on the surrounding lots and whether development has typically occurred on the flat area of the property or has taken place on the steeper lands (Note: this factor shall not apply to properties accessed off of an alley). 
5.  The ability of the proposed development to keep all site impacts, such as drainage and erosion, within the confines of the site during and following construction. 
c.  Preserve natural features. Whenever possible development should be located to preserve significant natural site features such as prominent landforms, rock outcrops, mature trees and vegetation, and drainage courses. Developing in already disturbed areas of a site is preferred to disturbance of natural areas. 
d.  Avoid unstable slopes. Development shall be located so as to avoid areas that the Town determines are subject to slope instability and rockfall hazards, except as provided in the following circumstance. Where a project is not able to fully avoid these hazards, development may be permitted if an engineer or geologist licensed in the State of Colorado demonstrates that the hazard will be safely mitigated and appropriate mitigation measures are employed. Mitigation measures may include but are not limited to: 
1.  Slope stabilization via grading, revegetation, retaining walls, soil nail or micropile systems, or other accepted designs; 
2.  Stabilization of rocks via bolting, gunite application (cementing), removal of unstable rocks (scaling), cribbing, installation of retaining or catchment walls and other accepted practices; 
3.  Slowing, diverting or channelizing rocks or debris flows using fences, screens, dams, concrete barriers or diversion facilities around vulnerable structures; and 
4.  Designing structures to withstand the impacts from rocks and other geologic hazards by reinforcing uphill walls, windows and doors or by having no windows or doors on uphill walls. 
e.  Avoid driveway cuts across steep slopes. To the extent practical, development should be placed close to where an existing road or driveway enters a property so as to avoid having the driveway cut across an existing steep slope to access another portion of the site. This means that if the road accesses the property at the toe of a slope, then development should occur at the toe of the slope while if the road accesses the property at the top of the slope, then development should occur at the top of the slope. 
(2)  Grading standards. 
a.  Developments within the R-3TN Zone District. Terracing, as seen throughout the R-3TN Zone District (Hill District), is permitted to occur on slopes in excess of thirty percent (30%) in order to create a flat bench or building pad or to create a garden or lawn area as this is consistent with the historical development of this area of Town. 
b.  Developments in areas not zoned R-3TN. In areas of Town not zoned R-3TN that have slopes in excess of thirty percent (30%) development should be designed to minimize the need for earth moving or disturbance. For example, cutting and grading to create a flat bench or building pad should be avoided to the maximum extent possible. Building designs that require excessive cut and fill shall not be allowed. Instead buildings should be designed to follow the site's natural contours and building foundations should be stepped along the slope to limit the need for cutting and filling. Driveways should be designed to follow the site's natural contours whenever possible and should take up the grade of the slope rather than cutting into or manipulating the topography. 
c.  Man-made slopes. Where grading, excavation, or filling is necessary, creation of slopes of twenty-five percent (25%) or less is strongly encouraged. Cut or filled man-made slopes shall not exceed a slope of fifty percent (50%) unless a soils engineering or technical report is submitted demonstrating that the cut or fill will be stable. 
d.  Re-contour cut and filled slopes. All cut, filled and graded slopes shall be re-contoured to blend with the natural, varied contours of the surrounding undisturbed terrain. Abrupt angular transitions and linear slopes should be avoided to the extent possible. 
e.  Retaining walls. Retaining walls used to support steep slopes shall not exceed six (6) feet in height except when terracing is employed or as needed to construct a structure's foundation wall. Terracing should be limited to two (2) tiers. The width of the terrace between retaining walls that are up to four (4) feet in height should be at least three (3) feet. Retaining walls greater than four (4) feet in height should be separated from other retaining walls by at least five (5) horizontal feet and shall be based on the design of a professional engineer. Terraces shall be permanently landscaped or revegetated pursuant to the standards in Subsection (e)(3)a. below. 
(3)  Vegetation preservation and landscaping. 
a.  Revegetation is required. Areas disturbed by development shall be revegetated. Plant material used to revegetate these areas shall be non-invasive and should be low-water using and indigenous to the neighborhood in which the property is located. For the purpose of this standard, "indigenous" means naturalized to a given geographic area. The Town has prepared a list of indigenous plant materials that can be obtained from the Town Planner or Town Horticulturalist. Proposals to revegetate with plant materials that are not on the list of indigenous plant materials shall be subject to review and approval by the Town Horticulturalist and Town Planner. In evaluating the appropriateness of using non-indigenous materials on a particular site, the Town Horticulturalist and Town Planner may consider the type and composition of plant materials in the immediate surrounding area. 
b.  Preserve natural vegetation. Development shall be located so as to preserve, to the maximum extent practical, existing natural vegetation (particularly mature vegetation) which may help to screen its appearance. 
c.  Soil disturbance. Topsoil from a disturbed slope should be stockpiled on-site to the extent practical and should be used in re-vegetation of the subject property or surrounding area when this is feasible. Soils disturbed by development shall be retained on-site by using accepted erosion and sedimentation control practices. 
d.  Irrigation. The applicant shall demonstrate that there are sufficient facilities for irrigation present on the property to support the vegetation that is proposed to be planted. 
(4)  Building form and materials. The following standards shall only apply to properties that are located in certain highly visible areas that are depicted on the Hillside Overlay Map which is considered to be part of this Section. 
a.  Mass. The mass of the development shall be designed to minimize or reduce its overall visual impacts by complying with either of the following two (2) design approaches: 
1.  Breaking the mass into distinct smaller forms which may involve repeating similar forms at a more modest scale, breaking facades and roof lines into smaller segments, or stepping the building mass into the hillside. When development is permitted to occur on a slope, stepped foundation design and terraced building forms should also be used to allow buildings to step up or down with the natural slope; or 
2.  Using simple building forms and simple roof lines that tend to reduce the visual perception of the structure. 
b.  Buildings shall meet the ground. Buildings shall be designed so they firmly meet the ground and do not use a pier design. Cantilevers may be permitted when: 
1.  The Town Planner or other applicable final review body determines that using cantilevers causes less physical impacts on the slope and results in a building with less visual impacts than if cantilevers were not used; and 
2.  The resulting building form is compatible with that of surrounding structures. 
c.  Basement exposure. No more than two (2) floors shall be exposed above grade. An additional basement level is permitted and is determined to satisfy this requirement if it meets the following provisions: 
1.  The additional basement level must be covered with grade at the exterior of the residence so that not more than six (6) feet of basement wall is exposed, as measured vertically at all points around the perimeter of the residence except for any door or window and grading necessary to achieve the door or window that satisfies subsection 2. below. 
2.  Individual window openings that are no wider than six (6) feet may be approved by the Town Planner after a finding that the glazing is kept to a minimum and that such glazing is adequately screened from view from the public right-of-way and the neighboring properties. 
3.  Any egress well may be no deeper than four (4) feet. 
(Prior code 70-81; Ord. 05 §B(Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 15 §1(Exh. A), 2014) 
Sec. 16-188. - Reserved. 
Sec. 16-189. - Adult entertainment uses and establishments. 
(a)  The purpose and intent of this Section is to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the Town, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the Town, thereby helping to reduce and eliminate the adverse secondary effects from such sexually oriented businesses. The provisions of this Section have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent or effect of this Section to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment or the Colorado Constitution, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent or effect of this Section to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(b)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of the exterior boundary of any residential zone district, church, public or private school, child care center, public community center, park, fairground, recreation center, any alcoholic beverage establishment located in the Town at which alcoholic beverages are offered for sale for consumption on the premises or any area designated as an urban renewal project area pursuant to Section 31-25-107, C.R.S. Further, no adult entertainment use shall be located within two hundred (200) feet of any arterial or major collector roadways. 
(c)  No adult entertainment use shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any other adult entertainment use whether such adult entertainment uses are within or without the Town. 
(d)  The method of measurement for the one-thousand-foot restriction shall be computed by direct measurement from the exterior boundary of any area identified in Section 16-189(b) above, or from the nearest property line of the property upon which an adult entertainment business or establishment, or other adult entertainment use, is conducted to the nearest property line of the property where on the building in which an adult entertainment use is to occur. 
(e)  Any adult entertainment establishment operating at the effective date of the ordinance codified herein in violation of any relevant provision of Chapter 6 or 16 of this Code shall be deemed a nonconforming use. An adult entertainment establishment which is deemed a nonconforming use shall be permitted to continue operating for an amortization period of six (6) months. Such nonconforming adult entertainment use shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered, except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any adult entertainment establishment deemed a nonconforming use shall apply for a license provided for by Section 6-71 et seq. of this Code within thirty (30) days of the effective date of the ordinance codified herein, or be subject to the relevant penalty provisions set forth herein and in Section 6-71 et seq. 
(f)  An adult entertainment establishment lawfully operating as a conforming use pursuant to the receipt of zoning approval and obtaining a license is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of an adult entertainment establishment license, of any uses identified in Section 16-189(b) above, within the specific distancing requirements noted therein. 
(g)  No licensee, manager or employee mingling with the patrons of sexually oriented businesses or serving food or drinks shall be nude or in a state of nudity. It is a defense to prosecution for a violation of this Section that an employee of a sexually oriented business exposed any specified anatomical area during the employee's bona fide use of a rest room, or during the employee's bona fide use of a dressing room which is accessible only to employees. Further, no licensee or employee shall encourage or knowingly permit any person on the premises to engage in specified sexual activities, which conduct involving specified sexual activities is unlawful and shall be subject to criminal penalties as set forth in Section 6-105 of this Code. 
(h)  Advertisements, displays or other promotional material depicting adult entertainment uses shall not be shown or exhibited to be visible to the public from pedestrian sidewalks or walkways, or from other areas public or semipublic. 
(i)  Only one (1) adult entertainment establishment use shall be permitted per building or, in other words, no building, premises, structure or other facility that contains any sexually oriented business shall contain any other kind of sexually oriented business therein. 
(j)  All building openings, entries and windows shall be located, covered or screened in such a manner as to prevent a viewing to the interior from any public or semipublic area; for new construction, the building shall also be oriented so as to minimize any possibility of viewing the interior from public or semipublic areas. 
(k)  No one under twenty-one (21) years of age shall be admitted to any adult entertainment establishment where live, nude entertainment and performances are featured, which live nude entertainment is characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas. Further, no one under eighteen (18) years of age shall be admitted to any adult entertainment establishment of any kind, and the foregoing minimum age limitations also apply to any employees, agents, servants or independent contractors working on the premises during the hours when adult entertainment is being presented. 
(l)  It shall be unlawful for an adult entertainment establishment and/or a sexually oriented business to be opened for business or for the licensee or any employee of a licensee to allow patrons upon licensed premises, or to permit any employee to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service or solicit a service between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any particular day. Further, it shall be unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if, working as an employee of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether a license has been issued for said business under this Code, engages in a performance, solicits a performance, makes a sale, solicits a sale, provides a service or solicits a service between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any particular day. 
(m)  It shall be unlawful for an adult entertainment establishment and/or a sexually oriented business or for the licensee or any employee of a licensee thereto, regardless of whether a license has been issued for said business under this Code, to knowingly allow any patron upon the premises to engage in a specified sexual activity while on said premises. It shall also be unlawful for any licensee or employee of an adult entertainment establishment, regardless of whether a license has been issued for said business under this Code to engage in a specified sexual activity while on the premises of said adult entertainment establishment. The foregoing conditions contained in this paragraph are promulgated pursuant to the terms of this Section, Article IV of Chapter 6 of this Code and Sections 18-7-208 and 18-7-301, C.R.S. 
(n)  This Section shall not apply to those areas of an adult motel that are private rooms. 
(o)  Any person or entity who operates or causes to be operated an adult entertainment establishment who violates any provision contained in this Section or does not have a valid license is subject to a suit for injunction and is subject to civil and criminal penalties as set forth in Sections 6-103 and 6-105 of this Code. 
(p)  Except for the amortization period set forth in Subsection (e) above, each day of operation in violation of any provision of this Section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(q)  Any adult entertainment establishment which engages in repeated or continuing violations of these regulations shall constitute a public nuisance. For purposes of these regulations, repeated violations shall mean three (3) or more violations of any provision set forth herein within one (1) year dating from the time of a new violation, and a continuing violation shall mean a violation of any provision set forth herein lasting for three (3) or more consecutive days. 
(r)  Notwithstanding any other remedies at law or equity, the Town Attorney may bring an action in the District Court for Eagle or Pitkin County for an injunction against the operation of such establishments in a manner which violates any of the provisions set forth herein. 
(Ord. 20 §6, 1996) 
Sec. 16-190. - Medical marijuana facilities and retail marijuana establishments. 
    A medical marijuana facility or retail marijuana establishment is prohibited unless specifically permitted by this section and by the zoning district regulations applicable to the subject property. 
    The premises for a medical marijuana center operating under the provisions of Colorado Constitution Article XVIII § 14, Section 18-18-406.3, C.R.S., Section 25-1.5-106, C.R.S., the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code and 1 CCR 212-1 (Permanent Rules Related to the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, Marijuana Enforcement Division, Colorado Department of Revenue) is permitted in the Town subject to the requirements included in this Code, including but not limited to Chapter 6 and this Chapter. In addition a premises for a retail marijuana store operating under the provisions of Colorado Constitution Article XVIII § 16, C.R.S. 12-43.4-101 et seq., and 1 CCR 212-2, each as amended, is likewise permitted in the Town subject to the requirements included in this Code including but not limited to Chapter 6 and this Chapter. 
(1)  Location limits for medical marijuana centers premises and retail marijuana stores. The premises for a medical marijuana center or the premises for a retail marijuana store permitted under State Law may be approved provided they satisfy the licensing requirements outlined in Chapter 6 and are located within areas zoned for that use as outlined in subsections a. and b. below and the schedule of use requirements outlined in Section 16-22. 
a.  Located within areas zoned C-3 and P, and within the following premises: 
1.  A medical center; 
2.  A hospital building; or 
3.  A hospice facility. 
b.  Located in areas zoned C-2, C-3 and Industrial. 
(2)  Additional limitations. Medical marijuana facilities and retail marijuana stores shall be subject to these additional requirements and restrictions: 
a.  The maximum signage shall be limited to the more restrictive of the otherwise applicable sign regulations for that property or the following: 1) only one (1) sign is permitted per premises, inclusive of any signage located in a window or on the exterior doors, roof and walls of the facility; and 2) no sign shall be larger than six (6) square feet. No temporary signage is permitted, including but not limited to sandwich boards, signs in or on windows and signs on cars parked in the Town limits. No off-premises signage is permitted. 
b.  All medical marijuana dispensing and retail products sales shall be conducted indoors within the approved premises. 
c.  All product storage shall be maintained indoors within the approved premises. Products, accessories and associated paraphernalia shall not be visible from a public sidewalk or way. 
d.  A medical marijuana dispensing facility or retail marijuana store may not include areas for testing or using the product within the facility, medical center, or store and such testing or use is prohibited within such premises. 
e.  A medical marijuana dispensing facility cannot be colocated with a medical marijuana cultivation or infused products manufacturing facility. 
f.  The authorized growing of marijuana plants by a caregiver or patient and the conversion of them into medical marijuana must take place in an approved greenhouse or other structure that is enclosed on all sides, including the roof, regardless of location. 
g.  A medical marijuana center or retail marijuana store shall be required to meet any special venting, waste, and byproduct disposal requirements as determined to be reasonably necessary by the Town Building Official. 
h.  A medical marijuana center or retail marijuana store may not be colocated with food preparation facilities producing or assembling food. 
i.  A medical marijuana center may not sell nonmedical food products which are similar to the medical marijuana food products being sold in the center, including but not limited to brownies or lollypops. This prohibition does not include medicinal products such as tinctures. 
j.  A medical marijuana facility or retail marijuana store shall satisfy all licensing and permitting requirements of the State of Colorado and the Town prior to operation. 
k.  The Town may impose additional requirements through its land use review process as deemed necessary in order to protect the health, safety and residents of the Town and surrounding area. (Ord. 12 §3, 2009) 
(Ord. 12 §3, 2009; Ord. 30 §1(Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 14 §1(Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 24 §1(Exh. A), 2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. 14 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted May 27, 2014, changed the title of § 16-190 from "Medical marijuana facilities" to read as herein set out. 
Secs. 16-191-16-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X - Accessory Buildings and Uses 

Sec. 16-201. - Permitted buildings and uses. 
    Accessory buildings and uses may include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Home occupations. 
(2)  Horses and household pets. 
(3)  Fences, hedges and walls. 
(4)  Private greenhouses. 
(5)  Private swimming pools. 
(6)  Storage and merchandise in commercial districts. 
(7)  Fallout shelters. 
(8)  Detached garages. 
(9)  Tennis courts. 
(10)  Storage sheds for residential areas. 
(Prior code 70-85; Ord. 5 §5, 1997) 
Sec. 16-202. - Home occupations. 
    A home occupation shall be allowed as a permitted accessory use, provided that the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The use must be conducted entirely within a dwelling and shall not employ any persons other than those members of the immediate family residing on the premises. For the purposes of this Section, a dwelling unit may include attached garages and attached accessory buildings. 
(2)  The use must be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and must not change the residential character thereof. 
(3)  The total area used for home occupation uses shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the total floor area within a dwelling unit. The area used for the home occupation shall be considered to include all storage areas and work space clearly utilized or essential in the operation of the home occupation. 
(4)  There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation, including advertising signs or displays or advertising that solicits or directs persons to the address. 
(5)  There shall not be conducted on the premises the business of selling stock, supplies or products, provided that incidental retail sales may be made in connection with other permitted home occupations. 
(6)  There must be no exterior storage on the premises of material or equipment used as a part of the home occupation. 
(7)  No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates any glare, fumes, odors or other objectionable conditions detectable to the normal senses off the lot, if the occupation is conducted in a single-family dwelling, or outside the dwelling unit if conducted in other than a single-family dwelling. 
(8)  No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of the home occupation shall be met off the street and not in a required yard adjacent to a street. 
(9)  Under no circumstances shall any of the following be considered a home occupation: antique shop, barbershop, beauty parlor, wig styling, clinic, mortuary, nursing home, restaurant, veterinarian's clinic, dancing studio, wood shop or cabinet making shop. 
(10)  Each home occupation shall annually register with the Town Clerk, which registration shall include a review of compliance with the home occupation standards contained in this Code. The person seeking to register said home occupation shall grant the Town reasonable access to the location of the home occupation for the purpose of verifying compliance with this Code, as may be required by the Town. 
(11)  Under no circumstances shall the following be considered a home occupation: any retail marijuana establishment, a medical marijuana center, optional premises for medical marijuana center or premises for infused products manufacturer or any caregiver producing medical marijuana for a price in excess of the direct cost of growing and producing the end product. A person growing marijuana for his or her personal consumption within the limitations established by Colorado Constitution Article XVIII § 16 where no marijuana is sold to another party for money, goods or services or a patient or primary caregiver growing medical marijuana and converting the plant into medical marijuana for only one (1) patient where there is no exchange of payment over and above the direct cost is not considered a home occupation but is permitted, provided that: 
a.  The person, patient or primary caregiver lives within the single-family lot or the dwelling unit where the marijuana is grown and produced; 
b.  The total floor area used for growing and production does not exceed fifty (50) total square feet of a single-family lot, including any lot with an accessory dwelling unit; 
c.  The total floor area used for growing and production does not exceed forty (40) square feet for any dwelling unit within a duplex, multi-family building, apartment building or mixed-use building, and the activity must be located within the dwelling unit; and 
d.  The other requirements for that use and activity are adhered to in accordance with the Colorado Constitution Article XVIII § 14 and § 16, C.R.S. 18-18-406.3, C.R.S. 25-1.5-106, C.R.S. 12-43.4-101 et seq., 1 CCR 212-2, and this Code, including but not limited to the licensing requirements under Chapter 6 of this Code and the additional limitations in Section 16-190 of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 70-86; Ord. 14 §1, 1992; Ord. 12 §7, 2009; Ord. 30 §1(Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 14 §1(Exh. A), 2014) 
Sec. 16-203. - Renting of rooms and housing units. 
(a)  The renting of rooms for long-term purposes of thirty (30) days or more to one (1) or two (2) persons, not members of the family residing in the same dwelling unit, may be permitted as an accessory use, provided the following are met: 
(1)  The total number of unrelated persons, including roomers, in any one (1) dwelling unit must not exceed three (3). 
(2)  Quarters used by the roomers must not be more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total floor area of the dwelling unit. 
(3)  The dwelling unit must have only one (1) electric meter. 
(4)  Where the renting of rooms is to two (2) roomers, at least one (1) off-street parking space must be provided, in addition to the number of such spaces required by this Code. 
(5)  All roomers shall use the main kitchen facilities of the dwelling unit. No separate kitchen facilities are allowed including, but not limited to: 
a.  Range, grill, broiler or cooktop fueled by solid fuel, L.P. or natural gas or by electrical power. This will include any gas piping from the area of the range or cooktop back to the point of intersection with the primary gas piping system and any 220-volt electrical wiring back to the main electrical panel. 
b.  Sink, not including lavatory or laundry tub. 
c.  Dishwasher. 
d.  Counters and cabinets of a quantity and configuration that indicate the creation of a food preparation area. 
e.  Refrigerator or refrigerator/freezer. 
f.  Microwave oven, hot plate or similar portable cooking device. 
(6)  Renting of rooms shall be allowed as an accessory use in the principal building on a lot only, with no renting of rooms allowed in accessory buildings. 
(b)  Supplemental regulations. 
(1)  Interpretations regarding violation of the Zoning Code restrictions relating to renting of rooms, Section 16-203(a)(5) above, and the creation of illegal dwelling units pursuant to the schedule of permitted uses, definition of single-family dwelling, definition of dwelling unit and definition of kitchen, Section 16-4 may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Adjustment in accordance with Section 16-265. 
(2)  Violations relating to the above sections shall be punishable as outlined in Section 16-266 regarding notice and Section 16-268 regarding fines, subject to the following further stipulations: 
a.  That due to the nature of the violations and their impacts on the Town's water system, street system and adjoining properties, such violations shall be punishable by doubling of the fines established by Section 16-268. 
b.  That establishment of code compliance will require removal of all gas piping from the area of a range or cooktop back to the point of intersection with the primary gas piping system and any two hundred twenty (220) volt electrical wiring or dedicated wiring from the area of a range or cooktop back to the main electrical panel. 
c.  Reinspection to verify compliance in the case of an initial violation shall require a one-hundred-dollar special inspection fee payable by the property owner. 
d.  Any reinspection to verify compliance following a second violation within two (2) years of any violation shall require a special inspection fee payable by the property owner in an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. 
(c)  Short-term rental of dwelling units. The rental of rooms and dwelling units for short-term purposes of less than thirty (30) days is permitted, provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  An annually renewable business license shall be applied for and obtained prior to renting a residential dwelling unit on a short-term basis. The rental of a dwelling unit for a time period of less than 30 days is subject to the Town's Lodging Tax as established in Town Code Article VII, Chapter 4. The business license for short-term rental of a dwelling unit shall be address specific and non-transferable to other properties. 
(2)  The owner of a dwelling unit being rented on a short-term basis, if residing the Roaring Fork Valley or a designated representative of the owner residing in the Roaring Fork Valley or having a business in the Roaring Fork Valley shall manage the short-term rental during the period in which the rental is being occupied and shall be on-call. The name, phone number and address of the local owner or the local owner representative shall be provided to the Planning Department at the time of application for a business license. 
(3)  Upon application for a business license for short-term rental of a dwelling unit, the Town Building Official will schedule an inspection of the dwelling unit to be rented on a short-term basis to review that it is safe for occupancy and that it contains necessary carbon monoxide and smoke detectors. If the Town Building Official determines that a dwelling unit needs to be upgraded to ensure that it is safe for short-term rental, the Town Building Official shall order the applicant to make improvements necessary to render the unit safe for short-term rental occupancy prior to issuance of the business license. An applicant for a business license to rent a unit on a short-term basis shall pay an inspection fee in the amount specified in the Town's fee schedule. 
The owner of a dwelling unit being rented on a short-term basis shall also contact the Town Building Official annually in conjunction with the renewal of the business license to schedule a safety inspection. The safety inspection must be conducted and passed prior to renewal of a short-term rental business license. Short-term rental of a dwelling unit without a current business license is prohibited and is discussed in subsection (11) below. 
(4)  Dwelling units that are rented on a short-term basis for less than thirty (30) days shall satisfy the general Town Code requirements applied to all residential units within the Town. Dwelling units that are occupied by more than three (3) unrelated individuals for periods of thirty (30) days or longer shall meet the occupancy requirements set forth in Town Code Section 16-203(a), Renting of rooms. 
(5)  Multi-family dwelling units may only be rented on a short-term basis to a single party or entity at any one (1) time. A building containing six (6) or more units intended for temporary occupancy by guests is considered a motel or hotel and is subject to the Town Code requirements for motels and hotels. Properties containing a single-family dwelling unit or a primary single-family dwelling unit with an accessory dwelling unit or detached suite may only be rented on a short-term basis by one (1) entity or party at any one (1) time. 
(6)  Outdoor, amplified music and outdoor use of other devices used for audiblizing sound (such as a radio, CD player) shall be prohibited after 10:00 p.m. on a property containing a dwelling unit being rented on a short-term basis. Compliance with this requirement shall be both the responsibility of the owner of the dwelling unit and the tenants renting the dwelling unit on a short-term basis. 
(7)  Except for noise and other nuisance violations as set forth in Section 10-21(a)(3), Offenses against public peace, order, and safety, violations of the requirements set forth in this Section shall be punishable as outlined in Section 16-266 regarding violations and Section 16-268 regarding fines. Repeated violations are addressed in Subsection (10) below. 
(8)  Nothing herein shall prevent Homeowner's Associations or site-specific land use approvals from containing more restrictive requirements related to short-term rental of dwelling units. 
(9)  Each short-term rental business license issued by the Town shall contain a business license number. The business license number shall be included in all advertising related to renting a dwelling on a short-term basis. 
(10)  In the instance that there are violations of the Town's nuisance provisions or the regulations for short-term rental of dwelling units as set forth herein, as evidenced by three (3) written complaints or tickets from the Police Department that the Town Manager determines to be valid and substantiated violations, the Town Manager shall revoke the individual dwelling's short-term rental business license. In the event that a business license for short-term rental is revoked by the Town, the property owner may not apply to rent the dwelling unit on a short-term basis again for one (1) year from the date of revocation. Enforcement shall be conducted on the short-term rental of dwelling units that do not have a business license as discussed in Subsection (11) below. 
(11)  Offering a dwelling unit for rent on short-term basis without a current business license shall be considered a zoning violation and shall be subject to the fines and penalties as discussed in Town Code Section 16-268, Penalty for violations. Any property owner who offers a dwelling unit for rent on a short-term basis that is not permitted for rental on a short-term basis shall be considered to be in violation of Section 16-203(c)(1) and subject to prosecution in municipal court. 
(12)  Any agent, representative, or property manager for a property owner who knowingly assists an owner in advertising or renting a dwelling unit on a short-term basis that is not permitted under Section 16-203(c)(1) shall be subject to prosecution in municipal court. In addition, the agent, representative, or property manager's Town of Basalt business license may be subject to revocation. 
(13)  The Town may seek an injunction in addition to other remedies and penalties provided for by the Town Code or available law in the event a residential dwelling is being rented without a business license. 
(Ord. 29 §8, 1990; Ord. 5 §§6, 7, 1997; Ord. 12 §B37, 2003; Ord. 07 §§5(Exh. E), 6(Exh. F), 2012) 
Editor's note- Ord. 07 , § 5(Exh. E), adoped June 26, 2012, changed the title of § 16-203 from "Renting of rooms" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 16-204. - Fences, hedges and walls. 
    Fences, hedges and walls may be permitted in the required yard areas of any district subject to the following conditions and requirements: 
(1)  All fences and walls are subject to the applicable sections of the building code adopted in Chapter 18 of this Code. 
(2)  No fence, hedge or wall may extend beyond or across a property line unless with the joint agreement of the abutting property owners. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to locate all property lines. 
(3)  No fence, hedge or wall shall be placed nearer than twelve (12) inches from a public sidewalk. 
(4)  No barbed wire or sharp-pointed or electrically charged fence shall be permitted, with the exception that in the Industrial (IN) Zone only, up to three (3) strands of barbed wire may be attached to the top of a minimum six (6) foot high fence, for security purposes. 
(5)  Fences, hedges or walls shall not exceed six (6) feet in height except in the Industrial Zone District. The height shall be measured at the finished grade on the side of the fence nearest the street or abutting property. 
(6)  Fences located within the required front yard setback shall not exceed four (4) feet in height. In addition, on corner lots, any obstruction of any nature whatsoever over thirty (30) inches in height shall not be allowed within the sight triangle established for the adjacent intersection except for trees with branches and foliage removed to a height of seven (7) feet above the ground and open wire fencing that does not obscure more than ten percent (10%). Said sight triangle shall be determined in accordance with Appendix A. 
(Prior code 70-88; Ord. 10 §7, 1991; Ord. 13 §6, 2008) 
Sec. 16-205. - Swimming pools. 
(a)  Swimming pools may be located in any zoning district as an accessory use, provided that such pools are situated on a lot, tract or parcel in a manner which is not detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the users of the pool or the adjacent property owners. 
(b)  All swimming pools shall be completely enclosed with a minimum of a four (4) foot high fence, or be elevated at least four (4) feet above the ground level. 
(c)  Gates, ladders or entrances to the swimming pool areas shall be kept closed and made inaccessible without the knowledge and consent of the owner. 
(Prior code 70-89) 
Sec. 16-206. - Bed and breakfast establishments. 
(a)  An application for a special review approval for a bed and breakfast establishment shall follow the procedures outlined in Article III of this Chapter. 
(b)  Criteria. All bed and breakfast establishments shall, in addition to any other applicable requirements, meet the following criteria: 
(1)  A proprietor or manager shall be required to reside on the premises, with the exception that the TRC may waive this requirement if it finds that the intent of this condition is satisfied. The primary intent of on-site management is to provide twenty-four-hour-per-day access to management to ensure a level of service typically associated with lodging and to ensure operation of the bed and breakfast in a manner compatible with the neighborhood, including residential uses. The applicant may appeal the decision of the TRC to the Town Council. 
(2)  Parking shall be provided in the form of at least one (1) off-street parking space per guest room; one (1) employee space and any parking required for the primary residence pursuant to Section 16-91, Off-street parking spaces required. 
(3)  Meals shall be served only to permanent residents, overnight guests and their guests unless approved through special review approval. 
(4)  The maximum length of any guest's stay shall not be more than twenty-nine (29) days. 
(5)  Unless prohibited by other provisions of this Code, underlying zoning or the special review approval for the bed and breakfast facility, special events shall be allowed as long as they are entirely contained within the limits of the property (including parking). Special events that extend beyond the confines of the property or require variation from Town provisions shall obtain approval from the Town Manager. The Town Manager shall have the authority to refer such requests to the TRC or any other group established to review special events in the Town and to develop procedures governing such activities. Special event requests must be submitted to the Town Manager at least thirty (30) days prior to the event. Allowance of special event requests by the Town Manager does not preclude the need to obtain other applicable permits such as liquor licenses or building permits. 
(6)  Other accessory commercial uses within less than three hundred (300) square feet of floor area shall be allowed on the property so long as they remain secondary to the operations of the bed and commercial uses that exceed three hundred (300) square feet may be approved through a special review approval if permitted by the underlying zoning designation. Exterior signage to advertise commercial uses shall not be permitted. 
(7)  Any signage on the subject property shall be non-illuminated, shall architecturally complement the principal structure and shall comply with the provisions of Article VII of this Chapter. 
(c)  Denial of a special use approval for a bed and breakfast establishment or a waiver of the on-site manager provisions of Subsection (b) above. In addition to any other legal basis for denial, a special use approval or waiver of the on-site manager provision may be denied for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The special review application does not meet the criteria established in Subsection (b) above. 
(2)  The special review application does not meet the criteria established in Article III, Special Review Application Requirements and Procedures. 
(3)  The special review application will have an adverse impact on the traffic or parking patterns of the neighborhood. 
(4)  The special review application will have an adverse effect on the existing residential character of a neighborhood. 
(Prior code 70-90; Ord. 13 §3, 2008) 
Sec. 16-207. - Heating and air conditioning devices and equipment. 
    Heating and air conditioning equipment shall be maintained in good working order as determined by the Chief Building Official so as not to become a nuisance to neighboring property owners and tenants. In such cases where equipment is not in good working order and is making significant noise, enforcement may be conducted under Town Code Section 10-21(a)(3), Offenses against public peace, order, and safety. Violations of the requirements set forth in this Section shall be punishable as outlined in Section 16-266 regarding violations and Section 16-268 regarding fines. 
( Ord. 06 § 1(Exh. A), 2014) 
Secs. 16-208-16-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI - Nonconforming Lots, Buildings and Uses 

Sec. 16-221. - Objectives. 
    Certain uses of land or buildings, sizes of lots or location or size of structures or signs may be found to be in existence at the time of the passage of the ordinance codified in this Chapter which do not meet the requirements of the Chapter. It is the intent of this Chapter to allow the continuance of such nonconformance but not to encourage its enlargement nor to allow its continuance should the use be discontinued for a period of one (1) year or should the use be destroyed by fire or any other cause. Such nonconformance is declared to be incompatible with other uses in the district. 
(Prior code 70-95) 
Sec. 16-222. - Nonconforming lots. 
(a)  Some nonconforming lots of record at the time of the passage of this Chapter may be built upon or used after the passage of this Chapter, but only: 
(1)  With a permitted use in the zone district, not requiring any special review approval; and 
(2)  By approval of the Board of Adjustment. 
(b)  No lot that is conforming in size at the time of the passage of this Chapter may be subdivided or reduced in size in such a way that it would become nonconforming or cause any building, space or use to become nonconforming. 
(Prior code 70-96; Ord. 10 §8, 1991) 
Sec. 16-223. - Alterations and extensions. 
    No building or use that is nonconforming as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter shall be structurally altered or expanded in any way that would increase the degree or area of nonconformance. The following changes or alterations may be made to a nonconforming building: 
(1)  Repair to a building or structure that is ordered by any public official to make it safe. 
(2)  Maintenance repairs that are needed to keep the building in good condition. 
(3)  Any structural alteration that would not increase the degree of nonconformance or would change the use to a conforming one. 
(Prior code 70-97; Ord. 10 §9, 1991) 
Sec. 16-224. - Restoration. 
    A nonconforming building or use which has been damaged or destroyed may not be restored if the estimated cost of reconstruction exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the appraised value of the building (as determined by the Building Official) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Town Council may waive this prohibition against restoration for a nonconforming accessory dwelling unit ("ADU") if (1) the owner thereof commences reconstruction within one (1) year after the accessory dwelling unit has been damaged or destroyed, (2) such reconstructed ADU shall be limited to a maximum of the square footage of the ADU as it existed prior to being damaged or destroyed, (3) compliance with the building code adopted in Chapter 18 of this Code adopted in Chapter 18 requirements, (4) the ADU is in general conformance with the Town's master plan, and (5) the ADU is in general conformance with the zone district requirements. 
(Prior code 70-98; Ord. 32 §4, 2000; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 13 §6, 2008) 
Sec. 16-225. - Abandonment. 
    If any nonconforming use of land, a building or a structure is abandoned for a period exceeding one (1) year, no nonconforming use may be reestablished upon such land or within such building or structure. 
(Prior code 70-99) 
Sec. 16-226. - Previously approved uses. 
    Any building, use or structure that had been officially approved by the Town Council or for which a building permit has been issued prior to the passage of the ordinance codified in this Chapter may proceed to construct or use such building, structure or land, provided that the structural members of such building or structure are completed within one (1) year of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter. 
(Prior code 70-100; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-227. - Change to another nonconforming use. 
    No nonconforming use of a building or structure may be changed to another nonconforming use, except when the new nonconforming use is of a more restrictive nature, as may be determined and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(Prior code 70-101) 
Secs. 16-228-16-239. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII - Fences 

Sec. 16-240. - Permit required. 
    All fences within the Town of Basalt, regardless of location, material type, or height above finished grade, shall require a building permit prior to installation. Permit application will require a current, approved property survey or improvement location certificate prepared by a surveyor licensed in the State of Colorado showing all pertinent property lines, streets, alleys, easements, encroachments and improvements. The Building Official may waive or refine the application contents based on the specific circumstances of the property. 
(Ord. 33 §2, 2001) 
Sec. 16-241. - Barbed wire fences along public streets prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall, in this Town, construct or maintain or cause to be constructed or maintained any barbed wire fence upon or along any public street or upon or along any boundary line of any such street or in any manner next to any such street for the purpose of enclosing any private grounds or premises or public ground or for any other purpose whatever. No person shall repair any such fence constructed before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter. 
(b)  In case such fence shall have been constructed before, and be in existence at, the time of the passage of the ordinance codified in this Chapter, the owner thereof shall not be liable therefor until notice is given or served as hereinafter stated and until his or her failure to comply therewith as hereinafter stated. Such notice may be oral or written and may be given or served by the Chief of Police or any other police officer of the Town. Said notice shall notify the person served, or the person to whom the notice shall be given, to remove such fence and thereby abate the nuisance. Such notice, when written, shall be signed by the Chief of Police or any other police officer of the Town. Such notice shall direct that the fence be removed within five (5) days, but this provision shall not be deemed to apply in the case of a person constructing or causing to be constructed any such fence after the taking effect of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 31-1) 
Sec. 16-242. - Removal of fences required upon notice. 
    Any person who shall have possession or control of private or public grounds upon or within which any such fence shall exist, and who may have constructed or caused to be constructed such fence, shall, upon notice given or served as hereinbefore required, remove any such fence and thereby abate the nuisance, and be subject to a penalty for violation upon the failure so to do. 
(Prior code 31-2) 
Sec. 16-243. - Removal by Town. 
    When any such fence shall be found within the Town existing contrary to the provisions of this Chapter, the Chief of Police or any other police officer of the Town shall cause any such fence to be removed and thereby abate the nuisance, and any such officer shall have authority to engage the necessary assistance and incur the necessary expense therefor. 
(Prior code 31-3) 
Secs. 16-244-16-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII - Administration and Enforcement 

Sec. 16-261. - Zoning Enforcement Officer. 
    This Chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Town Building Inspector, who shall also be known as the "Zoning Enforcement Officer." 
(Prior code 70-105) 
Sec. 16-262. - Building permits. 
(a)  No building shall be erected, moved or structurally altered unless a permit therefor has been issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, and no permit shall be issued unless the building or structure proposed is in full conformance with this Chapter and, where applicable, in full compliance with the Subdivision Regulations as adopted by the Town Council, except in those instances where a permit has been granted for a variance by the Board of Zoning Adjustment. 
(b)  All applications for building permits must be accompanied by drawings to scale showing the plot plan and the location, floor plan, height and size of all proposed buildings and the location and dimensions of fences, signs and parking and loading areas. 
(c)  A fee for the examination and administration of this permit shall be payable to the Town upon receipt of the application in an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. 
(d)  No building permit shall be issued for a building requiring water service until the Town Council has approved the application for use of water for said building, and for a building, requiring Basalt Sanitation District sewer service until the Board of Directors of the Basalt Sanitation District has approved the connection to the district's sewer system for said building. 
(Prior code 70-106; Ord. 12 §B38, 2003) 
Sec. 16-263. - Certificates of occupancy. 
(a)  No land or building shall hereafter be changed in use, nor shall any new structure, building or land be occupied or used, without first having obtained a certificate of occupancy from the Zoning Enforcement Officer. 
(b)  Such certificate of occupancy from the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall be issued within five (5) days of the time of notification that the building is completed and ready for occupancy, and after final inspection and approval of the Zoning Enforcement Officer. 
(c)  All certificates of occupancy shall be filed with the Zoning Enforcement Officer and shall be available for examination by the public. 
(Prior code 70-107) 
Sec. 16-264. - Registration of nonconforming uses. 
    A certificate of occupancy shall be applied where any land or building is made nonconforming as to use by the passage of the ordinance codified in this Chapter. Such certificate shall be applied for and issued within one (1) year after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter. Failure to apply for the certificate within this period constitutes a violation of this Chapter, and appropriate action will then be taken under the provisions of this Chapter relating to violations. 
(Prior code 70-108) 
Sec. 16-265. - Board of Zoning Adjustment. 
(a)  Creation. A Board of Zoning Adjustment is hereby created, which will consist of five (5) members and which shall be appointed by the Town Council. All further reference to the Board of Zoning Adjustment in this Section shall hereafter be made to the "Board." 
(b)  Membership and organization. 
(1)  Members. The Board shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the Town Council. Members shall live in the Town, and shall be registered electors within the Town. 
(2)  Terms of office. One (1) member shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year, two (2) for a term of two (2) years and two (2) for a term of three (3) years. Thereafter, all appointments to the Board shall be made for terms of three (3) years each. When vacancies occur prior to the expiration of a regular term, they shall be filled in the same manner as regular appointments, but such appointees shall serve only until the expiration of the term in which the vacancy occurred. 
(3)  Chairman. The members of the Board shall elect from among their number a Chairman to serve for a term of one (1) year. 
(4)  Expenses. In the performance of its duties, the Board may incur such expenses as shall be authorized by the Town Council, but no member shall receive any compensation for his or her service. 
(5)  Removal of members. The Town Council shall have the power to remove any member of the Board for cause, after a public hearing. 
(6)  Nonvoting members. The Zoning Enforcement Officer and Fire Chief shall be nonvoting members of the Board. 
(7)  The Town Council may appoint alternate members to the Board in the event that any regular member is temporarily unable to act owing to absence, illness, interest in a case before the Board or any other cause. The regular member's place may be taken temporarily by an alternate member. The Town Council shall appoint alternate members to serve for a term of three (3) years, and shall designate a "First Alternate" and "Second Alternate," indicating the order in which they shall be called upon to serve in a regular member's place. 
(c)  The Board shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  Board of Zoning Adjustment: Duties and Powers. To hear and consider requests for variances. 
(2)  To adopt any rules necessary to transact the Board's business or to expedite its functions or powers, so long as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(3)  The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board shall be necessary to decide in favor of any variance request. 
(4)  To keep minutes of the proceedings of each meeting, which shall be filed in the office of the Board, which may designate the Enforcement Officer to keep such files, which files shall be of public record. 
(5)  To permit the public to attend and to be heard at all of its meetings. 
(6)  To provide notice of all public hearings for consideration of variance requests in accordance with the notice requirements contained in Section 16-269. 
(7)  To provide notice of all public hearings for consideration of appeals, interpretation requests or variance requests in accordance with the notice requirements contained in Section 16-269. 
(d)  Board of Zoning Adjustment: Duties and Powers. All variance requests shall be in writing and on such an application form as shall be prescribed by the Board. Every application shall indicate what provision of this Chapter is involved and what relief from these provisions is being sought. The Chairman of the Board shall then, within thirty (30) days, or as soon thereafter as reasonably practical, call a meeting of the Board for the purpose of the review of the application. At the same time, a copy of the application shall be transmitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for an opinion, which opinion shall be returned to the Board before the date set for hearing the application. Failure of the Planning and Zoning Commission to return the requested opinion shall be considered as its approval of the Board's granting of the variance request. 
(Prior code 70-109; Ord. 23 §§2, 3, 1990; Ord. 28 §4, 1990; Ord. 10 §10, 1991; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 06 §1(Exh. A), 2014) 
Sec. 16-266. - Notification of violations. 
    Whenever the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall find a violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter, he or she shall notify the person responsible for the violation, in writing, and shall order the necessary correction within a period of ten (10) days. 
(Prior code 70-110) 
Sec. 16-267. - Amendment procedure. 
(a)  Amendments, supplements, changes or repeal of this Chapter or any Section thereof, or to the Official Zoning Map, may be initiated by: 
(1)  Application of any citizen or group of citizens or firm or corporation residing, owning or leasing property in the Town. 
(2)  The Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(3)  The Town Council. 
(b)  Application for an amendment to this Chapter shall be made on such a form as the Planning and Zoning Commission shall prescribe and shall be filed with the Town Clerk. Applications for an amendment to the Official Zoning Map shall contain all the following information: 
(1)  A description of the land area to be rezoned and the requested new classification along with a sketch to scale showing the boundaries of the area requested to be rezoned along with an indication of the existing zoning on all adjacent sides of the area. 
(2)  A statement of justification for the rezoning, including one (1) of the following conditions: 
a.  Changing area conditions. 
b.  Error in original zoning. 
c.  Peculiar suitability of the site to a certain use. 
(3)  A description and sketches, if available, of buildings or uses proposed if rezoning is granted, along with a description of land and building uses within two hundred (200) feet of the boundary of the proposed area of change, in all directions. 
(4)  A time schedule for any contemplated new construction or uses. 
(5)  Justification for any new commercial or industrial zoning. 
(6)  The effect that the new zoning would have on adjacent uses. 
(c)  All applications for changes to the Zoning Ordinance shall be referred by the Town Clerk to the Planning and Zoning Commission, which Commission shall return a recommendation either recommending for or against the proposed change to the Town Council within thirty (30) days of the receipt thereof. Before any amendment is enacted, a public hearing shall be held before the Town Council, in accordance with the procedures and public notice requirements of Section 16-269. 
(d)  Voting. 
(1)  Except as set forth in Subparagraphs (2) and (3) below, the adoption of any amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal of the regulations, restrictions or boundaries set forth in this Chapter, or of the Official Zoning Map, shall require the favorable vote of a majority of the Town Council. 
(2)  In any case in which a protest is filed against changes in zoning regulations or restrictions, changes in the zone district applicable to particular land, or other changes to the Official Zoning Map, which protest meets the criteria listed below, such proposed changes shall not become effective except by favorable vote of two-thirds ( 2 /3) of all of the Town Council. To be recognized under this Section, the protest shall: 
a.  Be filed with the Town Clerk at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the Town Council's vote on the proposed change; and 
b.  Be signed by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of the area of land extending a radius of one hundred (100) feet from the land which is subject to the proposed change, disregarding intervening public streets and alleys. 
(3)  In any case in which an amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal of the regulations, restrictions or boundaries set forth in this Chapter or of the Official Zoning Map was not recommended for approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission, a favorable vote of two-thirds ( 2 /3) of all of the Town Council shall be required to approve such amendment or map change. 
(4)  All provisions of state law and this Code with regard to public hearings and official notices shall apply when the Town Council is considering any amendment, supplement, change or modification of the zoning regulations, restrictions, boundaries or Official Zoning Map. 
(Prior code 70-111; Ord. 23 §1, 1990; Ord. 10 §11, 1991; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-268. - Penalty for violations. 
    Failure to comply with all of the provisions of this Chapter, unless a variance has been authorized by the Board of Zoning Adjustment, shall constitute a misdemeanor and upon conviction by a court is punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both. Each day that such violation continues to exist shall be considered a separate offense subject to fine and imprisonment. The maximum period for any imprisonment and the maximum fine shall be for the duration and in an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. Further upon conviction, the violator shall pay all reasonable attorney fees and costs incurred by the Town in or related to enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 70-112; Ord. 22 §1, 1991; Ord. 12 §B39, 2003) 
Sec. 16-269. - Public notice requirements. 
    For special review requests, variance requests, PUD hearings, rezoning requests and site plan development review applications, the following public notice requirements shall be met: 
(1)  A public notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the Town at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the hearing. 
(2)  Notice shall be sent to all property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the property in question at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the hearing. The applicant shall submit to the Town an affidavit certifying that the mailing has been completed and the date it was completed, and listing the property owners who received notice, together with one (1) copy of the notice sent. 
(3)  A notice shall be posted on the subject property at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. Said notice shall be protected from the elements to ensure its legibility for a reasonable period of time. 
(4)  All notices shall include the following information: 
a.  A description of the nature of the request. 
b.  The time, date and place of the public hearing. 
c.  The agency or office and phone number where further information may be obtained. 
(5)  The notice procedure for all PUD review proceedings shall be in accordance with the Planned Unit Development Act of 1972, specifically Section 24-67-104(1)(e), C.R.S., as such may later be amended. 
(Prior code 70-113; Ord. 10 §12, 1991) 
Sec. 16-270. - Recording of PUD documents. 
    Final approval by the Town Council of a PUD master plan, preliminary development plans, final development plans or zone district amendment, the finalized and executed maps and accompanying documents shall be legally recorded by the applicant with the County Clerk and Recorder in the county where the development is located. The cost of recording shall be paid by the applicant. 
(Prior code 70-114) 
Secs. 16-271-16-290. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV - Miscellaneous Regulations 

Sec. 16-291. - Complaints. 
    Any person aggrieved by a violation or apparent violation of the provisions of this Chapter may file a written complaint with the Zoning Enforcement Officer, who shall immediately investigate such complaint and take legal action to have the violation penalized and removed if such a violation is found to exist. 
(Prior code 70-115) 
Sec. 16-292. - Payment of fees; deposit requirements. 
(a)  Application fee. The applicant for a development review approval pursuant to Chapter 16 of this Code shall pay a nonrefundable application fee upon filing the application in an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. The application fee may include a credit for a designated number of hours of staff fees as described below. 
(b)  Payment of fees and costs. The applicant for a development review approval pursuant to Chapter 16 of this Code shall reimburse the Town for any and all costs, staff fees and consultant fees incurred by the Town during and after a review process associated with the property. Costs include, but are not limited to, publication fees, recording fees and any other actual out-of-pocket costs incurred by the Town with regard to the property. Staff fees include, but are not limited to, reimbursement for time spent by the Town Manager, Town Planning staff, and the Public Works staff for inspection, review and other work performed with regard to the development application at hourly rates established by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. Consultant fees shall include, but are not limited to, all actual out-of-pocket costs incurred by the Town in connection with the applicant's development review application for consultants providing the Town legal, engineering, planning and other professional advice, which consultants are not on Town staff, at the rate of the amount actually paid by the Town for such review and advice. Additionally, to partially defray administrative handling and review costs incurred by the Town with regard to the property, the applicant for any development review application shall pay to the Town an administrative fee in an amount equal to fifteen percent (15%) of all of the costs and consultant fees. Collectively, the costs, staff fees, consultant fees and administrative fees are referred to in this Section as review expenses . 
(c)  Deposit requirement. To secure the payment of the Town's review expenses, all applicants filing applications pursuant to this Chapter shall pay to the Town a deposit in an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. In the event the applicant's deposit exceeds the actual review expenses owed to the Town pursuant to Subsection (a) above, upon completion of all aspects of the development review, including the payment of all costs associated therewith, such excess deposit shall be refunded to the applicant within a reasonable time after final action by the Town or withdrawal of the application and payment of all costs associated with the application. 
(d)  Monthly payment and interest. The Town will bill the applicant on a monthly basis for all review expenses. All bills for review expenses are due and payable to the Town within fifteen (15) days of the date of the bill. Interest shall be charged on any overdue amounts unpaid within one (1) month of the date of the bill until paid at an interest rate set by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. 
(e)  Continuing obligation. By filing an application for development review under this Chapter and accepting the benefits thereof, a property owner agrees and acknowledges that there shall be a continuing and binding obligation on the applicant so long as the applicant owns the property and any future owners of the property to reimburse the Town for any and all expenses associated with the property incurred by the Town for counseling and advice, including, but not limited to, monitoring compliance with development approvals, enforcement of development permits or approvals, participation in litigation or depositions (whether or not the Town is a party), consideration of potential amendments to development approvals, and any other expenses directly associated with the property and incurred by the Town. 
(f)  Reimbursement agreement. On filing an application for development pursuant to this Chapter, the applicant shall enter a reimbursement agreement with the Town providing for the payment to the Town of the application fee, deposit and review expenses and acknowledging the continuing obligation to pay such review expenses. 
(g)  Processing applications. No application for development review pursuant to this Chapter shall be processed until such time as the application fee and the deposit required above have been paid and the reimbursement agreement required above has been executed by the applicant. If at any time during the review of a development application the applicant shall not have paid its bill for review expenses in a timely manner, then all processing of the application, including staff review and scheduled hearings, shall cease until such time as the applicant pays all amounts outstanding. 
(h)  Use of fees. The fees and expenses paid and collected by virtue of this Section shall not be used for general or other governmental proprietary purposes of the Town, except to pay each new development's equitable share of the costs of accounting, planning, management, administration and government of the Town, and to pay each new development's costs and expenses. Other than as described in this Section, the fees charged herein shall be used solely to pay for the costs of planning, operation, administration, maintenance, repair, improvement, renewal, replacement, reconstruction or other services provided by the Town on behalf of or as a result of new development within the Town. 
(Ord. 28 §3, 1990; Ord. 13 §3, 1991; Ord. 32 §§3-5, 1996; Ord. 12 §B40, 2003) 
Sec. 16-293. - Access to commercial district on Roaring Fork River. 
    In order to prevent undesirable traffic congestion of State Highway 82, the owners of the property zoned commercial lying across from the Basalt School and adjacent to State Highway 82 on one (1) side, the Roaring Fork River on another side and the Emma County Road on a third side shall be provided no more than one (1) entrance and one (1) exit to the entire commercial district from State Highway 82. 
(Prior code 70-118) 
Sec. 16-294. - Effect of revised regulations on existing approvals. 
    All existing areas with approved plans and PUD zoning shall be allowed the same uses, square footage of development and densities as previously approved regardless of new zoning districts applied to the property. Existing PUD zoned areas will retain the PUD designation. In the event that the previously approved plans are submitted to the Town for revision or for replatting, then the provisions of the revised Zoning Ordinance shall then apply. 
(Prior code 70-119) 
Sec. 16-295. - School district impact fee. 
    To help offset the financial impact of new residential development on school districts serving the Town, the school district impact fee required by Section 17-16 must be paid within ten (10) days of the final approval of any special review use or PUD development plan which increases the number of Equivalent Residential Units required for residential purposes on the property. The school district impact fee shall be due and payable under this Section unless it has already been paid as part of the subdivision process. 
(Prior code 70-120) 
Secs. 16-296-16-310. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV - Interpretation; Conflict 

Sec. 16-311. - Interpretation of provisions. 
    The provisions of this Chapter shall be interpreted and applied to be the minimum required for the proper protection of the public health and morals and the promotion of safety and general welfare. 
(Prior code 70-125) 
Sec. 16-312. - Conflicting provisions. 
    Whenever these requirements are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, resolutions or ordinances, the one which is the most restrictive or which requires the higher standard shall apply. 
(Prior code 70-126) 
Secs. 16-313-16-330. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI - Trailer Homes 

Sec. 16-331. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Article, the terms used herein are defined as follows: 
    Park means a trailer park licensed by the Town. 
    Trailer means any vehicle or similar portable structure having no foundation other than wheels, jacks or skirtings and so designed or constructed as to permit occupancy for dwelling or sleeping purposes. 
    Trailer, dependent means a trailer which does not have a flush toilet and a bath or shower. 
    Trailer, independent means a trailer which has a flush toilet and a bath or shower. 
    Trailer park means any plot of ground upon which two (2) or more trailers, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodation, which park is licensed by the Town. 
(Prior code 62-1) 
Sec. 16-332. - Trailers located outside of trailer parks. 
    No person shall park, place or locate any trailer being used for human habitation outside of any trailer park, on any lot, tract or parcel of land in the Town for a period longer than twenty-four (24) hours unless the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The owner of the trailer is also the owner of the property on which the trailer is located, which property shall have an area of at least six thousand (6,000) square feet, provided that there is not another habitable dwelling located on such a lot or parcel of land, and provided further that if said trailer is moved from said land of the occupant, then in such event any trailer may not be again moved onto said lot, parcel or tract of land. 
(2)  The provisions of Subsection (1) above do not apply to lots or parcels of land less than six thousand (6,000) square feet in area, from which trailers are forbidden. In such cases, trailers must be removed from said lot or parcel of land within one (1) year of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter. 
(3)  No such house trailer may be occupied by anyone other than the owner of the property upon which it is located and his or her immediate family. 
(4)  Each trailer for human habitation shall be of modern type and equipped with toilet and kitchen sink facilities, and such facilities shall be physically connected to the water system of the Town and the sewer system serving the Town. Each trailer shall have a minimum floor space of eight hundred (800) square feet and shall be occupied only by the number of people that said trailer is designated by the manufacturer to accommodate. 
(5)  All house trailers within the Town, other than those located in such Town for a period less than twenty-four (24) hours, shall comply with the above requirements and, in addition thereto, shall be placed on a permanent masonry, stone or concrete foundation, with wheels removed, within twelve (12) months of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter. 
(6)  The owner of any trailer home located within the limits of the Town on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter, which trailer home is not located in a licensed trailer park and which does not comply with the requirements of Subsections (1) through (5) of this Section, may apply for a permit for a nonconforming trailer home. Said application shall be addressed to the Town Council, shall set out each nonconformity in existence at the time of the application and shall include the name of the owner of the trailer home and the land upon which such trailer home is located. 
(7)  The owner of the trailer home as set out in Subsection (6) above may be issued a permit for a nonconforming trailer home under this Chapter by the Town Council or an authorized agent of the Town Council, upon approval of the application. 
(8)  The nonconforming permits issued under this Chapter shall be nontransferable either to a new owner or to a new trailer home. In case of a disaster caused by forces beyond the control of the owner of the trailer home, such as fire or other acts of God, the Town Council may, in its sole discretion, issue a subsequent nonconforming permit to the owner for another trailer home on the same location. 
(Prior code 62-2; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-333. - Additional regulations. 
    In addition to the requirements set forth in this Chapter, all trailer parks and facilities shall be established, constructed and operated in compliance with the existing laws of the State, ordinances of the Town, and such codes and regulations as may be adopted by the Town Council. 
(Prior code 62-6; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Secs. 16-334-16-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII - Flood Damage Prevention 

Sec. 16-351. - Definitions. 
(a)  Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Article shall be interpreted for purposes of this Article so as to give them the meanings they have in common usage and to give this Article its most reasonable application. 
(b)  As used in this Article only, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated: 
    100-year flood means a flood having a recurrence interval that has a one-percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded during any given year (one-percent-annual-chance flood). The terms "one hundred-year flood" and "one-percent (1%) chance flood" are synonymous with the term "100-year flood." The term does not imply that the flood will necessarily happen once every one hundred (100) years. 
    100-year floodplain means the area of land susceptible to being inundated as a result of the occurrence of a one hundred-year flood. 
    500-year flood means a flood having a recurrence interval that has a 0.2-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded during any given year (0.2-percent-chance-annual-flood). The term does not imply that the flood will necessarily happen once every five hundred (500) years. 
    500-year floodplain means the area of land susceptible to being inundated as a result of the occurrence of a five hundred-year flood. 
    Addition means any activity that expands the enclosed footprint or increases the square footage of an existing structure. 
    Alluvial fan flooding means a fan-shaped sediment deposit formed by a stream that flows from a steep mountain valley or gorge onto a plain or the junction of a tributary stream with the main stream. Alluvial fans contain active stream channels and boulder bars, and recently abandoned channels. Alluvial fans are predominantly formed by alluvial deposits and are modified by infrequent sheet flood, channel avulsions and other stream processes. 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this Article or a request for a variance. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated Zone AO or AH on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent (1%) chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one-percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base flood elevation (BSE) means the elevation shown on a FEMA flood insurance rate map for Zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent (1%) chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
    Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Channel means the physical confine of stream or waterway consisting of a bed and stream banks, existing in a variety of geometries. 
    Channelization means the artificial creation, enlargement or realignment of a stream channel. 
    Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) means the codification of the general and permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the executive departments and agencies of the Federal Government. It is divided into fifty (50) titles that represent broad areas subject to federal regulation. 
    Community means any political subdivision in the State of Colorado that has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations through zoning, including, but not limited to, cities, towns, unincorporated areas in the counties, Indian tribes and drainage and flood control districts. 
    Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) means FEMA's comment on a proposed project, which does not revise an effective floodplain map, that would, upon construction, affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodplain. 
    Critical facility means a structure or related infrastructure, but not the land on which it is situated, as specified in Section 16-368, that if flooded may result in significant hazards to public health and safety or interrupt essential services and operations for the community at any time before, during and after a flood. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    DFIRM database means a database (usually spreadsheets containing data and analyses that accompany DFIRMs). The FEMA Mapping Specifications and Guidelines outline requirements for the development and maintenance of DFIRM databases. 
    Digital flood insurance rate map (DFIRM) means a FEMA digital floodplain map. These digital maps serve as "regulatory floodplain maps" for insurance and floodplain management purposes. 
    Elevated building means a non-basement building (i) built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, either final site grading or pouring of concrete pads or the construction of streets). 
    Federal Register means the official daily publication for rules, proposed rules, and notices of federal agencies and organizations, as well as executive orders and other presidential documents. 
    FEMA means Federal Emergency Management Agency, the agency responsible for administering the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of water from channels and reservoir spillways; and/or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or 
(3)  Mudslides or mudflows that occur from excess surface water that is combined with mud or other debris that is sufficiently fluid so as to flow over the surface of normally dry land areas (such as earth carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current). 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS) means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains the flood insurance rate map as well as flood profiles for studied flooding sources that can be used to determine base flood elevations for some areas. 
    Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated as the result of a flood, including the area of land over which floodwater would flow from the spillway of a reservoir. 
    Floodplain Administrator means the community official designated by title to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain development permit means a permit required before construction or development begins within any special flood hazard area (SFHA). If FEMA has not defined the SFHA within a community, the community shall require permits for all proposed construction or other development in the community including the placement of manufactured homes, so that it may determine whether such construction or other development is proposed within flood-prone areas. Permits are required to ensure that proposed development projects meet the requirements of the NFIP and this floodplain management article. 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Flood control structure means a physical structure designed and built expressly or partially for the purpose of reducing, redirecting, or guiding flood flows along a particular waterway. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and/or non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway (regulatory floodway) means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. The Colorado statewide standard for the designated height to be used for all newly studied reaches is one-half (1/2) foot (six (6) inches). The Town of Basalt standard used for existing floodplain studies is zero feet (zero-rise standard). Letters of map revision to existing floodway delineations shall continue to use the floodway criteria in place at the time of the existing floodway delineation unless use of the Colorado statewide standard is approved by the Floodplain Administrator and the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
    Freeboard means the vertical distance in feet above a predicted water surface elevation intended to provide a margin of safety to compensate for unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood such as debris blockage of bridge openings and the increased runoff due to urbanization of the watershed. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or; 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Letter of map revision (LOMR) means FEMA's official revision of an effective flood insurance rate map (FIRM), or flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM), or both. LOMRs are generally based on the implementation of physical measures that affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the effective base flood elevations (BFEs), or the special flood hazard area (SFHA). 
    Letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) means FEMA's modification of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) based on the placement of fill outside the existing regulatory floodway. 
    Levee means a manmade embankment, usually earthen, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. For a levee structure to be reflected on the FEMA FIRMs as providing flood protection, the levee structure must meet the requirements set forth in 44 CFR 65.10. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). Any floor used for living purposes which includes working, storage, sleeping, cooking and eating, or recreation or any combination thereof. This includes any floor that could be converted to such a use such as a basement or crawl space. The lowest floor is a determinate for the flood insurance premium for a building, home or business. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    Material safety data sheet (MSDS) means a form with data regarding the properties of a particular substance. An important component of product stewardship and workplace safety, it is intended to provide workers and emergency personnel with procedures for handling or working with that substance in a safe manner, and includes information such as physical data (melting point, boiling point, flash point, etc.), toxicity, health effects, first aid, reactivity, storage, disposal, protective equipment, and spill-handling procedures. 
    National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) means FEMA's program of flood insurance coverage and floodplain management administered in conjunction with the Robert T. Stafford Relief and Emergency Assistance Act. The NFIP has applicable Federal regulations promulgated in Title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations. The U.S. Congress established the NFIP in 1968 with the passage of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    No-rise certification means a record of the results of an engineering analysis conducted to determine whether a project will increase flood heights in a floodway. A no-rise certification must be supported by technical data and signed by a registered Colorado Professional Engineer. The supporting technical data should be based on the standard step-backwater computer model used to develop the 100-year floodway shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) or flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM). 
    Physical map revision (PMR) means FEMA's action whereby one (1) or more map panels are physically revised and republished. A PMR is used to change flood risk zones, floodplain and/or floodway delineations, flood elevations, and/or planimetric features. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Special flood hazard area means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year, i.e., the 100-year floodplain. 
    Start of construction means the date the building permit was issued, including substantial improvements, provided that the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footing, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footing, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above the ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure just prior to when the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. The value of the structure shall be determined by the local jurisdiction having land use authority in the area of interest. This includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic" structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
    Threshold planning quantity (TPQ) means a quantity designated for each chemical on the list of extremely hazardous substances that triggers notification by facilities to the state that such facilities are subject to emergency planning requirements. 
    Variance means a grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this Article when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this Article. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations). (Prior code 33-4; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Prior code 33-4; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 23 §§B. 1, 2, 2007; Ord. 21 §B(Exh. A), 2013) 
Sec. 16-352. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the Town are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which increase flood heights and velocities and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage. (Prior code 33-1) 
(Prior code 33-1; Ord. 21 §B(Exh. A), 2013) 
Sec. 16-353. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this Article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to critical facilities, infrastructure and other public facilities such as water, sewer and gas mains; electric and communications stations; and streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is located in a flood hazard area. 
(Prior code 33-2; Ord. 21 §B(Exh. A), 2013) 
Sec. 16-354. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this Article includes methods and provisions for: 
(1)  Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities. 
(2)  Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction. 
(3)  Controlling the alteration of natural flood plains, stream channels and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters. 
(4)  Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage. 
(5)  Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Prior code 33-3) 
Sec. 16-355. - Applicability. 
    This Article shall apply to all special flood hazard areas and areas removed from the floodplain by the issuance of a FEMA letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) within the jurisdiction of the Town. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed within the special flood hazard area without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations. Nothing herein shall prevent the Town Council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. These regulations meet the minimum requirements as set forth by the Colorado Water Conservation Board and the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(Prior code 33-5; Ord. 21 §B(Exh. A), 2013) 
Sec. 16-356. - Basis for establishing special flood hazard areas. 
    The special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study, Eagle County, Colorado and Incorporated Areas" (FIS), dated the fourth day of December, 2007, and all subsequent revisions thereto, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary-floodway maps (FIRM and FBFM) also dated the fourth day of December, 2007, and all subsequent revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Code. The special flood hazard areas identified by the FIS and attendant mapping are the minimum area of applicability of this Article and may be supplemented by studies designated and approved by the Town Council. The Floodplain Administrator shall keep a copy of the Flood Insurance Study (FIS), DFIRMs, FIRMs and/or FBFMs on file and available for public inspection. The FIS is on file and is available for public inspection during regular business hours at: Town of Basalt, Municipal Building, 101 Midland Avenue, Basalt, CO 81621. See also Article XXI for additional standards for development in or around rivers, wetlands and environmentally sensitive areas. The "Floodplain Information Report, Roaring Fork River" prepared by Matrix Design Group, Inc. dated November 14, 2001, as such may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Code. The Floodplain Information Report for the Roaring Fork River is on file at Town Hall, 101 Midland Avenue, Basalt, Colorado, and is available for public inspection during regular hours. 
(Prior code 33-6; Ord. 7 §B, 1999; Ord. 25 §(B)(1), 2000; Ord. 23 §B.3, 2007; Ord. 21 §B(Exh. A), 2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. 21 §B(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 10, 2013, changed the title of § 16-356 from "Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 16-357. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This Article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easement, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this Article and any other ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Prior code 33-7) 
Sec. 16-358. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this Article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements. 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body. 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Prior code 33-8) 
Sec. 16-359. - Floodplain development permit. 
    A floodplain development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any special flood hazard area established in Section 16-356. Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Floodplain Administrator and may include, but shall not be limited to, plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question and proposed landscape alterations; existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes; fill; storage of materials; drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing in relation to special flood hazard areas. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (referenced to the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88)) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures. 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (referenced to the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88)) to which any non-residential structure shall be floodproofed. 
(3)  Certification by a Colorado registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing criteria in Section 16-363(b)(2). 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(Prior code 33-10; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 23 §B.4, 2007; Ord. 21 §B(Exh. A), 2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. 21 §B(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 10, 2013, changed the title of § 16-359 from "Development permit" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 16-360. - Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. 
    The Town Manager is hereby appointed as Floodplain Administrator to administer, implement and enforce this Article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Prior code 33-11; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 21 §B(Exh. A), 2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. 21 §B(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 10, 2013, changed the title of § 16-360 from "Enforcement by Town Manager" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 16-361. - Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator. 
    Duties of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Permit review. 
a.  Review and approve or deny all applications for floodplain development permits required by this Article. 
b.  Review all permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
c.  Review all floodplain development permits to determine whether a proposed building site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
d.  Inspect all development at appropriate times during the period of construction to ensure compliance with all provisions of this ordinance, including proper elevation of the structure. 
e.  Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the Floodplain Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this Article and the following relevant factors: 
1.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
2.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
3.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
4.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
5.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
6.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
7.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
8.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
9.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
10.  The relationship of the proposed use to the Town of Basalt Master Plan. 
(2)  The uses of other base flood data. 
a.  When parcels located in unincorporated Eagle County are annexed into the Town of Basalt municipal limits, the scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study Eagle County, Colorado and Incorporated Areas, dated the fourth day of December, 2007, and all subsequent revisions thereto, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary-floodway maps also dated the fourth day of December, 2007, and all subsequent revisions thereto" shall be used by the Floodplain Administrator to apply the provisions of Article XVII of this Code. When parcels located in unincorporated Pitkin County are annexed into the Town of Basalt municipal limits, the scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study Pitkin County, Colorado and Incorporated Areas, dated the 19 th day of October, 2004, and all subsequent revisions thereto, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary-floodway maps also dated the nineteenth day of October, 2004, and all subsequent revisions thereto" shall be used by the Floodplain Administrator to apply the provisions of Article XVII of this Code. 
b.  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 16-356, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source in order to administer Section 16-363(b)(1), (2) and (3). 
c.  For waterways with base flood elevations for which a regulatory floodway has not been designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the Town's flood insurance rate maps, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one-half (1/2) foot (Colorado statewide standard), or such lesser amount as required by the Town of Basalt standard, at any point within the community. 
d.  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, the Town may approve certain development in Zones Al-30, AE, AH, on the Town's flood insurance rate maps which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one-half foot (Colorado statewide standard), or such lesser amount as required by the Town of Basalt standard, provided that the Town first applies for a conditional flood insurance rate map revision through FEMA (Conditional Letter of Map Revision), fulfills the requirements for such revisions as established under the provisions of Section 65.12 and receives FEMA approval. 
(3)  Information to be obtained and maintained. 
a.  The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this Article, including the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (referenced to NAVD88) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures, and any floodproofing certificate required by Section 16-363(b)(2). 
b.  For all new and substantially improved floodproofed structures, the Floodplain Administrator shall: 
1.  Verify and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (referenced to NAVD88) to which the structure was floodproofed; and 
2.  Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in Section 16-363(b)(2). 
(4)  Alteration of watercourses. 
a.  The Floodplain Administrator shall notify adjacent communities and the Colorado Water Conservation Board prior to any alteration or relocation of a water course and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
b.  The Floodplain Administrator shall require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(5)  Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. The Floodplain Administrator shall make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the special flood hazard areas (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 16-362. 
(Prior code 33-12; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 23 §§B.5-9, 2007; Ord. 21 §B(Exh. A), 2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. 21 §B(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 10, 2013, changed the title of § 16-361 from "Duties and responsibilities of Town Manager" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 16-362. - Variance procedure. 
(a)  Appeal Board. 
(1)  The Town Council shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this Article following a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(2)  The Planning and Zoning Commission and the Basalt Town Council shall hear and decide appeals only when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this Article. 
(3)  Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved by the decision or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator, any taxpayer, any officer, department, board or bureau of the Town affected by the determination of the Floodplain Administrator, or by any other decision of an administrative officer or agency based on or made in the course of administration or enforcement of this Article. 
(4)  Such appeals must be made in writing and filed with the Planning and Zoning Commission within seven (7) days after the action or decision appealed. 
(5)  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a hearing on all appeals to it no sooner than thirty (30) days after the filing of the notice of appeal. For hearings involving variances or appeals relating to property constituting less than all of a designated zone district, notice shall be published in the Town's official newspaper and shall be mailed by certified mail at least fifteen (15) days before the date of the hearing to the applicant and to the owners of all real property within two hundred (200) feet of the property for which the variance is requested or to whom the decision was directed. The mailed and published notice shall state the description of the property involved and the statement of the nature of the variance requested or the nature of the appeal. The applicant shall supply a list and a scaled map showing the names and addresses of all of the owners of real property within two hundred (200) feet of the property for which the variance is requested or to whom the decision was directed. 
(6)  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make a recommendation on the appeal to the Town Council. 
(7)  A majority vote of a quorum of the Town Council shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Floodplain Administrator or agency or to decide in favor of the appellant. 
(8)  Processing and publication of applications for variances or appeals shall be assessed and payable in accordance with Section 16-292 of this Code for zone variances. 
(9)  Finality. All decisions of the Town Council on variances and appeals shall be final and effective as provided by the Basalt Home Rule Charter. 
(10)  In passing upon such applications, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Town Council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this Chapter and: 
a.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others. 
b.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage. 
c.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner. 
d.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community. 
e.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable. 
f.  The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage. 
g.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development. 
h.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program of that area. 
i.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles. 
j.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site. 
k.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and streets and bridges. 
(11)  Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection (10) above and the purposes of this Chapter, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Town Council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this Chapter. 
(12)  The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions, including technical information, and report any variance to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request of such agency. 
(b)  Conditions for variances. 
(1)  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, provided that Subsection (a)(10) above has been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(2)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(3)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(4)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(5)  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.  A showing of good and sufficient cause. 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant. 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public as identified in Subsection (a)(10) above or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(6)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(7)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: 
a.  The criteria outlined in Section 16-362(a)(1), (2) and (11) and Section 16-362(b)(1)-(4) are met, and 
b.  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Prior code 33-13; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 23 §§B.10, 11, 2007; Ord. 21 §B(Exh. A), 2013) 
Sec. 16-363. - Standard for special flood hazard areas. 
(a)  General standards. In all special flood hazard areas the following standards are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  Anchoring. 
a.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
b.  All manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. Special requirements shall be that: 
1.  Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four (4) corners of the manufactured home, with two (2) additional ties per side at intermediate locations, with manufactured homes less than fifty (50) feet long requiring one (1) additional tie per side. 
2.  Frame ties be provided at each corner of the manufactured home with five (5) additional ties per side at intermediate points, with manufactured homes less than fifty (50) feet long requiring four (4) additional ties per side. 
3.  All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of four thousand eight hundred (4,800) pounds. 
4.  Any additions to the manufactured home be similarly anchored. 
(2)  Construction materials and methods. 
a.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
b.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
c.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service utilities that are designed and/or located to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(3)  Utilities. 
a.  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
b.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge from the system into floodwaters. 
c.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(b)  Specific standards. In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in Section 16-356 or in Section 16-361(2), the following standards are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), elevated to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, or to such greater elevation required by other sections of this Chapter. Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered Colorado Professional Engineer, architect, or land surveyor. Such certification shall be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. With the exception of Critical Facilities, outlined in Section 16-368, new construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), elevated to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that at one (1) foot above the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered Colorado Professional Engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. Such certification shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator, as outlined in Section 16-361(3)(b). 
(3)  Manufactured Homes. All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the Town's FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home, electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), are elevated to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the Town's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of the above paragraph, shall be elevated so that either: 
a.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home, electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), are one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, or 
b.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(4)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered Colorado Professional Engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria, subject to the approval of the Town Engineer: 
a.  A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided, and 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(5)  Recreational Vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM shall either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; 
b.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
c.  Meet the permit requirements of Section 16-359, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in paragraph (3) of this section. 
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(6)  Prior approved activities. Any activity for which a floodplain development permit was issued by the Town or a CLOMR was issued by FEMA prior to adoption of the most recent changes to this Article may be completed according to the standards in place at the time of the permit or CLOMR issuance and will not be considered in violation of this Article if it meets such standards. 
(c)  Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH Zones). Located within the special flood hazard area established in Section 16-356, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  Residential construction. All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures must have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least one (1) foot, or to such greater elevation required by other sections of this Chapter above the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least three (3) feet if no depth number is specified). Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered Colorado Professional Engineer, architect, or land surveyor. Such certification shall be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. With the exception of critical facilities, outlined in Section 16-368, all new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures, must have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least one (1) foot above the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least three (3) feet if no depth number is specified), or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that the structure is watertight to at least one (1) foot above the base flood level with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered Colorado Professional Engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this Section, as outlined in Section 16-363(b)(2), are satisfied. 
    Within Zones AH or AO, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes are required to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Prior code 33-14; Ord. 23 §§B.12-14, 2007; Ord. 21 §B(Exh. A), 2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. 21 §B(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 10, 2013, changed the title of § 16-363 from "Standard for areas of special flood hazard" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 16-364. - Floodways. 
    Floodways are administrative limits and tools used to regulate existing and future floodplain development. The State of Colorado has adopted floodway standards that are more stringent than the FEMA minimum standard, and the Town of Basalt has adopted floodway standards that are more stringent than State of Colorado standards (see definition of floodway in Section 16-351). Located within special flood hazard areas established in Section 16-356 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed by a licensed Colorado Professional Engineer and in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase (requires a No-Rise Certification) in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If paragraph (1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 16-363. 
(3)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12 of the National Flood Insurance Regulations, the Town may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first applies for a CLOMR and floodway revisions through FEMA. 
(Prior code 33-15; Ord. 21 §B(Exh. A), 2013) 
Sec. 16-365. - Alteration of a watercourse. 
    For all proposed developments that alter a watercourse within a special flood hazard area, the following standards apply: 
(1)  Channelization and flow diversion projects shall appropriately consider issues of sediment transport, erosion, deposition, and channel migration and properly mitigate potential problems through the project as well as upstream and downstream of any improvement activity. A detailed analysis of sediment transport and overall channel stability should be considered, when appropriate, to assist in determining the most appropriate design. 
(2)  Channelization and flow diversion projects shall evaluate the residual 100-year floodplain. 
(3)  Any channelization or other stream alteration activity proposed by a project proponent must be evaluated for its impact on the regulatory floodplain and be in compliance with all applicable federal, state and local floodplain rules, regulations and ordinances. 
(4)  Any stream alteration activity shall be designed and sealed by a registered Colorado Professional Engineer or Certified Professional Hydrologist. 
(5)  All activities within the regulatory floodplain shall meet all applicable federal, state and Town of Basalt floodplain requirements and regulations. 
(6)  Within the regulatory floodway, stream alteration activities shall not be constructed unless the project proponent demonstrates through a floodway analysis and report, sealed by a registered Colorado Professional Engineer, that there is not more than a 0.00-foot rise in the proposed conditions compared to existing conditions floodway resulting from the project, otherwise known as a no-rise certification, unless the community first applies for a CLOMR and floodway revision in accordance with Section 16-364(3) of this Article. 
(7)  Maintenance shall be required for any altered or relocated portions of watercourses so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
( Ord. 21 §B(Exh. A), 2013) 
Sec. 16-366. - Properties removed from the floodplain by fill. 
    A floodplain development permit shall not be issued for the construction of a new structure or addition to an existing structure on a property removed from the floodplain by the issuance of a FEMA letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F), unless such new structure or addition complies with the following: 
(1)  Residential construction. The lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), must be elevated to one (1) foot, or to such greater elevation required by other sections of this Chapter, above the base flood elevation that existed prior to the placement of fill. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. The lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), must be elevated to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation that existed prior to the placement of fill, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that the structure or addition is watertight to at least one (1) foot above the base flood level that existed prior to the placement of fill with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
( Ord. 21 §B(Exh. A), 2013) 
Sec. 16-367. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be reasonably safe from flooding. If a subdivision or other development proposal is in a flood-prone area, the proposal shall minimize flood damage. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of Section 16-359 and Section 16-363 of this Article. 
(c)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to Section 16-356 or Section 16-361(2) of this Article. 
(d)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
( Ord. 21 §B(Exh. A), 2013) 
Sec. 16-368. - Standards for critical facilities. 
    A critical facility is a structure or related infrastructure, but not the land on which it is situated, as specified in Rule 6 of the Rules and Regulations for Regulatory Floodplains in Colorado, that if flooded may result in significant hazards to public health and safety or interrupt essential services and operations for the community at any time before, during and after a flood. 
(1)  Classification of critical facilities. It is the responsibility of the Town of Basalt to identify and confirm that specific structures in their community meet the following criteria: 
Critical facilities are classified under the following categories: (a) essential services; (b) hazardous materials; (c) at-risk populations; and (d) vital to restoring normal services. 
a.  Essential services facilities include public safety, emergency response, emergency medical, designated emergency shelters, communications, public utility plant facilities, and transportation lifelines. 
These facilities consist of: 
1.  Public safety (police stations, fire and rescue stations, emergency vehicle and equipment storage, and, emergency operation centers); 
2.  Emergency medical (hospitals, ambulance service centers, urgent care centers having emergency treatment functions, and non-ambulatory surgical structures but excluding clinics, doctors offices, and non-urgent care medical structures that do not provide these functions); 
3.  Designated emergency shelters; 
4.  Communications (main hubs for telephone, broadcasting equipment for cable systems, satellite dish systems, cellular systems, television, radio, and other emergency warning systems, but excluding towers, poles, lines, cables, and conduits); 
5.  Public utility plant facilities for generation and distribution (hubs, treatment plants, substations and pumping stations for water, power and gas, but not including towers, poles, power lines, buried pipelines, transmission lines, distribution lines, and service lines); and 
6.  Air transportation lifelines (airports (municipal and larger), helicopter pads and structures serving emergency functions, and associated infrastructure (aviation control towers, air traffic control centers, and emergency equipment aircraft hangars). 
Specific exemptions to this category include wastewater treatment plants (WWTP), non-potable water treatment and distribution systems, and hydroelectric power generating plants and related appurtenances. 
Public utility plant facilities may be exempted if it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Town that the facility is an element of a redundant system for which service will not be interrupted during a flood. At a minimum, it shall be demonstrated that redundant facilities are available (either owned by the same utility or available through an intergovernmental agreement or other contract) and connected, the alternative facilities are either located outside of the 100-year floodplain or are compliant with the provisions of this Article, and an operations plan is in effect that states how redundant systems will provide service to the affected area in the event of a flood. Evidence of ongoing redundancy shall be provided to the Town on an as-needed basis upon request. 
b.  Hazardous materials facilities include facilities that produce or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials. 
These facilities may include: 
1.  Chemical and pharmaceutical plants (chemical plant, pharmaceutical manufacturing); 
2.  Laboratories containing highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials; 
3.  Refineries; 
4.  Hazardous waste storage and disposal sites; and 
5.  Above ground gasoline or propane storage or sales centers. 
Facilities shall be determined to be critical facilities if they produce or store materials in excess of threshold limits. If the owner of a facility is required by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) to keep a material safety data sheet (MSDS) on file for any chemicals stored or used in the work place, and the chemical(s) is stored in quantities equal to or greater than the threshold planning quantity (TPQ) for that chemical, then that facility shall be considered to be a critical facility. The TPQ for these chemicals is: either five hundred (500) pounds or the TPQ listed (whichever is lower) for the three hundred fifty-six (356) chemicals listed under 40 C.F.R. § 302 (2010), also known as extremely hazardous substances (EHS); or ten thousand (10,000) pounds for any other chemical. This threshold is consistent with the requirements for reportable chemicals established by the Colorado Department of Health and Environment. OSHA requirements for MSDS can be found in 29 C.F.R. § 1910 (2010). The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regulation "Designation, Reportable Quantities, and Notification," 40 C.F.R. § 302 (2010) and OSHA regulation "Occupational Safety and Health Standards," 29 C.F.R. § 1910 (2010) are incorporated herein by reference and include the regulations in existence at the time of the promulgation of this Article, but exclude later amendments to or editions of the regulations. 
Specific exemptions to this category include: 
1.  Finished consumer products within retail centers and households containing hazardous materials intended for household use, and agricultural products intended for agricultural use. 
2.  Buildings and other structures containing hazardous materials for which it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the local authority having jurisdiction by hazard assessment and certification by a qualified professional (as determined by the local jurisdiction having land use authority) that a release of the subject hazardous material does not pose a major threat to the public. 
3.  Pharmaceutical sales, use, storage, and distribution centers that do not manufacture pharmaceutical products. 
These exemptions shall not apply to buildings or other structures that also function as critical facilities under another category outlined in this Article. 
c.  At-risk population facilities include medical care, congregate care, and schools. 
These facilities consist of: 
1.  Elder care ( nursing homes); 
2.  Congregate care serving twelve (12) or more individuals ( day care and assisted living); 
3.  Public and private schools (pre-schools, K-12 schools), before-school and after-school care serving 12 or more children); 
d.  Facilities vital to restoring normal services including government operations. 
These facilities consist of: 
1.  Essential government operations (public records, courts, jails, building permitting and inspection services, community administration and management, maintenance and equipment centers); 
2.  Essential structures for public colleges and universities (dormitories, offices, and classrooms only). 
These facilities may be exempted if it is demonstrated to the Town that the facility is an element of a redundant system for which service will not be interrupted during a flood. At a minimum, it shall be demonstrated that redundant facilities are available (either owned by the same entity or available through an intergovernmental agreement or other contract), the alternative facilities are either located outside of the 100-year floodplain or are compliant with this ordinance, and an operations plan is in effect that states how redundant facilities will provide service to the affected area in the event of a flood. Evidence of ongoing redundancy shall be provided to the Town on an as-needed basis upon request. 
(2)  Protection of critical facilities. All new and substantially improved critical facilities and new additions to critical facilities located within the special flood hazard area shall be regulated to a higher standard than structures not determined to be critical facilities. For the purposes of this ordinance, protection shall include one (1) of the following: 
a.  Location outside the special flood hazard area; or 
b.  Elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofing of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, to at least two (2) feet above the base flood elevation. 
(3)  Ingress and egress for new critical facilities. New critical facilities shall, when practicable as determined by the Basalt Town Council, have continuous non-inundated access (ingress and egress for evacuation and emergency services) during a 100-year flood event. 
( Ord. 21 §B(Exh. A), 2013) 
Sec. 16-369. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required and intended to be provided by this Article is considered reasonable for the protection of life and property and is based upon engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions and the flood height may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This regulation does not imply that areas outside the special flood hazard area or land use permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This regulation shall not create liability on the part of the Town or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this regulation or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Prior code 33-16; Ord. 21 §B(Exh. A), 2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. 21 §B(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 10, 2013, amended and renumbered former § 16-365 as § 16-369. 
Sec. 16-370. - Nonconforming uses. 
    The provisions of this Article shall not apply to or affect any fixed building or structure already lawfully in place or the terms or conditions of any lawful permit already granted at the time of the enactment of this Article, provided that, in the event of substantial damage, the reconstruction or replacement of such building shall be considered a substantial improvement and shall be governed by the applicable provisions of this Article. 
(Prior code 33-17 Ord. 21 §B(Exh. A), 2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. 21 §B(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 10, 2013, renumbered former § 16-366 as § 16-370. 
Sec. 16-371. - Applications for amendment. 
    Applications for an amendment to this Article shall be on such form as the Floodplain Administrator shall prescribe, shall be filed with the Floodplain Administrator and shall contain all of the following information: 
(1)  A description of the land affected by the amendment, the nature of the proposed amendment and a sketch to scale showing the boundaries of the area affected. 
(2)  A statement of justification for the amendment, including one (1) or more of the following: 
a.  Changing area conditions. 
b.  Error in original designation. 
c.  Peculiar nature of the site. 
d.  Newly acquired technological knowledge. 
e.  Any other reason and justification of the amendment. 
(3)  Description and sketches, if appropriate, of buildings or uses proposed if the redesignation is granted and a description of land, buildings and uses within two hundred (200) feet of the boundary of the proposed area of change in all directions. 
(4)  Time schedule for any contemplated new construction or uses. 
(5)  The effect that the new designation would have on adjacent uses. 
(Prior code 33-18; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 21 §B(Exh. A), 2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. 21 §B(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 10, 2013, renumbered former § 16-367 as § 16-371. 
Sec. 16-372. - Applications to be referred to Planning and Zoning Commission. 
    All applications for changes shall be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Commission shall return a recommendation to the Town Council recommending that the change be allowed, denied or allowed with conditions. The recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be transmitted to the Floodplain Administrator within thirty (30) days of receipt thereof. 
(Prior code 33-19; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 21 §B(Exh. A), 2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. 21 §B(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 10, 2013, renumbered former § 16-368 as § 16-372. 
Sec. 16-373. - Public hearing to be held. 
    Within thirty (30) days after the receipt of the recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission, a public hearing shall be held by the Town Council, and notice shall be published in the Town's official newspaper and shall be mailed by certified mail at least fifteen (15) days before the date of the hearing to the applicant and to owners of all real property within two hundred (200) feet of the property affected by the designation. The applicant shall supply a list and a scaled map showing the names and addresses of all property owners within two hundred (200) feet of the property affected by the amendment. 
(Prior code 33-20; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 21 §B(Exh. A), 2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. 21 §B(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 10, 2013, renumbered former § 16-369 as § 16-373. 
Sec. 16-374. - Amendments to be reflected on map. 
    All amendments shall be reflected on the FIRM and on any other map deemed necessary by the Town. 
(Prior code 33-21; Ord. 21 §B(Exh. A), 2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. 21 §B(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 10, 2013, renumbered former § 16-370 as § 16-374. 
Sec. 16-375. - Severability. 
    These regulations and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of these regulations be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the regulations as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
( Ord. 21 §B(Exh. A), 2013) 
Secs. 16-376-16-390. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVIII - Historic Preservation 

Sec. 16-391. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to promote the public health, safety and welfare through the following: 
(1)  The protection and preservation of the Town's historic and cultural heritage, as represented by designated Landmarks. 
(2)  The enhancement to quality of life through the maintenance of designated Landmarks. 
(3)  The protection and enhancement of the Town's economy through the preservation of historical attractions for local residents, tourists and visitors to the Town. 
(4)  The expansion of public awareness, appreciation and knowledge of the Town's unique local history. 
(Ord. 20 §1 (part), 2001) 
Sec. 16-392. - Definitions. 
    Except as specifically defined herein, words or phrases in this Article shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common usage and so as to give this Article its most reasonable application. 
    Applicant means a person or entity appointed by the record owner of the property. 
    Building means any structure, place or any other construction built for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or personal property, or any part of such structure. 
    Compatible or Compatibility means consistent with, harmonious with and/or enhances the mixture of complementary architectural styles either of the architecture of an individual structure or the character of the surrounding structures. 
    Demolition or Demolish means any act or process that destroys in part or in whole a Landmark. 
    Guidelines means the Town of Basalt's Landmark Protection Guidelines which shall be approved by the Town Council and may be amended from time to time by the Town. The Guidelines shall be available at Town Hall and are incorporated herein by this reference. 
    Landmark means a property or structure designated as a "Landmark" by ordinance of the Town Council, pursuant to procedures prescribed herein, that is worthy of rehabilitation, restoration, or preservation because of its historic and architectural significance. 
    Owner means the person, corporation or other legal entity listed as owner on the real property records of Pitkin or Eagle County. 
    Preservation means the act or process of applying measures to sustain the existing form, integrity, and materials of a building or structure, and the existing form and specimen trees located on a site. It may include initial stabilization work, where necessary, as well as ongoing maintenance of the historic building or materials. 
    Rehabilitation means the act or process of returning property to a state of utility through repair which makes possible a contemporary use while preserving those portions or features of the property which are significant to its historical, architectural and cultural value. 
    Relocation means any relocation of a structure on its site or to another site. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent or temporary location on or in the ground, including, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, buildings, fences, gazebos, advertising signs, billboards, radio and television antennae, including supporting towers, hot tubs and swimming pools. 
(Ord. 20 §1 (part), 2001; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-393. - Designation of landmarks. 
(a)  Designation. The Town Council may by ordinance designate as a Landmark an individual structure or other feature or integrated group of structures and features on a single lot or site having special historical value. Each such designating ordinance shall include or reference a description of the characteristics of the landmark which justifies its designation and shall include a legal description or other information sufficient to accurately determine the location and boundaries of the landmark. The designating ordinance may indicate demolitions which would not have a significant impact on or be potentially detrimental to the landmark. Any such designation shall be in furtherance of and in conformance with the purposes of this Section. Any property designated as a landmark, regardless of whether the town or property owner initiated the landmark designation, shall be subject to the controls and requirements set forth in this Section and shall be eligible for the incentive programs provided for in this Article. 
(b)  Procedure for designation. Landmarks may be designated on approval of an ordinance of the Town Council at a public hearing after recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission and after notice to the property owner of the Town's intent to consider designation of the property as a landmark. 
(c)  Application. Applications may be filed by the property owner or may be initiated by the Town. Any application filed by a property owner shall include all information required by the Guidelines and any other information reasonably requested by the Town Planner, the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Town Council. The applicant shall not be required to submit an application fee or fees to the Town's Development Review Account for processing the Landmark Designation Application. After August 14, 2001, the Town shall not initiate an application for landmark designation of a structure which is exclusively residential without the written permission of the property owner. 
(d)  Standards for designation. When considering whether certain property should be designated as a landmark, the Town Council shall consider the following factors with regard to the property. It is not the intention of this Article to allow designation of insignificant structures, features or sites. Any structure, feature or site that is at least seventy-five (75) years old and demonstrates one or more of the following characteristics may be designated as a landmark. 
(1)  Its character, interest or value as a part of the development, heritage or culture of the Town. 
(2)  Its location as a site of a significant historic event. 
(3)  Its identification with a person or persons who significantly contributed to the culture and development of the Town. 
(4)  Its exemplification of the cultural, economic, social or historic heritage of the Town. 
(5)  Its embodiment of distinguishing characteristics, detail, materials or craftsmanship of an architectural type or specimen. 
(6)  Its identification as a work of an architect or master builder whose individual work has influenced the development of the Town. 
(7)  Its unique location or singular physical characteristic representing an established and familiar visible feature of a neighborhood community or the Town. 
(8)  Its status as a significant component of a historically significant neighborhood and the preservation of the structure or site is important for the maintenance of that neighborhood character. 
(Ord. 20 §1 (part), 2001; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-394. - Incentives. 
(a)  Parking Reductions. The off-street parking standards and requirements for the commercial portion of properties designated as landmarks shall be reduced by one hundred percent (100%) of the parking space requirements provided in the Municipal Code. The off-street parking requirements for the residential portion of properties designed as Landmarks shall be reduced by thirty percent (30%) of the parking space requirements provided in the Municipal Code provided that each residential unit shall have at least one designated space. A property owner is permitted to seek additional relief from parking standards through the zoning incentives outlined below. 
(Ord. 20 §1 (part), 2001) 
(b)  Landscape Area Reductions. Landmarks on Midland Avenue or Midland Avenue Spur shall not be required to provide a minimum landscaped area. 
(c)  Parkland Dedication and Improvement Requirements. The Town Council may by ordinance waive up to one hundred percent (100%) of the parkland dedication requirements for landmark properties through the procedures for zoning incentives. 
(d)  School Land Dedication Requirements. There shall be no school land dedication requirements for landmarks. 
(e)  Community Housing. 
(1)  Community housing for commercial development. The remodel of a landmark with new commercial square footage which results in no more than three thousand (3,000) square feet of additional countable floor area subsequent to August 14, 2001, shall be exempt from the commercial housing mitigation requirements including the fifteen percent (15%) of the full-time equivalent employees generated by such development. The portion of new commercial countable floor area in excess of three thousand (3,000) square feet shall be subject to the community housing mitigation requirements 
(2)  Community housing for inclusionary zoning. If none of the individual free-market residential units in a development on a landmark parcel exceed the minimum square footage for Category 2 community housing units established in the Community Housing Guidelines, the residential portion of the development shall be exempt from the inclusionary housing requirements. 
A property owner is permitted to seek relief in addition to that outlined above for commercial and residential development through the zoning incentive procedures. 
(f)  Zoning Incentives. 
(1)  The Town Council may by ordinance grant zoning incentives for designated landmarks that do not conform with existing zoning regulations or which, upon redevelopment, will not conform with existing zoning regulations. The Town Council may grant such zoning incentives as it deems reasonably necessary to assure preservation of the landmark. Zoning incentives which may be granted include, but shall not be limited to, the transfer of allowable density to other properties owned by the owner of the landmark, additional reduction in the off-street parking standards and requirements, exemption of subgrade area from floor area limitations and calculations, approval of an increase in the floor area allowed to be constructed on the landmark, approval of an accessory dwelling unit or an accessory dwelling unit larger than otherwise allowed, variances in setbacks and other elements of the schedule of requirements provided by Section 16-22 of this Chapter, the dimensional requirements in the C-2 zone district (Table 3 in Section 16-29) and the allowance of a lot split which would create two (2) nonconforming lots where one (1) of the resulting lots contains a landmark. 
(2)  Zoning incentives for residential landmarks. The Town Council may by ordinance grant zoning incentives for designated residential landmarks that do not conform with existing zoning regulations or which, upon redevelopment, will not conform with existing zoning regulations. 
(3)  Zoning incentives for residential landmarks may be either (1) a lot split or (2) a combination of other incentives, but not including a lot split. If a lot split is the zoning incentive requested, then the residential landmark shall be located on one of the lots ("Landmarked Lot") and the other lot ("Second Lot") may contain another residential structure. The Landmarked Lot shall be permitted to request approval for setback variances as are necessary to create a reasonable lot for the Landmarked Lot and a floor area ratio variance in order to reflect the perimeter boundaries of the existing housing unit. Further, the Landmarked Lot may request additional below grade area. Except for lot size, development on the Second Lot shall comply with all of the requirements of the respective zone district in which the Second Lot is located. By way of example, the Second Lot shall not be permitted to request a floor area ratio greater than thirty-five hundredths (0.35) and shall not be permitted to request special review for reduced yard setbacks. 
(4)  Alternatively, zoning incentives for residential landmarks may include any combination of the following zoning incentives, provided a lot split is not granted: 
a.  The transfer of allowable density to other properties owned by the owner of the landmark; 
b.  Additional reduction in the off-street parking standards and requirements; 
c.  Exemption of subgrade area from floor area limitations and calculations; 
d.  Approval of an increase in the floor area allowed to be constructed on the landmark; 
e.  Approval of an accessory dwelling unit or an accessory dwelling unit larger than otherwise allowed; 
f.  Variances in setbacks and other elements of the schedule of requirements provided by Section 16-22; 
g.  Relief from the requirement that one (1) of the units be owner occupied where currently not allowed by this Article; and 
h.  Other minor variances to provisions of Chapter 16 which have impacts similar to or less than the impacts from the above incentives. 
(g)  Procedures and application. The procedures and requirements for approval of a zoning incentive shall be the same as for special review approval pursuant to Chapter 16, Article III; except that: 
(1)  If the only incentives sought are setback and/or height variances, the public hearing shall be before the Town Council and there shall be no requirement for a Planning and Zoning Commission recommendation. 
(2)  If a zoning incentive is submitted, the Town Manager shall have the authority to waive one (1) or more of the following: 
a.  The application fee; 
b.  Up to one hundred percent (100%) of charges for staff review required to be paid by the applicant under Sections 16-292 and 17-61, Town Code; 
c.  Up to fifty percent (50%) of the other charges encumbered by the Town. 
(3)  In the event that a zoning incentive transfer is requested, the maximum amount of fees and charges that can be waived by the Town Manager is fifty percent (50%). 
(4)  The applicant shall be responsible for all building permit fees and other fees not waived or reduced through this Article. As a point of clarification, the applicant shall be responsible for preparing the application and the engineering services typically necessary for preparing and recording the documents to be recorded in the public records. 
(h)  Standards. The Town Council may grant zoning incentives upon a finding of all of the following: 
(1)  For nonresidential and mixed-use landmarks, the development obtaining the incentive is generally compatible with the character of the surrounding area and is generally consistent with the Town Master Plan, with specific emphasis on the neighborhood typologies; 
(2)  For residential landmarks, the development obtaining the incentive is generally compatible with the character of the surrounding area and is consistent with the Town Master Plan, with specific emphasis on the neighborhood typologies. In addition, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Town Council shall consider the factors outlined in Section 16-44 (e)(1). 
(3)  The historic value of the building or structure will be preserved with the granting of the zoning incentive. 
(i)  Incentives transferable. The Town Council may by ordinance at a duly noticed public hearing (for purposes of clarification, both the designating and receiving sites are subject to the Town's public notice requirements) approve, approve with conditions or deny a request for transfer of incentives, including zoning incentives, parking reductions, affordable housing mitigation reductions and the elimination of the minimum landscape requirements, from a landmarked property to any other property located in Town. By way of example, a receiving site may have access to zoning incentives such as the setback and height, or floor area, or minimum lot size reductions. The Town Council may approve the ordinance upon a finding of all of the following: 
(1)  The development for the receiving site is generally compatible with the character of the surrounding area and is generally consistent with the Town Master Plan, with specific emphasis on the neighborhood typologies for the receiving site; 
(2)  The historic value of the building or structure from which the zoning incentive is transferred will be preserved with the granting of the zoning incentive; and 
(3)  The zoning incentive transfer will be subject to reasonable conditions such as execution of an instrument of transfer to a specific receiving site approved by the Town Attorney, a prohibition against the removal of the Landmark designation after transfer of the zoning incentives, and any other reasonable conditions or restrictions. 
(Ord. 20 §1 (part), 2001; Ord. 30 §1, 2003; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 05 §C, 2009; Ord. 07 §B9, 2009; Ord. 19 §B(Exh. A), 2015) 
Sec. 16-395. - Special landmark review approval required. 
    No demolition, partial demolition or relocation of any landmark shall be permitted unless the demolition, partial demolition or relocation is approved by the Town Council by Special Landmark Review in accordance with the standards set forth in this Chapter. 
(1)  Procedures for review. At a duly noticed public hearing before the Town Council held after publication, mailing and posting pursuant to Section 16-269, the Town Council shall approve, approve with conditions or disapprove the application. 
(2)  Application for a Special Landmark Review. The application shall include the following: 
a.  The general information required by the Town's development review application form; 
b.  A written description of the actions to be permitted and a statement of how the proposal complies with the review standards set forth below; 
c.  If deemed necessary by the Town Planner, a report from a licensed engineer or architect regarding the soundness of the structure and its suitability for rehabilitation and/or an economic feasibility report; and 
d.  Any other information reasonably required by the Town Planner or the Town Council. 
e.  Any applicable fees and deposits required by the Town. 
(3)  Standards for review. No approval for demolition, partial demolition or relocation of a landmark shall be granted unless the Town Council approves or approves with conditions the Special Landmark Review after considering any of the following standards which the Town Council deems applicable; 
a.  The structure proposed for demolition is not structurally sound despite evidence of the owner's efforts to properly maintain the structure; 
b.  The structure cannot be rehabilitated or reused on site to provide for any reasonable beneficial use of the property; 
c.  The structure cannot be practically moved to another site in Town; 
d.  The applicant demonstrates that the proposal mitigates to the greatest extent practical, the following: 
1.  Any impacts that occur to the character of the neighborhood; 
2.  Any impact on the landmark or on the historic significance of the structure or structures located on the parcel and adjacent parcels; and 
3.  Any impact to the architectural character and integrity of the structure or structures located on the parcel and adjacent parcels; 
e.  Any partial demolition is required for the renovation, restoration or rehabilitation of the Landmark, or the part of the structure to be demolished does not contribute to the historic significance of the Landmark; 
f.  The structure cannot be rehabilitated or reused on its original site to provide for any reasonable beneficial use of the property; 
g.  Any relocation activity is demonstrated to be the best preservation method for the character and integrity of the structure and the historic integrity of the existing neighborhood and adjacent structures will not be diminished due to the relocation; 
h.  If appropriate, the structure has been demonstrated to be capable of withstanding the physical impacts of the relocation and re-siting. A structural report shall be submitted by a licensed engineer demonstrating the soundness of the structure proposed for relocation; and 
i.  If appropriate, a relocation plan shall be submitted, including posting a bond or other financial security approved by the Town Council with the engineering department, to insure the safe relocation, preservation, and repair (if required) of the structure, site preparation and infrastructure connections. The receiving site shall be prepared in advance of the physical relocation. 
(4)  Exemption for structures or portions of structures which do not contribute to the historic significance of a landmarked parcel. Demolitions or partial demolitions which do not affect the exterior of the building are exempt from meeting the standards of Section 16-395. The demolition, partial demolition or relocation of a structure or portion of a structure which the Technical Review Committee unanimously finds does not contribute to the historic significance or defining elements of a landmarked parcel shall be exempt from meeting the standards of Section 16-395. 
(Ord. 20 §1 (part), 2001; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-396. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this Chapter 16, Article XVIII, shall be subject to the general penalty provisions of this Chapter, and, in addition, the Town Council, by ordinance following notice to the owner and hearing, may prohibit the owner, successor, or assigns from obtaining a building permit for the affected property for a period up to three (3) years from the date of such violation. The extent of the penalty shall be determined by the Town Council following a review of the severity of the violation. The Town may initiate proceedings to record a public notice against the property to this effect to insure the notice and enforcement of this penalty. 
(Ord. 20 §1 (part), 2001; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-397. - Insubstantial amendment of development order. 
(a)  Insubstantial amendment. An insubstantial amendment to a Special Landmark Review Approval may be authorized by the Town Planner. An insubstantial amendment shall be limited to technical or engineering considerations discovered after the approval process which could not reasonably have been anticipated during the approval process. 
(b)  Other amendments. All other amendments shall be approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 16-395. 
(Ord. 20 §1 (part), 2001; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-398. - Minimum maintenance requirements. 
    In order to avoid loss of landmarks, all buildings and structures designated as a landmark and having historical significance shall be maintained to meet the minimum requirements of the building codes adopted in Chapter 18. Provided, this requirement shall not create an obligation for an owner of a structure to repair or replace elements of such structure which are properly functioning but which are not UBC compliant. Said structures shall receive reasonable care, maintenance and upkeep appropriate for the preservation, protection, enhancement, rehabilitation, reconstruction, perpetuation or use in compliance with the terms of this Section. The owner of each such landmarked property shall keep the building or structure in good repair, including all of the exterior portions of such improvements and all interior portions thereof which, if not maintained, may cause or tend to cause the exterior portions of such improvements to deteriorate, decay or become damaged or otherwise fall into a state of disrepair. The Town Council may, on its own initiative, file a petition with the Chief Building Official requesting that said official require correction of defects or repairs to any structure covered by this Section, so that such structure shall be preserved and protected consistent with the purpose of this Section. Upon application, the Town Council may approve a one-time loan to the owner of the property in an amount not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for purposes of satisfying the minimum maintenance requirements of this Section upon a demonstration of economic hardship which prohibits the owner from conducting such repairs, provided that: 
(1)  The loan shall be in the minimum amount necessary to maintain the structure; 
(2)  No interest will be due unless the applicant is not able to repay the loan within ten (10) years; and 
(3)  In approving the loan, the Council shall establish the loan terms and interest rates in the event the loan is not to be paid back in ten (10) years. 
(Ord. 20 §1 (part), 2001; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 13 §6, 2008) 
Secs. 16-399-16-410. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIX - Housing Mitigation 

Sec. 16-411. - Purpose. 
(a)  Basalt is located in a unique and highly desirable valley. The Town recognizes that having a supply of community housing attainable by households earning lower and median incomes in the Town is critical to retaining a diversified and sustainable Town having the character and sense of community of a Town where people can live and work in the same area. The citizens of the Town do not want Basalt to become an exclusive community. Historically, persons earning lower and median incomes have been able to attain housing in the Basalt area, and the Town currently reflects a mix of socioeconomic backgrounds. The Town further recognizes that there is a growing gap between housing costs and wages in Basalt. Therefore, the Town Council has determined that it needs to develop and maintain an community housing program. 
(b)  The intent of this community housing program is to require new development to mitigate for a portion of the employees generated by such development and to reflect and maintain the Town's small town character and enhance the livability of the Town. The goal of these regulations is to require new development to provide community housing attainable by persons having lower and median incomes paying not more than approximately thirty percent (30%) of their household income for total housing expense. 
(1)  All new residential developments will integrate community housing into the development or, if integration is impractical or not desired given the specific circumstance as determined at the sole discretion of the Town, provide meaningful community housing in or near the Town; methods will be developed to maintain the affordability of existing housing in the Town; nonresidential projects will mitigate for impacts they create by providing community housing; and existing community housing will not be lost through displacement or demolition. 
(2)  Community housing should be dispersed throughout the community and, where possible, integrated into the existing community fabric. 
(3)  The Town encourages community participation in solving and benefitting from solutions to the community housing concerns. The Town intends to supplement the provisions of this Article by developing a program that looks at the total benefits to a neighborhood and to the community while relying less on numerical standards and limitations. 
(4)  The Town will emphasize programs that will result in the creation of community housing units - by units being constructed or by existing units being permanently restricted for community housing, either through deed restrictions or other methods. As an example, the Town has identified as a priority an Accessory Dwelling/Employee Dwelling Unit Program. This will include an educational program on the benefits and workings of the Accessory Dwelling/Employee Dwelling Unit Program. 
(5)  Community housing will be transit friendly, integrate with intermodal transportation connections and perpetuate the Town's history of pedestrian walkability and ease of mass transit use. 
(6)  The Town will look at the total costs for all housing, including life cycle costs, such as painting, building materials and energy costs. The Town will work toward a zero energy footprint for all housing. 
(7)  The Town's housing program should acknowledge regional issues and encourage coordination among jurisdictions, including community housing standards and requirements. The Town will seek out partnerships with other entities supporting community housing and develop reciprocal agreements. The Town will discourage jurisdiction shopping for development proposals. 
(8)  The Town will support creative housing solutions, including projects that include sweat equity by those benefiting from the housing subsidy. 
(Ord. 6 §C, 1999; Ord. 26 §2, 2001; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 05 §B, 2009) 
Sec. 16-412. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply to the following terms and phrases: 
    Accessory dwelling unit or ADU shall mean a deed-restricted community housing unit typically required to mitigate for single-family residential development which is a separate dwelling unit that contains not less than four hundred fifteen (415) square feet and not more than one thousand (1,000) total square feet, comprises not more than thirty-three percent (33%) of the total floor area on the lot and: (1) is located within or attached to a principal dwelling unit, but has a separate entrance from such principal dwelling unit; or (2) is detached from the principal dwelling unit but located on the same lot. ADUs shall be subject to a deed restriction requiring occupancy in accordance with the Community Housing Guidelines then in effect. 
    Community housing shall mean dwelling units deed-restricted with initial sales price and appreciation caps corresponding to the housing sizes and types set forth in the Community Housing Guidelines. Community housing units shall be: (1) owned or rented; and (2) occupied by individuals and households meeting income, employment and occupancy requirements set forth in the Town's Community Housing Guidelines. 
    Community Housing Guidelines shall mean guidelines adopted by resolution of the Town Council which may include, but shall not be limited to, standards concerning the procedure for qualifying to obtain community housing; the limitations (e.g., income and asset) and requirements (e.g., residency) for qualifying to obtain community housing; forms of approved deed restrictions; limitations on appreciation of sale prices of community housing; procedures for sale and rental of community housing; priorities for persons bidding to purchase community housing; occupancy requirements; size and price limitations; maximum price increases; employee generation standards for commercial land uses; standards for numbers of residents per dwelling unit; land dedication standards; quality of construction requirements for new community housing; ; and formula for calculating any payment of a fee-in-lieu of provision of community housing. The Community Housing Guidelines and any subsequent amendments thereto shall be adopted only after a duly noticed public hearing at which such guidelines are considered. Other terms used in this Article but not defined in this Code are defined in the Community Housing Guidelines. 
    Employee dwelling unit or EDU shall mean a deed-restricted community housing unit typically required to mitigate for multi-family, mixed-use and commercial development, which separate dwelling unit contains not less than four hundred fifteen (415) square feet and not more than one thousand five hundred eighty-five (1,585) total square feet and: (1) is located within or attached to a commercial development, but has a separate entrance from such commercial development; or (2) is detached from the commercial development but located on the same lot. EDUs shall be subject to a deed restriction requiring occupancy in accordance with the Community Housing Guidelines then in effect. 
    Net commercial square footage shall mean those areas within a commercial, industrial or office building, which are or which are designed to be operated by the owner or leased to a tenant and occupied for commercial, industrial or office purposes. Net commercial square footage shall not include areas dedicated to bathrooms, stairways, circulation corridors, mechanical areas and storage areas so long as these areas are used solely by the commercial owner or tenants on the site. 
    Net square footage (feet) shall mean a calculation based on interior area that is measured from the interior walls, including all interior partitions, habitable basements (including unfinished basements that have the potential to meet habitability standards once finished), interior storage areas and closets and laundry area. Such calculations shall not include mechanical areas, exterior storage, stairwells, garages (either attached or detached), patios, decks and porches. Exterior storage exclusions may not exceed ten percent (10%) (twenty percent [20%] of the net square footage) of the total net square footage of the community housing or resident-occupied housing. 
    New residential development or new commercial development shall mean any development for which a building permit has not been issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified herein, except the following: 
a.  Development which has a vested property right pursuant to Section 17-125 of this Code; or 
b.  Applications for site specific development plan approval which have been determined by the Town prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified herein to be complete; and 
c.  The following applications (which were exempt from the development moratorium preceding adoption of this regulation). If any of these applications are withdrawn or denied, then any new application is subject to these regulations. If the application fails to comply with any subsequent submittal deadline, the Town Council may require the application to be subject to the new community housing regulations: 
1.  Basalt Design District. 
2.  Arbaney/Kittle. 
New commercial development shall include the development of new public and nonprofit facilities that include the uses listed in Section 16-28(3) of this Chapter. Upon a recommendation from the Town Planner, the Town Council may assess, waive or partially waive community housing mitigation requirements on new public facilities by governmental and quasi-governmental agencies as is deemed appropriate and warranted for the purpose of promoting civic uses and in consideration of broader community goals. The employee generation rates may be used as a guideline, but each operation shall be analyzed for its unique employee needs. 
(Ord. 6 §C, 1999; Ord. 26 §3, 2001; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 05 §B, 2009; Ord. 19 §B(Exh. A), 2015) 
Sec. 16-413. - Employee Impact and Housing Mitigation Report. 
    Unless waived in part or whole by the Town Planner, in order for the Town to be able to assess the need for housing mitigation generated by new nonresidential development, any application for site plan review (Sections 16-111 through 16-113), planned unit development (Section 16-65), subdivision (Sections 17-83 and 17-84), rezoning (Section 16-267), Community Priorities Scoring System (Section 16-481) or special review (Section 16-43) containing nonresidential development shall include an Employee Impact and Housing Mitigation Report prepared by a professional qualified to prepare such report and approved by the Town using recognized standards which provide, at a minimum, the following items: 
(1)  An analysis of the number of full-time equivalent employees which will be added to the Town as a result of the applicant's proposed nonresidential development, including employees during and necessary for construction of the project, as well as employees necessary after complete build-out of the project; 
(2)  An analysis of the number, size, type and configuration of all housing on the property as of January 1, 1999, which was generally attainable by households having low and median incomes (household income less than fifty thousand dollars [$50,000.00] in 1999) paying not more than twenty-eight percent (28%) to thirty-six percent (36%) of their household income for total housing expense, including debt service or rental payments, homeowner's or renter's insurance, real estate taxes and utilities; 
(3)  A description of the manner in which the applicant proposes that employees will be housed, including any on-site or off-site housing the applicant will provide; 
(4)  A description of the methodology by which the applicant will ensure that the housing to be provided by the applicant will be maintained as housing available for employees of the Town; 
(5)  A written statement verifying that the proposed development is in compliance with the then-existing master plan; and 
(6)  A written statement describing how the proposed development is consistent with the adopted Community Housing Guidelines and community housing requirements established in this Article. 
(Ord. 27 §1, 1998; Ord. 6 §C, 1999; Ord. 26 §4, 2001; Ord. 05 §B, 2009) 
Sec. 16-414. - Waiver or additional information. 
    The Town Planner may waive the requirement of preparing and submitting the Employee Impact and Housing Mitigation Report in instances when the Town Planner finds that the preparation and filing of the report for a particular application is unduly burdensome, duplicative or unnecessary because the applicant conclusively demonstrates there will be no impacts on the employees of the community or the availability of housing in the Town generated by the proposed development; or the Town Planner conclusively finds that the applicant has proposed a plan for community housing that satisfies all of the requirements of Sections 16-416, 16-417 and 16-418 below. The Technical Review Committee, Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council may require the applicant to provide additional or supplemental information not provided in such report prior to granting any approval, denial or approval with conditions for the application. 
(Ord. 27 §1, 1998; Ord. 6 §C, 1999; Ord. 26 §5, 2001; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 05 §B, 2009) 
Sec. 16-415. - Mitigation methods. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Article, a requirement to provide community housing shall require construction of newly deed-restricted community housing or recording a deed restriction against title to existing housing not previously deed restricted. The applicant shall, in its development application, propose the location and the mixture of type, size and configuration of the community housing which shall be subject to the review and approval, approval with conditions or denial by the Town in accordance with this Article. The Town, with information provided by the Town staff and the applicant, shall require community housing in a location and a mixture of unit types, sizes and configurations which, based on the location and nature of the development, is most likely to offset the impacts of the specific development on a case-by-case basis. 
    The proposed community housing shall meet the minimum average size, sale/rent price and tenant/owner qualification requirements established in the Community Housing Guidelines and the average pricing requirements set forth in this Article and the Community Housing Guidelines. Additionally, in determining the location and mix of unit types, sizes and configurations, the Town shall consider the then-perceived needs of the community for housing. Applicants are encouraged to be creative with community housing proposals. In accordance with CRS 38-12-301, rental housing subject to rent controls will only be approved by the Town if it is provided (1) pursuant to a voluntary agreement between the Town and a permit applicant or property owner, and/or (2) it includes the placement on the title to such housing units of a deed restriction that limits rent on the property or unit or that is otherwise designed to provide affordable housing stock pursuant to a voluntary agreement between the Town and a permit applicant or property owner. The requirement to provide community housing pursuant to the following residential, commercial and replacement housing sections may be satisfied in full or in part through the creation of ADUs or EDUs. This may include the construction of new ADUs or EDUs at off-site properties (i.e., properties other than the property which is the subject of the new development), the construction of new ADUs or EDUs on-site, the recording of new deed restrictions on existing accessory units, or other mechanisms subject to approval of the Town Council that will create dwelling units that are assured to meet the Town's affordability criteria on a permanent basis. In the sole and absolute discretion of the Town Council, a requirement to provide community housing may be satisfied in whole or in part by the dedication of land to the Town or an entity designated by the Town for community housing. Developers may dedicate land to the Town in lieu of providing community housing at the Town Council's sole discretion, as long as the land dedicated meets the following criteria: 
(1)  Located within the Town's Urban Growth Boundary as defined in the Town's Master Plan; and 
(2)  Located in an area determined to be more appropriate for community housing than the property proposed for development that generates the need for community housing mitigation; and 
(3)  The land to be dedicated in lieu of providing community housing units shall be equal to or more than the value of the community housing units required for mitigation, including total development costs such as the land, structures and utilities. The development costs of the community housing units that the land is being dedicated in lieu of and the value of the land being dedicated shall be determined by an appraisal from a real estate appraiser licensed in the state. An applicant proposing to dedicate land shall pay the cost of the appraisal. 
    At the discretion of the Town, development projects may use affordable housing credits pursuant to Town Code Section 16-420(4), certificates of community housing credits or pay fees-in-lieu of providing community housing pursuant to the payment-in-lieu schedule set forth in the Town's Community Housing Guidelines, for a portion or all of their community housing mitigation, inclusionary housing requirements, or replacement housing requirements as follows: 
(1)  Commercial development. 
a.  Commercial development projects required by the Town Code to provide seven thousand (7,000) square feet or less of community housing, and that are not proposing to include a free-market residential component, may satisfy all or a portion of their community housing mitigation through use of certificates of community housing credits or by paying fees-in-lieu, or through a combination thereof. 
b.  Commercial development projects required by the Town Code to provide greater than seven thousand (7,000) square feet of community housing and that are not proposing to include a free-market residential component, may satisfy all or a portion of their first seven thousand (7,000) square feet of community housing mitigation, and up to seventy-five percent (75%) of the additional community housing mitigation required through the use of certificates of community housing credits or by paying fees-in-lieu, or through a combination thereof. Additionally, up to one hundred percent (100%) of the community housing mitigation for a commercial development project requiring more than seven thousand (7,000) square feet of community housing may be satisfied through the use of certificates of community housing credits or through payment of fees-in-lieu, if authorized through special review pursuant to the review process established in Town Code Section 16-44, Special review application procedures. 
(1)  Mixed use or residential development. 
a.  Mixed use or residential development projects that are required by the Town Code to provide seven thousand (7,000) square feet or less of community housing, may satisfy all or a portion of their community housing mitigation or inclusionary housing square footage through use of affordable housing credits or by paying fees-in-lieu, or through a combination thereof. 
b.  Mixed use or residential development projects that are required by the Town Code to provide greater than seven thousand (7,000) square feet of community housing, may satisfy all or a portion of their first seven thousand (7,000) square feet of community housing mitigation, and up to fifty percent (50%) of the additional community housing mitigation through the use of affordable housing credits or by paying fees-in-lieu, or through a combination thereof. 
    In the event that an application to mitigate for community housing by the use of housing credits or cash-in-lieu where development of a property is being considered in conjunction with other development review applications which require review by the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Town Council, the final decision maker shall make the final determination on a project's ability to use housing credits or pay cash-in-lieu after a recommendation from the Town's housing advisory board, if one (1) exists. If an application to use housing credits or cash-in-lieu for development of a property does not have any associated development review actions that require review by the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Town Council, the Town Planner will issue the certificate of community housing credit if it meets the technical and legal requirements set forth in Town Code Section 16-420, certificates of community housing credits, after a recommendation from the Town's housing advisory board, if one (1) exists. All community housing required for a particular development approval shall be available for occupancy prior to or simultaneous with issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any of the non-community housing components of the development, except upon approval of the Town Council of a specific phasing schedule for the development. All community housing shall be located within the urban growth boundaries as defined in the then-current master plan and shall otherwise be consistent with the goals and objectives of the then-current master plan. 
(Ord. 6 §C, 1999; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 05 §B, 2009; Ord. 05 §1(Exh. A), 2014) 
Sec. 16-416. - Residential inclusionary requirements. 
(a)  All new residential development comprised of two (2) or more units or lots unless exempted by the provisions below, including the residential component of a mixed use development shall satisfy residential inclusionary requirements by providing deed-restricted, category-level housing in the form and amount described in one (1) of the following options: 
(1)  Community housing equal to at least twenty-five percent (25%) of total net square footage of the residential development and twenty percent (20%) of the total residential units; or 
(2)  Community housing equal to at least fifteen percent (15%) of total net square footage of the residential development and fifteen percent (15%) of the total residential units, and voluntary adoption of a 1.5-percent transfer assessment placed on all sales of market-rate units (excluding units resold to eligible households). The assessment shall remain in place in perpetuity. The proceeds from the assessment shall be paid to a non-profit entity specified by the Town Council for the purpose of creating community housing within the Town's UGB. 
Residential or mixed use developments creating three (3) or fewer new residential units are exempt from the residential inclusionary housing requirements set forth above if they consist of detached residential dwelling units not exceeding three thousand (3,000) total square feet each or attached residential dwelling units not exceeding one thousand four hundred (1,400) total square feet each. 
(b)  Category-level community housing units constructed within a development to satisfy inclusionary zoning requirements shall have an average initial sales price not to exceed a sales price that is affordable to those individuals or households making one hundred percent (100%) of Basalt's Area Median Income (AMI) as is updated periodically pursuant to the method established in the community housing guidelines. By way of example, if there are three (3) community housing units constructed in a development to satisfy inclusionary zoning requirements, one (1) community housing unit could be priced to be affordable to those individuals or households making one hundred percent (100%) of AMI, the second community housing unit could be priced to be affordable to those individuals or households making one hundred twenty percent (120%) of AMI, and the third community housing unit could be priced to be affordable to those individuals or households making eighty percent (80%) of AMI so that they do not average an initial sales price greater than would be affordable for those individuals or households making one hundred percent (100%) of AMI. The bedroom mix of units used to meet the inclusionary zoning requirements shall be at the discretion of the Town Council as is set forth in Section 16-415, mitigation methods. 
(c)  When an applicant seeks to create only residential lots, the inclusionary housing requirement shall be based on the applicant's estimate at the time of the land use application of the net square footage of residential development that will be constructed on such lots. The inclusionary housing requirement from lot creation shall generally be imposed at the time of subdivision, except upon showing of good cause to the Town Council. If additional net square footage is later requested and approved, an additional housing or in-lieu payment shall be required at that time. If purchasers build smaller units than the estimate, they may sell their unused housing allocation as community housing credits. 
(Ord. 6 §C, 1999; Ord. 05 §B, 2009; Ord. 19 §B(Exh. A), 2015) 
Sec. 16-417. - Commercial linkage requirements. 
(a)  Except as provided elsewhere in this Chapter, all new commercial development, except for remodeling of existing structures which results in no more additional countable floor area, shall satisfy commercial mitigation requirements by providing deed-restricted, category-level housing for fifteen percent (15%) of the new employees generated. If a development provides one hundred percent (100%) of its net commercial square footage as being deed restricted such that it is to be sold in commercial units of one thousand (1,000) square feet or less that cannot be combined, then the mitigation rate will be reduced by half to ten percent (10%). 
    If a development provides one hundred percent (100%) of its net commercial square footage as being deed restricted such that it is to be sold in commercial units of one thousand (1,000) square feet or less that cannot be combined, and restricts the occupancy to uses identified as retail uses, then the mitigation rate will be reduced to zero. 
(b)  For mixed-use projects, only the higher of the (1) inclusionary housing requirement established in Town Code Section 16-416(a), residential inclusionary requirements, or (2) the commercial linkage requirements established in Town Code Section 16-417(a), commercial linkage shall apply at the lowest applicable AMI-affordability levels. By way of example, if a mixed-use project of one hundred thousand (100,000) net square feet of total residential development and fifty thousand (50,000) net square feet of commercial development were proposed, the community housing obligation would be thirty-five thousand (35,000) square feet at an average price point affordable to a household earning eighty percent (80%) AMI. This represents the higher net square footage requirement of inclusionary housing, thirty-five thousand (35,000) or commercial mitigation, twenty-one thousand nine hundred thirty-five (21,935), at the eighty percent (80%) AMI level required by commercial mitigation. 
(c)  Community housing units within a development constructed to satisfy commercial linkage requirements shall have an average initial sales price not to exceed a sales price that is affordable to individuals or households making eighty percent (80%) of Basalt's AMI as is updated periodically pursuant to the method established in the Community Housing Guidelines. By way of example, if there are three (3) community housing units constructed in a development to satisfy commercial linkage requirements, one (1) community housing unit could be priced to be affordable to individuals or households making eighty percent (80%) of AMI, the second community housing unit could be priced to be affordable to individuals or households making one hundred percent (100%) of AMI, and the third community housing unit could be priced to be affordable for those individuals or households making sixty percent (60%) of AMI so that they do not average an initial sales price greater than would be affordable to those individuals or households making eighty percent (80%) of AMI. The bedroom mix of units used to meet the commercial linkage requirements shall be at the discretion of the Town Council as is set forth in Section 16-415, mitigation methods. 
(d)  The community housing demand generated by a commercial development shall be determined by utilizing an average job generation rate of four (4) employees per one thousand (1,000) net square feet of commercial space with adjustments for multiple job holding and multiple employees per household. Job generation rates and mitigation rates are based on the 2014-2015 Town of Basalt Housing Needs Assessment. The mitigation requirements shall be discounted by taking into account multiple job holdings of 1.24 jobs per employee and multiple employees per household of 1.43 employees per household as is demonstrated in the example below. 
    By way of example, below is the housing demand requirement for a new three thousand (3,000) net square foot of commercial space: 
    Three thousand (3,000) of net leasable square feet divided by one thousand (1,000); multiplied by a job generation rate of four (4) full-time employees per one thousand (1,000) net square feet of commercial space; divided by 1.24 jobs per employees, divided by 1.43 employees per household; multiplied by .15 (fifteen percent (15%) of employees generated) mitigation requirement equals 1.01 community housing units required, multiplied by nine hundred fifty (950) net square feet per community housing unit equals nine hundred fifty-nine (959) net square feet of community housing required. 
(e)  If the applicant can document, to the TRC's reasonable satisfaction, that the proposed commercial development will generate fewer jobs per one thousand (1,000) net square feet than the rate of jobs identified above for the life of the project, then the Town may allow the applicant to use the anticipated lower job-generation rate in calculating commercial mitigation obligations. The TRC may require a request to use a lower job generation rate to be reviewed by the Town Council or an applicant may appeal the TRC's determination to the Town Council. The bedroom mix of units used to meet the commercial linkage requirements shall be at the discretion of the Town Council as set forth in Section 16-415, mitigation methods. 
(Ord. 6 §C, 1999; Ord. 05 §B, 2009; Ord. 07 §B7, 2009; Ord. 24 §1, 2011; Ord. 19 §B(Exh. A), 2015) 
Sec. 16-418. - Replacement housing requirements. 
(a)  General Requirement. The development and/or redevelopment of any property within the Town or to be annexed thereto, on which, as of January 1, 1999, there were located four (4) or more residential housing units, the occupancy of which was financially attainable by persons with household incomes of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) on January 1, 1999, hereinafter referred to as "lower-income housing," must comply with the requirements of this Section. 
(b)  Compliance Alternatives. The applicant shall be required to provide relocation assistance as described in Subsection (1) below or replacement housing as described in Subsection (2) below, or some combination of relocation assistance and replacement housing, as approved by the Town Council. Relocation assistance shall be due from the applicant to tenants of mobile homes and other lower-income housing units and to owners of mobile homes. Replacement housing may also be required of the applicant, as described below. 
(1)  Relocation Assistance. For each lower-income housing unit that is occupied on the date the application is submitted, whether by tenants or by mobile home owners, the applicant shall make a payment for relocation assistance to each such tenant or the owner of a mobile home in amounts to be determined below. 
a.  In determining the amount of the relocation assistance to be provided by the applicant to a tenant (leasing any stick built unit or a mobile home unit), the Town shall consider the following factors: 
1.  Duration of tenant's occupancy (one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year up to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00)); 
2.  Annual rental rates paid by tenant (one (1) year's rent at average of prior two (2) years); 
3.  Number of persons occupying the premises in accordance with the applicable lease and based on proof of residency (five hundred dollars ($500.00) per person up to three thousand dollars ($3,000.00)); and 
4.  Responsibility for, and amount of, costs associated with relocating to a new location of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
5.  The sum of the amount of compensation referred to in subparagraphs (b)(1)a.1. through (b)(1)a.4. above will be the maximum required by the Town unless the Town Council determines that unusual circumstances justify additional compensation. 
b.  In the event that an Owner occupies mobile home unit the owner shall receive the compensation outlined in Subsection (b)(1)a.4. above for the tenant plus an additional amount for the mobile home. In determining the amount of additional relocation assistance to be provided by the applicant, to the owner of a mobile home who occupies the home, the Town will consider the following factors: 
1.  Value of the home; 
2.  Whether the home can be relocated for future use; and 
3.  Responsibility for, and amount of, costs associated with the relocating or removing the home from the property. 
4.  However, unless the Town Council determines that unusual circumstances justify additional compensation, the Town shall not require an applicant to pay more than seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) to a owner where the owner moves the mobile home off the site, and two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) to an owner where the applicant is required to move the mobile home off the site in addition to the amount of compensation required by the Town to be paid pursuant to this Subsection (b)(1)a. above. 
c.  In determining the amount of relocation assistance to be provided by the applicant, to the owner of a mobile home who does not occupy the home, the Town shall consider the following factors: 
1.  Value of the home; 
2.  Whether the home can be relocated for future use; and 
3.  Responsibility for, and amount of, costs associated with the relocating or removing the home from the property. 
4.  However, unless the Town Council determines that unusual circumstances justify additional compensation, the Town shall not require an applicant to pay more than seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) to an owner where the owner moves the mobile home off the site, and two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) to a owner where the applicant is required to move the mobile home off the site. For clarification, the applicant will also be required to provide relocation assistance to the tenant as provided in Subsection (b)(1)a. above. 
d.  In determining the amount of relocation assistance to be paid as provided above, the Town may require that tenants and mobile home owners provide to the Town the information reasonably necessary to document an entitlement to the type and amount of relocation assistance to be required. 
e.  The applicant may offer non-cash assistance to tenants of occupied lower-income housing units or the owner of a mobile home, and if accepted by the tenant or owner, such non-cash assistance shall reduce the amount of payment. Non-cash assistance may include, for example, locating housing, loans, and professional housing and financial counseling. 
f.  Payments shall be made to the tenant listed on the ground lease for the mobile home site and to the mobile home owner listed on the title to the mobile home. The tenant or mobile home owner-occupant shall be responsible for relocation of all individuals residing in the lower-income housing unit. Final payment may be withheld by the applicant until inspection has been made to ensure that all property is removed pursuant to the final payment agreement between the applicant and the tenant or mobile home owner. 
(2)  Replacement Housing. 
a.  For each lower-income housing unit that is vacant or has been removed from the property on the date of the application, the applicant shall provide as specified in this section unless (i) the applicant demonstrates that the last tenant of the lower-income housing unit (or the owner of a mobile home occupied by the owner) was provided relocation assistance consistent with the provisions of Section 16-418(b)(1) relocation assistance above. 
b.  If replacement housing is required, the applicant shall provide replacement housing equal to forty-five percent (45%) of the lower-income housing units that were vacant or removed on the date of the application and which do not qualify for one (1) of the two (2) exceptions listed in Subsection (b)(2)a. above. In the event that this calculation includes a fraction, the applicant shall pay a fee-in-lieu for the fractional amount as determined in accordance with the Basalt Community Housing Guidelines. 
c.  Replacement housing defined. Each required replacement housing unit must meet the following requirements: 
1.  The new unit must be of a type, size, configuration, and quality that are comparable to the unit being replaced; 
2.  The new unit must be subject to a sale price or rental rate that is lower-income, i.e., affordable to individuals or households earning no more than seventy percent (70%) of area median income; 
3.  The replacement unit must be subject to a deed restriction to ensure that the sale and resale price will remain affordable, pursuant to the community housing guidelines, unless the replacement unit is a mobile home and the Town Council determines that there is a reasonable expectation that the mobile home will remain affordable to households earning no more than seventy percent (70%) of the area median income for at least that period stated in the community housing guidelines. 
4.  The replacement units must be in one (1) of the following locations, subject to approval by the Town Council: 
(i)  The property being redeveloped; or 
(ii)  The urban growth boundaries as identified in the then-current Master Plan; or 
(iii)  The urban growth boundary or urban service boundary of the 1999 Basalt Master Plan and identified with a future land use designation on the Future Land Use Plan Map in the then-current Master Plan; or 
(iv)  An existing dwelling unit within the Town's three-mile planning area included in its then-current Master Plan that is within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet from the nearest bus stop (as measured to the upvalley or downvalley stop that is closest to the dwelling unit); or 
(v)  A mobile home pad with an existing mobile home park that is located within the Town's three-mile planning area included in its then-current Master Plan provided that the pad is within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet from the nearest bus stop (as measured to the upvalley or downvalley stop that is closest to the dwelling unit). 
(vi)  In the case of Subsections (b)(1)d. and (b)(1)e. above, the Town Council is permitted to approve a distance greater than one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet from the existing unit to the nearest bus stop if the Town Council finds there are compelling circumstances that justify the greater distance. 
5.  If the replacement unit is a mobile home, it must be located in accordance with applicable land use and building code requirements. 
(d)  Variances. The Town Council may approve variances from the strict application of the requirements of this Section where it is found to be appropriate to achieve the purposes of this Section. 
(e)  Relationship to housing mitigation requirements. The relocation assistance and replacement housing provided by an applicant in accordance with this Section shall reduce the requirements of Section 16-416 and 16-417 on a proportional basis, as determined by the Town Council. 
(Ord. 6 §C, 1999; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 05 §B, 2009; Ord. 15 §B, 2011; Ord. 14 §B(Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 19 §B(Exh. A), 2015) 
Sec. 16-419. - Fee exemptions. 
    Community housing, including deed-restricted ADUs and EDUs, may be reduced or exempted by the Town Council from the payment of certain fees required by this Code, such as fees or land dedications required for park land dedication, school land dedication, building permit fees, the water tank surcharge, special improvement fees and water tap fees in special circumstances. The Town Council shall consider the financial impacts of any waiver or reduction on the Town's operations in evaluating a request for a reduction or a waiver. 
(Ord. 6 §C, 1999; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 05 §B, 2009; Ord. 19 §§B(Exh. A), C(Exh. B), 2015) 
Sec. 16-420. - Certificates of community housing credits. 
    This section describes the process for establishing, transferring and extinguishing a certificate of community housing credit. 
(1)  Applicability and issuance. The Town Planner, in accordance with the procedures, standards, and limitations of this section, shall issue a certificate of community housing credit ("CCHC") to the developer of deed restricted, community housing units that are not required for commercial mitigation or inclusionary housing, upon the issuance of a certificate of occupancy on such units. At the time of issuance of a CCHC by the Town, a letter acknowledging the receipt and acceptance of the certificate shall be submitted by the owner to the Town Planning Department. 
CCHC's are issued to reflect credits based upon net square footage and are not to be based upon unit count. CCHC's may only be issued for the net square footage in the units developed in excess of any applicable housing mitigation requirements. The term net square footage as used herein means the interior calculation of the actual square footage of a project and shall not include common circulation space or floor area located outside of the actual applicable dwelling unit(s). The CCHC shall contain the following information: 
a.  A number of the certificate in chronological order of their issuance. 
b.  Parcel identification number, legal address and the street address of the affordable housing. 
c.  The category designation and the net square footage of the community housing credit. 
(2)  Transferability. A CCHC may be sold, assigned, transferred, or conveyed. Transfer shall be evidenced by an assignment of ownership on the actual certificate document. Upon transfer, the new owner may request that the Town Planner reissue the CCHC acknowledging the new owner. 
(3)  Market for certificates. The market for CCHC's is unrestricted and the Town shall not prescribe or guarantee the monetary value of a CCHC. 
(4)  Using CCHC credits. Pursuant to the review procedures established in Section 16-415, Mitigation methods, the Town may permit the use of a CCHC to serve as community housing mitigation for a development project. A certificate that is being used within the Town of Basalt to satisfy community housing requirements in-lieu of developing community housing shall provide community housing credit in the amount of the net square footage and for the category designation listed on the certificate. The Town Planner may allow the conversion of a certificate of a certain category designation for a certificate of another category designation pursuant to the payment of a fee to the Town based on the following calculation methodology: 
Step 1. Calculate the difference between the per square foot cash-in-lieu amount for the category designation listed on the certificate and for the desired category designation as the per square foot cash-in-lieu amounts are listed in the Town's Community Housing Guidelines. 
Step 2. Multiply the net square footage listed on the CCHC by the difference in cash-in-lieu amounts yielded in Step 1. The developer wishing to exchange the CCHC for another lower category shall pay the amount yielded from this calculation. 
Example: An owner of a Category 3 certificate wishes to exchange the certificate for a Category 2 certificate. The existing certificate is for one thousand (1,000) square feet of Community Housing. 
Step 1. Category 2 cash-in-lieu per square foot = $139.53 
Category 3 cash-in-lieu per square foot = $106.12 
Per square foot difference = $33.41 
Step 2. $33.41 per square foot difference × 1,000 square feet = $33,410.00 to convert from a Category 3 certificate to a Category 2 certificate for one thousand (1,000) square feet. 
Upon approval of a category designation conversion and the associated payment of any required amount to the Town, the Town Planner shall reissue the certificate with the new category designation. 
A developer or credit certificate holder wishing to exchange a certificate of community housing credit in place of a higher category requirement may do so without paying an additional fee. By way of example, if a developer is required to build a one thousand (1,000) square feet of Category 3 housing and they use a Category 2 CCHC for one thousand (1,000) square feet, the developer would not be required to pay an additional fee. 
(5)  Appeals. An individual aggrieved by a determination made by the Town Planner, may appeal the decision to the Town Council pursuant to the procedures and standards of Chapter 16-11, General Appeal Procedures. 
( Ord. 05 §1(Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 19 §B(Exh. A), 2015) 
Secs. 16-421-16-430. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XX - Exterior Lighting 

Sec. 16-431. - Purpose. 
    The Town experienced a significant expansion in population and construction, resulting in increased use of exterior illumination on an urban scale. This Article is intended to help maintain the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Town through regulation of exterior lighting as reflected by the following goals: 
(1)  Promote safety and security; 
(2)  Help preserve the small town character; 
(3)  Eliminate the escalation of nighttime light pollution; 
(4)  Reduce glaring and offensive light sources; 
(5)  Provide clear guidance to builders and developers; 
(6)  Encourage the use of improved technologies for lighting; and 
(7)  Conserve energy. 
(Ord. 29 §2, 1998; Ord. 14 §1(Exh. A), 2012) 
Sec. 16-432. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Color rendering index (CRI) is a quantitative measure of the ability of a light source to reproduce the colors of various objects faithfully in comparison with an ideal or natural light source. 
    Correlated color temperature (CCT) means the color temperature of a light source is determined by comparing its chromaticity with that of an ideal black-body radiator. The temperature (usually measured in kelvin (K)) at which the heated black-body radiator matches the color of the light source is that source's color temperature. Yellow-red colors are considered warm, and blue-green colors are considered cool. 
    Fixture height means the vertical distance from the ground directly below the centerline of the fixture to the lowest direct light emitting part of the fixture. 
    Fluorescent lamp or fluorescent tube is a gas-discharge lamp that uses electricity to excite mercury vapor. The excited mercury atoms produce short-wave ultraviolet light that then causes a phosphor to fluoresce, producing visible light. 
    Foot-candles means the illuminance on a one square-foot surface of which there is a uniformly distributed flux of one lumen. For the purposes of these regulations, foot-candles shall be measured at finished grade. 
    Fully shielded light means light fixtures shielded or constructed so that no light rays are directly emitted by the installed fixture at angles above the horizontal plane as certified by a photometric test report. The fixture must also be properly installed to effectively down direct light in order to conform with the definition. Exemptions from this definition may be allowed for aesthetic lighting elements such as shades with perforated patterns and opaque diffusers. 
    Glare means excessive contrast or intense and/or blinding light which creates visual discomfort or disability. 
    High intensity discharge light source (HID) means light sources characterized by an arc tube or discharge capsule that produces light, with typical sources being metal halide, high pressure sodium and other similar types which are developed in accordance with accepted industry standards. 
    Incandescent and/or halogen light source is the emission of light (visible electromagnetic radiation) from a hot body due to its temperature. Incandescence occurs in incandescent light bulbs, because the filament resists the flow of electrons. This resistance heats the filament to a temperature where part of the radiation falls in the visible spectrum. 
    Landscape lighting means luminaires mounted in or at grade but not more than three (3) feet above grade and used solely for landscape rather than area lighting. 
    Light-emitting diode (LED) is a semiconductor diode that emits light when an electric current is applied in the forward direction of the device, as in the simple LED circuit. The effect is a form of electroluminescence where incoherent and narrow-spectrum light is emitted. 
    Light fixture is an electrical device used to create artificial light or illumination. A luminaire is a lighting fixture complete with the light source or lamp, the reflector for directing the light, an aperture (with or without a lens), the outer shell or housing for lamp alignment and protection, an electrical ballast, if required, and connection to a power source. 
    Light trespass means light escaping the boundaries of the property in excess of 0.2 footcandles. 
    Lumen is the unit of measure used to quantify the amount of light produced by a lamp or emitted from a luminaire. Technically, if a light source emits one (1) candela of luminous intensity uniformly across a solid angle of one (1) steradian, its total luminous flux emitted into that angle is one (1) lumen. Alternatively, an isotropic one-candela light source emits a total luminous flux of exactly 4TT lumens. 
    Luminaire means a complete lighting unit consisting of one (1) or more electric lamps, the lampholder(s), any reflector or lens, ballast or transformer, and any other components and accessories. 
    Point light source means the exact place from which illumination is produced (i.e., a light bulb filament or discharge capsule). 
(Ord. 29 §2, 1998; Ord. 14 §1(Exh. A), 2012) 
Sec. 16-433. - Lighting plans. 
(a)  An outdoor lighting plan shall be submitted in conjunction with any subdivision, planned unit development, site plan development review, site plan development exemption, special review application and building permit application for a commercial or multifamily building. Said plan shall show the following: 
(1)  The location and height above grade of light fixtures; 
(2)  The type (such as incandescent, halogen, high pressure sodium) and total lumens of each light source; 
(3)  The type of fixture (such as floodlight, full-cutoff, lantern, coach light); 
(4)  Calculated estimates for site illumination resulting from the lighting, measured in foot-candles; and 
(5)  Other information deemed necessary to document compliance with the provisions of this Article. 
(b)  Applications for single-family and duplex building permits shall be required to provide all information necessary to document compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, as determined by the Building Official. Said information may be required in the form of a lighting plan consistent with Section 16-433(a)(1). 
(Ord. 29 §2, 1998; Ord. 14 §1(Exh. A), 2012) 
Sec. 16-434. - Street lighting and lighting for common areas. 
    All lighting illuminating public right-of-ways, easements or private streets, and public or private walkways shall conform with the following standards: 
(1)  All light fixtures must be fully shielded and use a full cut-off fixture to minimize light spill towards the private property. 
(2)  Maximum fixture height shall be sixteen (16) feet. Exemptions up to a maximum of twenty-five (25) feet may be granted for street lights located at opposing corners of intersections. 
(3)  A minimum of one hundred (100) feet shall be maintained between street light fixtures. Exemptions to this standard may be considered when fixtures are located on opposing corners of an intersection, at a pedestrian crosswalk or where similar special or unique conditions exist. Exemptions may be considered only where fixture type, placement and light intensity are modified to conform with the intent of the minimum spacing requirement. 
(4)  Fixture types shall be selected from a list of Town-approved designs. Said list will be approved by the Town Council. Property owners and developers may petition the Council for inclusion of new designs. 
(5)  Walkways/bikeways and pedestrian areas to be used in common areas and public areas that are not lit by streetlights: These areas shall be illuminated with low level bollards unless waived by the Town Planner. Average light level for these areas shall be measured at finished grade shall average at most 0.5 foot-candles. Lighting shall be directed downward, be pedestrian-friendly, and fully shielded. Light sources shall be no more than eight hundred (800) lumens, regardless of type. 
(Ord. 29 §2, 1998; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 14 §1(Exh. A), 2012) 
Editor's note- Ord. 14 §1(Exh. A), adopted Aug. 28, 2012, changed the title of § 16-434 from "Street lighting" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 16-435. - Nonresidential lighting standards. 
    The following lighting standards shall be applicable to all nonresidential properties including mixed uses: 
(1)  Outdoor lighting used to illuminate parking spaces, driveways, maneuvering areas or buildings shall be designed, arranged and screened so that the point light source shall not be visible from adjoining lots or streets. The light level shall not exceed an average of one (1) foot-candle as measured at finished grade. Lighting for pedestrian entrances, stairways, and loading docks shall not exceed five (5) foot-candles. Exemptions may be requested where the applicant can demonstrate that the intent of this Article is satisfied with alternate lighting fixtures or standards. 
Lighting power densities for building exteriors shall also comply with International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) requirements in affect. 
(2)  Outdoor lighting shall be ten (10) feet or less in height unless it is: 
a.  Fully shielded with a nonadjustable mounting; 
b.  Lighting for parking and vehicle circulation areas in which case heights up to a maximum of twenty-eight (28) feet may be allowed; 
c.  Building-mounted lighting directed back at a sign or building facade or 
d.  Lighting on above-grade decks or balconies which shall be fully shielded. 
(3)  All light sources which are not fully shielded shall use other than a clear lens material as the primary lens material to enclose the light bulb to minimize glare from a point light source. Exceptions may be allowed where there is a demonstrated benefit for the community determined through the exemption process. 
(4)  HID light sources are allowed with a maximum nine thousand (9,000) initial lumens high pressure sodium (HPS) and metal halide. Ceramic Metal Halide lamps with a correlated color temperature (CCT) of three thousand (3,000) K (Kelvin) and color rendering index (CRI) of eighty (80) or higher are preferred. Standards for other HID light sources may be established by the Town for new technology consistent with the above restrictions. 
(5)  Pole-mounted fixture spacing for security and parking lot light fixtures shall be no less than seventy-five (75) feet unless approved pursuant to the exemption process established in Section 16-438(4). Fully shielded decorative fixtures are allowed to maintain a fifty-foot fixture spacing. Wall-mounted fixture spacing for security lighting shall be no less than fifty (50) feet measured horizontally. Aesthetic fixtures directed back toward a building face shall be exempt from this spacing requirement when fully shielded. Aesthetic fixtures that are not fully shielded shall maintain a minimum spacing of twenty-five (25) feet. Where security lighting is a combination of lamp posts and wall fixtures, minimum spacing shall be seventy-five (75) feet. 
(6)  Pole-mounted fixtures shall be limited to two (2) light sources per pole. Decorative fixtures may be exempted from this requirement up to a maximum of three (3) light sources per pole. 
(7)  Mixed use areas that include residential occupancies shall comply with the residential standards on those floors or areas that are more than fifty percent (50%) residential based on square footage of uses. 
(8)  Up-lighting is only permitted if the light distribution from the fixture is effectively contained by an overhanging architectural or landscaping element. Such elements may include awnings, dense shrubs or tree canopies, which can functionally reflect illumination back to the ground. In these cases the fixture spacing is limited to one (1) fixture per one hundred fifty (150) square feet of area (as measured in a horizontal plane) and a total lamp wattage within a fixture of twenty-six (26) watts for incandescent or halogen sources, or 500 lumens per luminaire for fluorescent or HID sources. 
(9)  Up-lighting of flags is permitted with a limit of two (2) fixtures per flag pole with a maximum of fifty (50) watts each. 
(10)  Parking lot lighting shall have an average light level of one (1) foot-candle, measured at finished grade, with a maximum of five (5) foot-candles measured directly under the light fixture. 
(11)  Gas stations. Gas station canopies shall be lit in accordance with Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) RP-33.99. Light levels under canopies at pump islands shall average ten (10) foot-candles or less with a maximum of fifteen (15) foot-candles. Light fixtures under canopies shall be fully shielded with flat lenses. Indirect lighting may be used under canopies where light is reflected down from the bottom of the canopy. In this application, light fixtures must be shielded so that direct illumination is focused exclusively on the underside of the canopy. Lights shall not be mounted on the top or sides of the canopy. The sides of the canopy (fascia) may be illuminated only in compliance with signage regulations. Gas station aprons used for parking, vehicle storage, or similar uses, shall be lit in accordance with the requirements for parking areas. 
(12)  Light trespass. In order to minimize light trespass onto neighboring properties, the maximum light level at a property line shall not exceed 0.2 footcandles (FC). Light trespass shall be measured horizontally (meter photocell pointed vertically) at finished grade at the property line and vertically (meter photocell pointed horizontally) towards the property at forty-eight (48) inches above finished grade with readings taken every ten (10) feet along the property line. 
(13)  Bus stops and other public facilities requiring a minimum amount of light for life and safety purposes shall abide by the maximum lighting requirements established herein and shall have lighting with a minimum average of one (1) foot-candle as measured at finished grade around the perimeter of the facility. 
(Ord. 29 §2, 1998; Ord. 2 §§2, 3, 2001; Ord. 14 §1(Exh. A), 2012) 
Sec. 16-436. - Sign lighting. 
    In addition to the provisions of Section 16-435, the following provisions shall further regulate lighting of signs: 
(1)  Sign illumination shall not exceed ten (10) foot-candles as measured at the brightest point on the sign face. 
(2)  Signs in residential neighborhoods and zone districts shall be illuminated only by lighting which conforms with the residential lighting standards. 
(3)  Illuminated signs equal to or larger than twenty (20) square feet in size shall be turned off no later than 11:00 p.m. or one-half (1/2) hour after the use to which it is appurtenant is closed, whichever is later. 
(4)  Externally illuminated signs. Lighting fixtures shall be carefully located, oriented, and shielded so that light is directed only on the sign face. Down directed lighting for signs is required. 
(5)  Internally illuminated signs. Signs shall be designed with a dark or opaque background and illuminated lettering. Total lumens shall not exceed six thousand four hundred (6,400) per sign. Backlit or silhouetted lettering or logos against building facades shall be permitted only if the light source is not visible to passersby. 
(Ord. 29 §2, 1998; Ord. 14 §1(Exh. A), 2012) 
Sec. 16-437. - Residential lighting standards. 
    The following lighting standards shall be applicable to residential properties: 
(1)  Outdoor lighting shall be ten (10) feet or less in height. 
(2)  Lighting on above-grade decks or balconies shall be fully shielded. 
(3)  Outdoor lighting with HID light sources in excess of thirty-five (35) watts (bulb or lamp) shall be prohibited. In addition, incandescent light sources including halogen shall not exceed one hundred (100) watts. Outdoor lighting shall be limited per lamp to twenty-six (26) watt incandescent or halogen or five hundred (500) lumens per luminaire for HID or fluorescent. 
(4)  All light sources shall use other than a clear lens material as the primary lens material to enclose the light bulb to minimize glare from a point source. 
(5)  Landscape lighting is limited to twenty-six (26) watt incandescent or halogen or five hundred (500) lumens per luminaire for HID or florescent sources. 
(6)  Floodlights and security lights shall be restricted as follows: 
a.  The point light source shall not be visible from adjoining lots or streets. 
b.  Photo-cell or timer-controlled lights shall be prohibited. 
c.  Lights must be fully shielded, down directed and screened from adjacent properties in a manner that prevents light trespass. 
d.  Light intensity shall not exceed an average of one (1) foot-candle measured at finished grade. 
(7)  Motion sensor lights may be permitted, but only where the sensor is triggered by motion within the owner's property lines. 
(8)  Up-lighting is only permitted if the light distribution from the fixture is effectively contained by an overhanging architectural or landscaping element. Such elements may include awnings, dense shrubs or tree canopies, which can functionally reflect illumination back to the ground. In these cases the fixture spacing is limited to one (1) fixture per one hundred fifty (150) square feet of area (as measured in a horizontal plane) and a total lamp wattage within a fixture of twenty-six (26) watts for incandescent or halogen sources, or five hundred (500) lumens for fluorescent of HID sources. 
(9)  Light trespass. In order to minimize light trespass onto neighboring properties, the maximum light level at a property line shall not exceed 0.2 foot-candles (FC). Light trespass shall be measured horizontally (meter photocell pointed upwards) at finished grade at the property line and vertically (meter photocell pointed perpendicular to horizontal) towards the property at forty-eight (48) inches above finished grade with readings taken every ten (10) feet along the property line. 
(Ord. 29 §2, 1998; Ord. 14 §1(Exh. A), 2012) 
Sec. 16-438. - Exemptions. 
    Exemptions from the lighting regulations of this Article may be granted subject to the following procedures. Exemptions may be granted for the following types of lighting in addition to conditions allowing for exemptions contained in Sections 16-434 through 16-437: 
(1)  Winter holiday lighting which is of a temporary nature and which is illuminated only between November 1 and April 15 of each year. Other holiday lighting temporary in nature may request exemption from the Town. 
(2)  Municipal lighting installed for the benefit of public health, safety and welfare and temporary in nature with a maximum duration of not more than ninety (90) days. 
(3)  Lighting for outdoor recreational facilities, subject to submittal of a detailed lighting plan. Conditions applicable to any such exemptions may include limited hours of operation, limits on lighting intensity and specific requirements for fixture design. 
(4)  Exemption requests shall be formalized by submittal of a lighting plan and exemption request letter to the Planning Department. The request will be considered and may be granted by the Technical Review Committee (TRC). For more complex or significant reviews, the TRC may refer the request to the Town Council for action, or an applicant may appeal a decision of the TRC to the Town Council. Exemptions shall be reviewed in accordance with the following standards and procedures: 
a.  Compliance with the purpose and intent of this Article. 
b.  Submittal of a complete lighting plan in accordance with this Article. 
c.  Review by the Town may include recommendations by a professional lighting consultant selected by the Town, funded by the applicant. 
d.  Any special conditions, circumstances or hardships that warrant the exemption and/or appropriate conditions of approval. 
(5)  The lighting code exemption procedures shall also be utilized in regard to any interpretation or clarification of the lighting code necessary or requested by an applicant. 
(6)  Exit signs and other illumination required by building codes. 
(Ord. 29 §2, 1998; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 14 §1(Exh. A), 2012) 
Sec. 16-439. - Prohibited lights. 
(a)  Light sources shall not be affixed to the top of a roof, except where required by building code requirements. 
(b)  Flood illumination of buildings shall be prohibited from ground or pole-mounted lights or lights mounted on adjoining structures. 
(c)  Lights which flash, move, revolve, scintillate, blink, flicker, vary in intensity, change color or use intermittent electrical pulsation are prohibited unless specifically approved as part of a lighting code exemption. 
(d)  Mercury vapor and low pressure sodium lighting shall be prohibited. 
(e)  Linear lighting (including neon, fluorescent, rope-lighting and low voltage strip-lighting) primarily intended as an architectural highlight to attract attention or used as means of identification or advertisement shall be prohibited, except for use in signs in the C-2 Zone District if permitted through the site plan review process. 
(f)  LED lights for display of prices. 
(Ord. 29 §2, 1998; Ord. 14 §1(Exh. A), 2012) 
Sec. 16-440. - Enforcement and nonconforming lighting. 
(a)  Nonconforming lighting. 
(1)  As of the effective date of the ordinance codified herein, all outdoor lighting that does not conform to every requirement of this Article shall be pre-existing nonconforming lighting. Pre-existing nonconforming lighting shall not be moved in any direction, nor shall there be any change in use or light type, or any replacement or structural alteration made to the nonconforming lighting without conforming to all applicable requirements of this Chapter. 
(2)  At such time as a building permit application for a major remodel or new structure is submitted to the Town, or any type of rezoning, subdivision or site plan development application is filed with the Town, all lighting on the site or building shall be required to conform with all applicable requirements of this Article unless an exemption request is filed. 
(b)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Any building permit submittal or development review application to the Town shall include a lighting plan, sufficient in detail to demonstrate compliance with all applicable requirements of this Article. The Town may require completion of a lighting plan by a designer or architect with professional training in lighting design. 
(2)  The Town shall enforce the provisions of this Article in accordance with Section 16-268 of this Code. In the case of repetitive zoning enforcement for repeat offenses, the Town may impose the special inspection fees consistent with Section 16-203(b)(2)c and d. 
(3)  A final certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until such time as a nighttime inspection of the property is conducted to verify compliance with this Chapter. 
(4)  Residential compliance. Residential fixtures in place as of August 28, 2012, shall be brought into compliance with the Code upon receiving notice from the Town's Building Official. Upon receipt of notice from the Town's Building Official, the property owner shall have thirty (30) days from the notice to bring a non-complying fixture into compliance. 
(5)  Commercial compliance. Anytime after July 1, 2014, commercial and industrial fixtures in place as of August 28, 2012, shall be brought into compliance with the Code. After July 1, 2014, the property owner shall have thirty (30) days from the notice to bring a non-complying fixture into compliance. All newly installed lighting fixtures shall comply with the Code. 
(Ord. 29 §2, 1998; Ord. 14 §1(Exh. A), 2012) 
Sec. 16-441. - Automatic teller machines. 
    ATM lighting shall have an average of ten (10) foot-candles at the face of the machine and extending in an unobstructed direction outward five (5) feet, and an average of two (2) foot-candles within twenty-five (25) feet from any unobstructed direction from the face of the machine, except when such dimensions are off the property of the ATM owner. 
( Ord. 14 §1(Exh. A), 2012) 
Secs. 16-442-16-460. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXI - Rivers, Wetlands and Environmentally Sensitive Areas 

Sec. 16-461. - Applicability. 
(a)  This Article contains development standards for any development in or adjacent to rivers, wetlands and other environmentally sensitive areas (herein collectively referred to as environmentally sensitive areas or ESA ). Environmentally sensitive areas shall include all: 
(1)  Land within fifty (50) feet of the high water line (as described in Section 16-4, River Setback , of this Chapter) of the Frying Pan River, Roaring Fork River and any other river or stream which contains water on a year-round basis; 
(2)  Floodplains; 
(3)  Riparian and wetland areas; and 
(4)  Wildlife habitat areas. 
(b)  All land within one hundred fifty (150) feet measured horizontally from the high water line on each side of the Roaring Fork River, the Frying Pan River or any other stream or river which contains water on a year-round basis is presumed to be an ESA unless physical inspection, specific mapping or a specific study determines that such land is not an ESA. 
(c)  Any property located within the area defined as between Two Rivers Road on the north and Highway 82 on the south and downstream of the upper Highway 82 bypass bridge and upstream of the lower Highway 82 bypass bridge, shall be assumed to be an ESA. As used herein, this shall comprise the "Reach II ESA." 
(d)  Any property within the area defined as between Highway 82 on the north and the southernmost boundary line of the special flood hazard areas, as identified by the Flood Insurance Rate map revised to reflect the LOMR effective November 25, 2016 for panel 406 of 428 for Pitkin County or Panel 931 of 1125 effective November 25, 2016 for Eagle County as used herein shall be assumed to be an ESA. As used herein, this shall comprise the "Southside Reach II ESA". 
(Ord. 7 §C, 1999; Ord. 25 §(B)(2), 2000; Ord. 33 §B(Exh. A), 2016) 
Sec. 16-462. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply to words used in this Article and elsewhere in this Code, unless the context requires otherwise: 
    Floodplain shall have the same meaning as area of special flood hazard as defined by Section 16-351(b) of this Code. 
    Revegetation shall, in addition to any specific requirements contained in this Article, require replacement of vegetation using native vegetation and will be subject to approval by the Town. Revegetation of disturbed areas shall comply with the requirements of any revegetation standards adopted by the Town. 
    Riparian area shall mean any land adjoining or directly influencing a body of water. It includes the land immediately alongside small creeks and rivers, including the riverbank itself. 
    Technical Review Committee or TRC , for purposes of this Article, shall be comprised of the Town Manager, Town Planner, Public Works Director and Town Attorney. Further, the above-listed members of the TRC may, on a case-by-case basis, appoint other members to the TRC who possess relevant expertise. 
    Wetlands means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and under normal conditions does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation; provided that lands which are periodically irrigated for agricultural purposes are not considered to be wetlands as the term is used herein. 
    Wildlife habitat areas are all areas within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the high water line for the Roaring Fork River, the Frying Pan River and other streams within the Town, unless physical inspection, specific mapping or a specific study determines that such land is not a wildlife habitat area; areas mapped in accordance with the Colorado State University, Environmental Resources Analysis, 1974, as amended; areas known to be wildlife habitat areas by the Division of Wildlife; and other areas identified by studies by qualified wildlife habitat consultants as may be approved by the Town. In all cases, wildlife habitat areas may be field-verified by a wildlife biologist approved by the Town. 
(Ord. 7 §C, 1999; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-463. - Application procedures and contents. 
(a)  Any property containing an ESA for which a building permit or other development permit is sought or required shall file with the Town an application for development on property containing an ESA and shall comply with the requirements of this Article. 
(b)  Procedures. 
(1)  Pre-application conference. Prior to submittal of a formal development application hereunder, the applicant shall meet with the Town Planner to determine if the property contains an ESA and is subject to this Article and the anticipated procedures and application contents based on the particular circumstances of the property. The conference should be held before the applicant has entered into binding commitments or has incurred substantial expense in the preparation of plans or other studies. At the pre-application conference, the Town Planner should advise the applicant what studies, reports, maps or other information the Town Planner believes will be necessary for review of the application for development of the property. The Town Planner may waive or refine the application contents including the environmental assessment and inventory based on initial evaluation, a site visit and preliminary information provided by the applicant. 
(1.5)  Reach II ESA Referral Agency Review. As soon as practical after the Town Planner certifies a Reach II ESA application as complete, relevant referral agencies shall review the application for development of the property and provide written comments to the Town Planner. The relevant referral agencies shall be as determined by the Town Planner and at a minimum will include a qualified river hydrologist and a Reach II river master plan steering committee (if one exists). The applicant may, at its option, submit only that information required by Subsections 16-463(c)(3) and (6) with regard to sketch plan applications or, for other applications if the developer would prefer to receive written comments from the Town prior to the developer submitting the more detailed information required by Section 16-463(c)(7). Prior to review by the Town for preliminary plan, final plan, special review, building permit or other final stage review applications, the applicant shall submit the application requirements of Section 16-463(c)(7) for review. 
(1.75)  Southside Reach II ESA Floodplain Administrator Review. As soon as practical after the Town Floodplain Administrator determines a Southside Reach II ESA application as complete, the Administrator shall review and process an Administrative determination. The applicant may, at its option, submit only that information required by Subsections 16-463(c)(3) and (8) with regard to Sketch Plan applications or, for other applications if the developer would prefer to receive written comments from the Town prior to the developer submitting the more detailed information required by Section 16-463(c)(9). Prior to review by the Town for preliminary plan, final plan, special review, building permit or other final stage review applications, the applicant shall submit the application requirements of Section 16-463(c)(9) for review. 
(2)  Technical Review Committee. Within thirty (30) days of the Town Planner certifying an application as complete, the TRC shall review an application for development of property containing an environmentally sensitive area. The TRC may request such additional information, reports or studies as it deems necessary for its review of the application. Upon review of the application for development on property containing an ESA and after any site visit the TRC deems necessary, the TRC may: 
a.  By unanimous written consent, make a finding that the proposed development of the property containing an ESA (1) will not have a negative impact on the ESA, (2) is not required to be reviewed by the Town Council pursuant to any provision of this Article, (3) is in full compliance with the setbacks and other requirements of this Article, and (4) is not required by other provisions of this Code to be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission or Town Council. Such written consent shall further provide that the application is approved for purposes of compliance with this Article; or 
b.  If the TRC does not approve the application pursuant to the prior paragraph, the application shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission, if required, and to the Town Council for review. The TRC shall provide a recommendation of approval with conditions or a recommendation of denial of the application. 
(3)  Planning and Zoning Commission review. If the application for development of property containing an ESA is being considered in conjunction with other development review applications which require Planning and Zoning Commission review, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the application for development of property containing an ESA and the comments and recommendations of the TRC. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the application with respect to the criteria and standards for development of property containing an environmentally sensitive area provided in this Article. The Planning and Zoning Commission may then recommend to the Town Council that the matter be approved, be approved with conditions or modifications or be denied. 
(4)  Town Council action. At a regularly scheduled Town Council meeting following the TRC review of the application and, if required, following the Planning and Zoning Commission action, the application for development of property containing an ESA shall be considered by the Town Council. The Town Council shall consider the recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission, if any, the recommendations of the TRC and the review criteria and standards for development of property containing an ESA provided in this Article. The Town Council may then approve the application, approve the application with modifications or conditions or deny the application. 
a.  The Town Council may consider exemption requests for the following public improvements: bridges, roads, utility crossings, trails or river paths for nonmotorized use and fisherman and boating access improvements. The Town Council may also consider exemption requests for the following public or private improvements: erosion control devices; bank stabilization devices; fish habitat structures; park and recreation improvements; approved landscaping; improvements designed to enhance river stability and manage flood waters, such as drop structures, rock weirs, rock veins and hard points; and other similar structures. Any exemption approved pursuant to this Subparagraph 1, shall require a finding that the exemption is consistent with the purpose and intent of this Article and any impact is adequately mitigated. 
b.  In cases where development is prohibited by these regulations, the Town Council may grant exemptions and approve an application for development of property containing an ESA where there is a clear demonstration that these regulations impose on the particular property an unreasonable hardship that was not created by the property owner or was in existence at the time of the passage of the ordinance approving this Article XXI. In reviewing any case where development is prohibited by these regulations, the Town Council shall (1) review and consider the application at a public meeting, (2) consider any policies, standards or criteria set forth in the following regulations (Sections 16-464 through 16-467), and (3) consider the recommendations of the TRC and Planning and Zoning Commission. Approval of an exemption request shall be subject to a finding that there is no reasonable alternative and that any impacts on the ESA will be adequately mitigated. In order to further the goals of this Article where an exemption is necessary, the Town Council may consider any community benefits of the project and may impose additional conditions of approval including but not limited to the following: 
1.  Replacement of habitat or affected areas; 
2.  Enhancement or improvements to existing conditions and to ESAs; 
3.  Establishment of conservation easements; 
4.  Establishment of fisherman or other public access easements; 
5.  Cooperation with or participation in special environmental protection or enhancement programs as may be adopted or developed by the Town or local conservation agencies such as the Roaring Fork Conservancy; 
6.  Limitation of the permitted uses for a zone district and reduction of the permitted land use densities to minimize potential dangers to people, wildlife and the ESA; 
7.  Requirements for ongoing monitoring, warranties on required improvements and security as necessary to assure successful mitigation of impacts; 
8.  Conditions concerning the management of domestic animals; and 
9.  Any other conditions reasonably necessary to protect the environmental values expressed in this Article or to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Basalt. 
c.  In addition to the foregoing, in cases where an exemption from the fifty-foot river and stream setback requirement is requested, such exemption may be granted by the Town Council only at a public hearing for which notice is provided in accordance with Section 17-151 and on the affirmative vote of five (5) or more members of the Town Council. In circumstances where development of a property is limited by other zoning restrictions (such as a front yard setback), the Town Council shall not approve a reduction in the fifty-foot river setback unless and until the Board of Zoning Adjustment has denied relief in accordance with Section 16-265 from such other zoning restriction. 
(c)  Application contents. Except upon waiver by the Town Planner or the Technical Review Committee, all applications for building permit or development review on land areas that include environmentally sensitive areas as outlined in this Article must have an environmental inventory and analysis of the site conducted by a qualified person approved by the Town and paid for by the applicant. The environmental inventory and analysis will include the following: 
(1)  Mapping and delineation of all environmentally sensitive areas; 
(2)  Mapping and delineation of the minimum setbacks as outlined in this Article and as required elsewhere by the Zoning Code; 
(3)  Mapping and delineation of the floodway, the one-hundred-year floodplain and areas affected by riverine erosion potential, if they occur on the property; 
(4)  Inventory and photo documentation of existing vegetation within any ESA, unless the vegetation is not proposed to be disturbed; and 
(5)  A site plan showing the proposed development of the property. 
(6)  With regard to developments proposed within a Reach II ESA at the sketch plan review level or at the applicant's election for obtaining preliminary comments from the Town with regard to preliminary plan, final plan, special review, building permit and other final stage development permits prior to submitting the information required below by Subsection (7): A site plan with at least two (2) cross-sections and any mitigating conveyance improvements; existing and approximate proposed grade and one-hundred-year water surface elevations; improvements with approximate locations and sizes; and any access roadways with elevations ("conceptual Reach II ESA application"); and 
(7)  With regard to proposed development within a Reach II ESA at the preliminary plan, final plan, special review, building permit or other final stage review level, a floodplain report prepared and sealed by a professional engineer registered in the State of Colorado providing the following: Floodplain mapping showing the property location, structures, existing and proposed floodplain and effective conveyance structures prepared to standards required by the Town's river hydrologist; cross-sections showing existing and proposed flood elevations, grades and improvements prepared perpendicular to stream flow and at all hydrologically critical locations; a hydrological analysis performed for proposed and existing conditions in the most recent version of HEC-RAS program using the Town's modeling, with field surveyed cross-sections added to the model to verify actual conditions; a detailed site plan showing details and dimensions of all proposed structures, existing and proposed grades, and location and dimensions of any flood conveyance improvements; a written narrative prepared by the licensed engineer describing the analysis performed and any assumptions made with all calculations clearly presented; a certification from the engineer of record stating that the proposed improvements will not increase the one-hundred-year floodplain elevations; and a certified statement describing if and how the proposal impacts adjacent land owners ("detailed Reach II ESA application"). 
(8)  At the sketch plan review level with regard to developments proposed within a Southside Reach II ESA submit the items listed below. For any "detailed" plan application, an applicant may elect to receive a conceptual approval from the Floodplain Administrator prior to preparing detailed plans with regard to preliminary plan, final plan, special review, building permit and other final stage development permits as required below by Subsection (9) ("conceptual Southside Reach II ESA application"): 
a.  A site plan, detailing all construction activity proposed within floodplain boundaries, including: 
1.  Floodplain boundaries. 
2.  All reference marks. 
3.  All property lines. 
4.  All existing and proposed structures located within the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). 
5.  If applicable, the lowest floor elevation (crawl space, basement, etc.) of all structures on the property within the SFHA. 
6.  If applicable, specify the lowest elevation to which structure(s) are/will be floodproofed. 
7.  All easements. 
8.  All public rights-of way. (Rights-of-Way work permits may be required) and access roadways. 
b.  A copy of the relevant section of the applicable FIRM (Flood Insurance Rate Map), and identify the specific location and reach of the proposed activity. 
c.  A copy of the appropriate profile from the Flood Insurance Study (FIS), with the reach and Base Flood 
d.  Accurate cross sections of the site (minimum of two (2)) of the proposed activity with any mitigating conveyance improvements, including: 
1.  Depiction and labeling of both existing and proposed grade conditions. 
2.  Vertical (elevations) and horizontal dimensions (distances) and references. 
3.  Base Flood Elevation(s) (BFE). 
    In addition, nothing prevents an applicant from satisfying the full requirements at sketch as provided in subsection (9) below. 
(9)  At the preliminary plan, final plan, special review, building permit or other final stage or one-step review level with regard to proposed development within a Southside Reach II ESA, submit a Floodplain Development Permit Application prepared and sealed by a professional engineer registered in the State of Colorado providing the following: Floodplain mapping showing the property location, structures, existing and proposed floodplain and effective conveyance structures prepared to standards required by the Town's Floodplain Development Permit; cross-sections showing existing and proposed flood elevations, grades and improvements prepared perpendicular to stream flow and at all hydraulically critical locations; a hydraulic analysis performed for proposed and existing conditions in the most recent version of HEC-RAS program using the Town's modeling, with field surveyed cross-sections added to the model to verify actual conditions; a detailed site plan showing details and dimensions of all proposed structures, existing and proposed grades, and location and dimensions of any flood conveyance improvements; a written narrative prepared by the licensed engineer describing the analysis performed and any assumptions made with all calculations clearly presented; a certification from the engineer of record stating that the proposed improvements will not: 
a.  Increase the 100-year floodplain elevations by more than 0.0 feet (up to 0.05 of a foot allowed) as measured at the closest adjacent land areas not owned by the Applicant or under the Applicant's control and not including Town street rights-of-way. 
(d)  Any application pursuant to this Article, including applications for exemption, shall be submitted with an executed reimbursement agreement in accordance with Section 16-292 of this Chapter. Any application fee which may be required and any initial deposit shall be in an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. 
(e)  Special procedures for Reach II ESA properties. 
(1)  Prior to processing PUD or Subdivision Sketch Plan applications or, at the developer's election, other final stage development permit applications, applicants for development of property within a Reach II ESA shall submit a conceptual Reach II ESA application containing the application contents of Section 16-463(c)(3) and (6) for review and approval, denial or approval with conditions by the Technical Review Committee after referral agency review. Any approval of a conceptual Reach II ESA application shall be nonbinding and shall not form the basis of any reliance on the part of the applicant. Technical Review Committee approval of the conceptual Reach II ESA application shall only constitute certification that the applicant may proceed with additional necessary applications for development. 
(2)  Prior to processing a preliminary PUD plan, preliminary subdivision, special review, building permit or other final stage review for proposed development within a Reach II ESA, the applicant shall provide the information required by Section 16-463(c)(7), of this Code. After obtaining written comments from the Town's referral agencies, the Technical Review Committee shall approve, deny or approve with conditions such detailed Reach II ESA application. Technical Review Committee approval of the detailed Reach II ESA application shall only constitute certification that the applicant may proceed with additional necessary applications for development. 
(3)  Any condition of approval of any Reach II ESA application or any Southside Reach II application may be modified by the Town Council in any subsequent development review process. 
(4)  Prior to or concurrent with processing PUD or Subdivision Sketch Plan applications or, at the developer's election, other final stage development permit applications, applicants for development of property within a Southside Reach II ESA may elect to receive a conceptual approval from the Floodplain Administrator prior to preparing detailed plans with regard to preliminary plan, final plan, special review, building permit and other final stage development permits as required below by Subsection (9) ("conceptual Southside Reach II ESA application"). 
(5)  Prior to or concurrent with processing a preliminary PUD plan, preliminary subdivision, special review, building permit or other final stage or one-step review application for proposed development within a Southside Reach II ESA, the applicant shall provide the information required by Section 16-463(c)(9), Town Code. The Town's Floodplain Administrator shall approve, deny or approve with conditions such detailed Southside Reach II ESA application. 
(Ord. 7 §C, 1999; Ord. 25 §§B3-B5, 2000; Ord. 12 §B41, 2003; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 33 §B(Exh. A), 2016) 
Sec. 16-464. - River and stream setbacks. 
(a)  Development is prohibited within fifty (50) feet, measured horizontally, from the identifiable high water line on each side of the Roaring Fork River, the Frying Pan River and any other river or stream which has water in it on a year-round basis. Removal of riparian or wetland vegetation is prohibited within fifty (50) feet, measured horizontally, from the identifiable high water line on each side of the Roaring Fork River, the Frying Pan River and any other river or stream which has water in it on a year-round basis. 
(b)  In all cases, the requirement described in the preceding sentence shall be a minimum setback requirement. A greater setback may be required (by the Technical Review Committee or by the Town Council as a condition of approval) when: 
(1)  Slope equals or exceeds thirty percent (30%); 
(2)  Sparsely vegetated or rapidly eroding soils are present; 
(3)  The proposed use of the property presents a special hazard to water quality (e.g., storage or handling of hazardous or toxic material); 
(4)  The one-hundred-year floodplain exceeds the minimum setback requirement; 
(5)  Riverine erosion areas or potentially erodible areas exist that warrant a larger setback as determined by a qualified engineer or through other technical studies; or 
(6)  When reasonably necessary to protect riparian or wetland areas or to protect wildlife habitat areas. 
(c)  The Town Council may require revegetation, remediation or repair of native vegetation in river setback areas for new development review applications and exemption requests. 
(d)  Development along Reach II of the Roaring Fork River is prohibited if such development will have a substantial negative impact on the ability of the Town to implement any portion of the proposed River Master Plan for Reach II of the Roaring Fork River. 
(e)  Development within the Southside Reach II ESA of the Roaring Fork River is prohibited if such development will have an adverse impact on adjacent properties or impede the construction of a floodplain improvement included in an adopted Town of Basalt Capital Improvement Plan designed to carry flows back to the Roaring Fork River. 
(Ord. 7 §C, 1999; Ord. 25 §(B)(6), 2000; Ord. 33 §B(Exh. A), 2016) 
Sec. 16-465. - Floodplain areas. 
(a)  In addition to the requirements of Article XVII of this Chapter, Flood Damage Prevention, the standards in this Section apply to any mapped one-hundred-year floodplain areas as depicted in the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps for the Town of Basalt and surrounding areas, and areas found to be in the one-hundred-year floodplain areas by additional studies completed by a qualified river hydrology engineer, as may be approved by the Town. Where the one-hundred-year floodplain has not been established, this regulation shall apply to all land within an area which is fifty (50) feet measured horizontally from the existing high water line on any river or stream. 
(b)  No development, use, fill construction, excavation, embankment or alteration on or over any portion of the floodplain shall be permitted which would result in any of the following: 
(1)  The storage or processing of materials that in times of flooding are buoyant, flammable, explosive or otherwise potentially injurious to human, animal or plant life; 
(2)  The disposal of garbage or other solid waste materials; 
(3)  Storage of substantial solid debris capable of being carried downstream by flood waters; 
(4)  Any alteration or obstruction which would adversely affect the overall environ-mental quality and stability of the adjacent stream channel; 
(5)  Substantial increases in sedimentation or erosion; 
(6)  Infiltration of floodwaters into on-site water supply and wastewater disposal systems which would impair their functioning or pollute the stream; or 
(7)  Damage to or destruction of aquatic ecosystems, including, but not limited to, wetlands and riparian habitat areas. 
(8)  Any net increase in the elevation of the floodplain for Reach II ESA properties as shown on the Floodplain Information Report, Roaring Fork River prepared by Matrix Design Group, Inc., dated July 24, 2000. 
(9)  Any increase in the elevation of the floodplain for the Southside Reach II ESA properties which exceeds the standards included in Section 16-463(c)(9). 
(c)  The following uses shall be permitted in a floodplain to the extent that such uses are not prohibited by any other regulation of this Code and to the extent such uses comply with the guidelines set forth in Subsection (b) above: 
(1)  Agriculture uses such as farming, grazing, forestry, sod farming and wild crop harvesting. 
(2)  Public and private recreational uses, such as parks, natural swimming areas, golf courses, picnic grounds, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fishing, skiing and hiking areas if such uses do not cause concentrations of people or animals in areas during high hazard probability. 
(3)  Bridges or other structures for irrigation, drainage, flood control or water diversion may be allowed upon unanimous written approval of plans and specifications by the Technical Review Committee, provided that the impact on the floodplain is minimized, such structures are engineered to prevent blockage of drainage channels during peak water flows and the placement of such structures does not result in the unmitigated loss of wetlands or riparian areas. 
(4)  Buildings or structures that are in full compliance with Article XVII of this Chapter, Flood Damage Prevention, may be permitted by the Town Council subject to full compliance with the provisions of this Article, and the additional condition that for residential occupancies, the lowest floor (including any basement) shall be elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood elevation. 
(Ord. 7 §C, 1999; Ord. 25 §(B)(7), 2000; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 33 §B(Exh. A), 2016) 
Sec. 16-466. - Riparian and wetland areas. 
(a)  Development is prohibited within riparian and wetland areas. Removal of existing riparian and wetland vegetation is prohibited within riparian and wetland areas. 
(b)  If development is permitted or an exemption is granted, an application shall be reviewed according to the following standards: 
(1)  For the protection of both terrestrial and aquatic habitat, any development or activity which is permitted within such areas shall incorporate measures designed to maintain existing vegetation, reduce erosion and sedimentation, maintain cold water temperatures and otherwise allow man to function in harmony with, rather than be destructive to, wildlife habitat. 
(2)  Removal of vegetation in riparian areas and disturbance of ground cover adjacent to streams shall be avoided to the maximum extent possible. This destroys insect habitat and stream-bank stabilization, removes natural cover that provides shelter and insulation and disrupts the natural filtering action of the landscape. Riparian habitat areas should be allowed to develop naturally since they provide habitat for many birds and insects, shade and insects for fish and den sites for aquatic mammals. 
(3)  Permitted land uses which disturb or denude areas of vegetation adjacent to wetland or riparian areas shall be revegetated as soon as reasonably possible and in no case later than thirty (30) days after the beginning of the next growing season, with site specific variation to be allowed for unique species requirements. 
(4)  Channelization of streams destroys aquatic habitat and is prohibited. Development shall be designed to fit the existing channel rather than allowing changes in the channel in order to fit the project. 
(5)  Placing culverts which may become barriers to fish passage and may plug or wash out during high flows shall not be permitted. Perennial stream channels should be bridged whenever possible. When this is not feasible, culverts shall be designed to avoid plugging and prevent washouts. 
(6)  Adequate erosion control measures shall be incorporated in any development site plans. These measures shall include minimization of run-off velocities, diversion of run-off from areas with disturbed soil, development of drainage systems to handle concentrated or increased run-off, grading and construction sequencing to minimize soil exposure and use of best management practices for construction site control. 
(7)  Sewer lines shall be designed to avoid leakage of contaminants into the ground water source. 
(8)  Changes to the stream channel shall be limited to modifications that improve the stability and overall ecology of the channel as determined by studies completed by a qualified ecologist or river hydrology engineer. No reduction in the channel capacity shall be allowed. Bridge abutments may be permitted where they do not encroach on the flood channel and comply with any other floodplain development and building permit conditions. 
(9)  No activity shall be allowed which will increase stream sedimentation and suspension loads. 
(10)  All efforts must be made to reduce stream pollution and interference with the natural changes of the stream, and to enhance the value of the stream as an important natural feature. 
(11)  In the event there is a trail designated by an approved trail plan within the development site, such trail shall be dedicated for public use and a fisherman's access easement shall be granted, if appropriate. 
(12)  Developments otherwise permitted shall maintain water temperature in a normal pattern of diurnal and seasonal fluctuation, with no abrupt changes and shall have no increase in temperature of a magnitude, rate and duration deemed deleterious to the resident aquatic life. 
(13)  Development shall maintain the minimum water quality standards established by the Colorado Department of Health and Water Quality Control Commission, Regulation No. 33, Classifications and Numeric Standards for Upper Colorado River Basin and North Platte River (Planning Region 12), as amended July 14, 1997, and as may be further amended and as may be supplemented by regulations adopted by the Town Council. 
(14)  Development shall maintain or improve on baseline biological conditions for major streams and lakes affected by the development. For major subdivisions, PUDs, and large site review applications, baseline conditions will be established through water quality monitoring. Specific water quality monitoring requirements including multiple sampling locations and constituents may be established by the TRC or Town Council. 
(c)  In addition to the standards included herein, the Town Council may require development be set back up to an additional twenty-five (25) feet from a riparian or wetland area in order to further protect the riparian or wetland area. 
(Ord. 7 §C, 1999; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-467. - Wildlife habitat areas. 
(a)  This Section establishes land use standards for wildlife habitat areas. 
(b)  General standards. The standards in this Section apply to all wildlife habitat areas. 
(1)  Commercial, industrial or high-impact recreational development, open pit mineral extraction or construction of roads should avoid the habitat areas identified in this Section to the maximum extent possible to minimize impacts on wildlife. 
(2)  Residential development shall be clustered outside of habitat areas to the maximum extent possible to minimize impacts on wildlife. 
(3)  The removal of vegetation shall be minimized. Disturbed areas shall be promptly revegetated with beneficial browse species such as water birch, Gambel's oak, wild rose, willow, dogwood, aspen, mountain mahogany, chokecherry, serviceberry, bitterbrush, sagebrush, currant, snowberry, hawthorn and mountain alder. 
(4)  When existing vegetation must be altered for an access road, utility line or similar uses, an applicant will cooperate with the Town and the Colorado Division of Wildlife to devise a compensation plan acceptable to the Town. Such compensation plan may substitute (in a nearby area on the subject property) vegetation equal in type and quantity to that being removed to mitigate effects on wildlife species. 
(5)  Food, cover and water sources beneficial to wildlife shall be preserved to the extent possible. Developments shall mitigate effects of any damage to food, cover and water sources. Special consideration should be given to trees and shrubs with high wildlife food value, especially heavy seed, berry and fruit-producing species. There shall be no net loss of habitat, and the Town shall require mitigation either on- or off-site for beneficial habitat which is removed. The location, type and amount of mitigation shall be subject to the review and approval of the Town and may include in the Town's sole discretion payment of fees in lieu of mitigation, commensurate with the estimated costs of the mitigation requirements to allow the Town to accumulate adequate funds to undertake major mitigation projects. 
(6)  Wildlife food species and woody cover along fences should be encouraged as one (1) way of improving wildlife habitat. 
(7)  Waterholes, springs, seepage, marshes, ponds and other watering areas should be preserved to the maximum extent possible. 
(8)  Endangered species habitat shall be protected. 
(9)  All golden eagle, bald eagle or heron nest sites shall be protected by providing at least a two-hundred-meter buffer zone around the nest sites. 
(10)  Fences are discouraged. Any fences shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  No fence can be wider or have a base greater than twelve (12) inches; 
b.  For four-strand wire fences, the top wire shall be a 121/2-gauge type at a maximum height of forty-two (42) inches. The wire below the top wire, which may be barbed, should be a minimum of twelve (12) inches below the top wire. The next two (2) wires shall be six (6) inches apart so that there is at least an eighteen-inch distance between the bottom wire and the ground; 
c.  Rail fences must be constructed with at least eighteen (18) inches between the ground and the first rail above the ground (preferably twenty-four [24] inches). There shall be eighteen (18) inches between any additional rails. If the top of the rail fence is greater than forty-two (42) inches tall, then a pass through must be provided. All rails must be of the rounded type log or not provide for a flat surface where snow can build up; 
d.  In critical locations, the Town may require adjustable wire fences and sliding gates to mitigate impacts of fences in migration corridors; 
e.  Fences located on parcels assessed as "agricultural" by the Assessor's Office may be exempted from the fencing requirement; and 
f.  Small fenced animal enclosures and garden fences may be approved by the Technical Review Committee. 
(11)  Edges (zones of transition between two [2] different habitat types), including riparian/meadow, riparian/mountain shrub, riparian/pinon-juniper, meadow/pinon-juniper and meadow/mountain shrub, must be avoided by development and shall be maintained whenever possible. Many wildlife species utilize edges, which allow easy access to and benefits from both habitats (for example, food from one [1] and cover from another). 
(12)  Tall, overly mature trees and standing dead trees should be retained. Dead trees in wooded areas should also be retained. Disturbance or destruction of wildlife den sites shall be prohibited except in certain nuisance cases, like skunks, raccoons and coyotes under homes. 
(13)  Domestic pets that are permitted outdoors, including both cats and dogs, are generally discouraged in habitat areas and shall be either in animal enclosures or leashed when outdoors. 
(c)  Deer and elk migration patterns/ corridors and highway crossings. Land uses located in deer and elk migration corridors shall comply with Subsection (b) above. 
(d)  Deer, elk and bighorn sheep winter range. Land uses located in deer, elk or bighorn sheep winter range shall comply with Subsections (b), (e)(1),(2), (3) and (4) and the following standards: 
(1)  Prohibit high-impact recreational uses. 
(2)  Kennel dogs within or adjacent to winter range, except for dogs working as a part of an agricultural operation. 
(e)  Deer, elk and bighorn sheep winter concentration area/severe winter range/critical habitat. Development is prohibited within deer, elk and bighorn sheep winter concentration areas and severe winter range areas. In the event that there is no ESA-free area on a site, the Town Council may permit development which shall be reviewed according to Subsection (b) above and the following standards. 
(1)  Avoid overgrazing of ranges by livestock. 
(2)  Restrict development to areas that minimize wildlife impacts. 
(3)  Preserve access for the Division of Wildlife for managing wildlife. 
(4)  Prohibit commercial activity (such as seismic activity, construction and timber harvesting) and recreational uses from December 1 through March 31. 
(5)  Prohibit dogs within or adjacent to elk, mule deer and bighorn sheep severe winter ranges and winter concentration areas, except for dogs working as part of an agricultural operation. 
(f)  Deer and elk production areas. Development is prohibited within deer and elk production areas. In the event that there is no ESA-free area on a site, the Town Council may permit development which application shall be reviewed according to Subsection (a) above and the following standards: 
(1)  Prohibit development in production areas and prohibit other activities during the calving season of April through May which would disrupt reproduction. 
(2)  Prohibit dogs within one-quarter (1/4) mile of deer or elk production areas. Kennel dogs within one-half (1/2) mile of deer or elk production areas. 
(3)  Preserve access for the Colorado Division of Wildlife for trapping, tagging or studying wildlife. 
(Ord. 7 §C, 1999; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-468. - Exempt development activities. 
    The following activities may be approved by the TRC: 
(1)  Remodeling, expansion or reconstruction of existing structures provided that there is no construction or expansion of a structure that would create additional environmental impacts. 
(2)  Construction of less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in value, if the Technical Review Committee determines that any environmental impacts are adequately mitigated. 
(3)  Development which is exempt by virtue of a vested property right pursuant to a site specific development approval as defined and established by and pursuant to Section 24-68-103, C.R.S., and Section 17-125 of this Code, or which is otherwise exempt pursuant to an ordinance or resolution of the Town Council. 
(4)  Alternative fence construction in a wildlife habitat area on recommendation of a qualified wildlife biologist. 
(Ord. 7 §C, 1999; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Secs. 16-469-16-480. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXII - Community Priorities Scoring System 

Sec. 16-481. - Purposes and intent. 
(a)  Purposes of scoring system. The Community Priorities Scoring System is a tool that is intended to allow the Town to manage the development applications it receives. The scoring system provides a method by which the Town can objectively evaluate development applications to determine which projects most directly respond to the goals, objectives and recommendations that are set forth in the 2007 Basalt Master Plan. Specifically, the scoring system implements the following objectives from the 2007 Basalt Master Plan: 
(1)  Control growth. Establish measures to control growth and reduce the rate of growth to a rate less than the 4.8% annual rate of population growth the Town has recently experienced; 
(2)  Quality growth. Promote and support projects that provide quality growth, which are consistent with the goals, objectives and policies contained in the master plan, do not create a financial burden on the community and provide significant benefits to the community; 
(3)  Balance. Determine the appropriate balance between residential and commercial development and establish policies to achieve this balance; 
(4)  Community housing. Preserve existing resident housing and explore a wide range of strategies to produce community housing for local residents; 
(5)  Environmental sensitivity. Establish environmentally sensitive building and development standards; 
(6)  Historic landmarks. Encourage landmark designation of additional structures by property owners and consider developing additional policies for the preservation of historic structures and places; and 
(7)  Gathering places. Retain and enhance significant existing community gathering places. 
(b)  Overview of scoring system. The Community Priorities Scoring System establishes scoring standards that reflect adopted community priorities and a growth rate that limits the pace of development in the community. Certain types of projects must be ranked under the scoring standards, and certain projects are also subject to the growth rate limitations. Table 1 below provides an overview of how the Community Priorities Scoring System applies to different types of projects. 
(1)  Exempt from scoring. The types of projects that are exempt from the scoring system and do not need to receive an eligible score are classified with a "no" in the first column of Table 1 (refer to Section 16-483 of this Article for a description of these project types). 
(2)  Subject to scoring. The types of projects that are required to submit an application under the scoring system and must receive an eligible score are classified with a "yes" in the first column of Table 1 (refer to Section 16-482 of this Article for a description of these project types and to Paragraph 16-484(4) for an explanation of the meaning of the term "eligible score"). 
(3)  Require a growth allotment. The types of projects that are required to obtain a growth allotment are classified with a "yes" in the second column of Table 1 (refer to Paragraphs 16-484(6) and (7) for a description of the growth allotment process). 
____________ 
Table 1 
Overview of Scoring System Requirements [1] 
Type of project Is the project required to receive an eligible score? Is the project required to obtain an allotment? New free market residential units   3 units or less No No   4 units or more Yes Yes Net commercial sq. ft.   Less than 5,000 sq. ft. No No   5,000 sq. ft. or more Yes No Redevelopment of free market residential units or units in a mobile home park   Less than 5 units No No   5 units or more Yes No Community housing/mitigation units No No Public/nonprofit facilities No No Historic landmarks No No Lodge or hotel units No No Areas zoned CSC No No  
NOTE: 
1.  See Section 16-482 for details of when the procedures in this article take effect or a project is required to obtain dwelling unit allotments. 
(Ord. 06 §B, 2009; Ord. 10 §B.4(Exh. C.1), 2012; Ord. 30 §1(Exh. A), 2014) 
____________ 
Sec. 16-482. - Applicability of scoring system. 
(a)  Due to a low growth rate experienced by the Town after the initial adoption of the community priorities scoring system, the scoring system will not apply to any land use applications until the Town Council holds a growth management notice public hearing and votes to approve a resolution reinitiating the full CPSS process. A growth management notice may be initiated in one (1) of two (2) ways: the Town Council may vote at any time to hold a growth management notice public hearing; or alternatively, the Town Planner may schedule a growth management public notice after at least one (1) of the following has occurred: 
(1)  Three (3) consecutive years in which the annual growth rate exceeds an average of 4.8 percent based on building permit activity; or 
(2)  More than one hundred fifty (150) units receive building permits in any one (1) year; or 
(3)  The Town approves more than two hundred fifty (250) dwelling units after approval of the ordinance. 
    The growth management public hearing notice will be published at least fifteen (15) days before the meeting. A land use application which is not complete upon the date the growth management public hearing notice is presented to the Town Council will be subject to the scoring system unless the Town Council fails to officially reactivate the scoring system by resolution within three (3) months of the growth management public hearing notice. The Town Council must adopt a resolution in order to reactivate the scoring system and establish the dates for review of the scoring system which can occur any time after the Planning Director's presentation of the growth management notice. The reactivation resolution will establish the submission and processing dates for the first round of land use applications subject to the scoring system which may differ from those established in Section 484, Scoring System review procedures. 
    Until the scoring system is reactivated by the Council, the Town Planner will score applications that otherwise would be subject to the scoring system during the standard development review process for evaluation by the Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council. The Planning and Zoning Commission and the Town Council will review this information to: 
(1)  Evaluate whether absent the scoring system, the Town is getting projects that support the goals, objectives and recommendations set forth in the then-current master plan; 
(2)  Determine what changes, if any, would be appropriate to the scoring system. 
(3)  Assist in evaluating whether the project is consistent with the then-current master plan since the scoring system was developed as an objective method of determining which projects most directly respond to the goals, objectives and recommendations of the master plan. 
    Applicants are therefore encouraged to develop projects that satisfy the scoring system standards established in this article and to provide information that assists the Town in its evaluation of any future changes. Applicants are required to provide responses to the scoring system review standards as described in Section 16-485 as part of their application for development. 
(b)  Once reactivated as described in subsection (a) above, the community priorities scoring system applies to the following types of development applications on lands within the incorporated limits of the Town or that are proposed to be annexed to the Town. The development applications that qualify for an exemption from the scoring system are listed in Section 16-483 of this Article. 
(1)  New residential lots and units. Any land use application that proposes to create four (4) or more new free market residential units or residential lots, including the residential component of a mixed-use development, is subject to the community priorities scoring system except for areas zoned CSC. 
(2)  Net commercial square footage. Any land use application that proposes to create five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of new or additional net commercial square footage, including the commercial component of a mixed-use development, is subject to the community priorities scoring system except for areas zoned CSC. Commercial development includes, but is not limited to, retail, office, industrial and other types of businesses, but excludes hotel, lodge and similar visitor accommodation units. 
(3)  Redevelopment of residential units. Any land use application that proposes to demolish and replace a multi-family residential building, a combination of multi-family residential buildings or a mobile home park containing a total of five (5) or more residential units is subject to the community priorities scoring system except for areas zoned CSC. 
a.  Demolition. For purposes of this Article, a unit shall be considered to be demolished if the building in which it is located is torn down and the unit is replaced in a substantially different configuration, or if the shell of the building is not torn down, but the interior units are demolished and replaced in a substantially different configuration. 
b.  Remodeling. Remodeling projects or demolition and replacement projects that involve only minor changes to the configuration of the existing units, as determined by the Town Planner, shall be exempt from the community priorities scoring system. Remodeling or replacement of existing commercial space shall also be exempt from the community priorities scoring system. 
(Ord. 06 §B, 2009; Ord. 10 §B.4(Exh. C.2), 2012; Ord. 30 §1(Exh. A), 2014) 
Sec. 16-483. - Exemptions from scoring system. 
    The following types of development applications, individually or in combination, shall be exempt from the community priorities scoring system. 
(1)  Previously approved projects and projects in the land use pipeline. 
a.  Basis for exemption. Any project that: (1) has received all of its necessary land use approvals prior to June 10, 2009 (the effective date of this Article); or (2) is on the list of "Exempt Pipeline Projects" that is attached as Exhibit B to Ordinance 06 of 2009, is exempt from the community priorities scoring system. If the project fails to meet any applicable deadline for submission of subsequent land use or building permit applications (as applicable) and its approval expires, or if the project is denied or is withdrawn, then any subsequent land use application for the project shall be subject to the community priorities scoring system unless the project is eligible for another exemption listed in this Section. 
b.  Amendments to previously approved projects. Amendments to projects that have received all of their land use approvals prior to June 10, 2009, shall be subject to the following provisions: 
1.  A minor amendment to a previously approved project shall be exempt from the community priorities scoring system. 
2.  A substantial amendment to a previously approved project shall be subject to the community priorities scoring system. 
3.  The determination of whether an amendment is minor or substantial shall be made by the Town Planner. In determining whether a project is minor or major the Town Planner may utilize the meaning of substantial and insubstantial as found in Section 16-65(d)(6). 
4.  All other amendments to a previously approved project shall be considered to be substantial and shall require the applicant to comply with the applicable provisions of the community priorities scoring system. Any amendment that would cause a substantial change in the use or character of any portion of the project, would increase the size of the project by more than the thresholds established in Paragraph (6) of this Section or would substantially alter the project's open space, transportation or community housing commitments shall be considered to be substantial. 
c.  Amendments to Exhibit B applications. Amendments to applications that are listed in Exhibit B of Ordinance 06 of 2009, shall be subject to the following provisions: 
1.  Such applications may be amended to the extent authorized by the applicable Code provisions at the time of the amendment. 
2.  If any application listed in Exhibit B is withdrawn or denied, then any new application for those properties shall be subject to the community priorities scoring system. 
3.  If the application fails to comply with any subsequent submittal deadline, the Town Council may require the application to be subject to the then current community housing regulations. 
(2)  Community housing. An application proposing the development of a project comprised of one hundred percent (100%) community housing units (as defined in Article XIX of this Chapter) is exempt from the community priorities scoring system. 
(3)  Mitigation units. An application or portion of an application proposing the development of community housing units (as defined in Article XIX) that are required to mitigate the impacts of a development project is exempt from the community priorities scoring system, whether the units are on the same site as the development project or are off-site. This exemption does not qualify the free market residential units or the commercial space that generates the demand for the mitigation units to be exempt from the scoring system. 
(4)  Public or nonprofit facilities. An application proposing the development of public or nonprofit facilities is exempt from the community priorities scoring system. For purposes of this Article, public or nonprofit facilities include the uses listed in Paragraph 16-28(3) of this Chapter. 
(5)  Historic landmarks. An application proposing development on a property or to a structure that is designated or is proposed to be designated as a historic landmark by the Town is exempt from the community priorities scoring system. If the proposed designation is subsequently withdrawn or is denied, this exemption shall no longer apply to the application and it shall be subject to the community priorities scoring system. 
(6)  Minor residential and commercial projects. An application proposing the development of no more than three (3) new residential units or lots, or less than five thousand (5,000) square feet of new or additional net commercial square footage, is exempt from the community priorities scoring system. This exemption may be used by any property (as it was configured at the time of adoption of Ordinance 6, Series of 2009) cumulatively up to no more than the three (3) units and five-thousand-square-feet thresholds. 
(7)  Lodge or hotel units. An application proposing the development or redevelopment of lodge or hotel units is exempt from the community priorities scoring system. If the lodge or hotel units are part of a mixed-use project in which the other uses would be subject to the scoring system, then only the lodge or hotel portion of the project shall be exempt. (Ord. 06 §B, 2009) 
(8)  An application within an area zoned CSC is exempt from the community priorities scoring system. 
(Ord. 06 §B, 2009; Ord. 10 §B.4(Exh. C.3), 2012; Ord. 30 §1(Exh. A), 2014) 
Sec. 16-484. - Scoring system review procedures. 
(a)  The community priorities scoring system is intended to allow the Town to manage the development applications it receives by comparing the applications to one another to determine which most directly respond to the Town's adopted growth priorities and contribute to the implementation of the master plan. Applications are accepted and reviewed twice per year, and allotments are awarded to successful applicants twice per year. 
(b)  To assist applicants and members of the public in understanding how the scoring system functions, the Town has prepared a flow chart (see Figure 1 below) that illustrates the steps in the scoring system. Following is an explanation of each of these steps. 
Figure 1 
Scoring System Review Process 

(1)  Preapplication conference. Before an applicant submits an application under the scoring system, the applicant shall hold a preapplication conference with the Town Planner. The purpose of the preapplication conference is for the applicant and the staff to review the proposed project so the applicant may become informed of how the review procedures and review standards of the scoring system will be applied to the proposal. The Town Planner may issue an informal written summary of the preapplication conference if requested to do so by the applicant, but shall only share the results of the conference with the applicant and not with other potential applicants, so as to maintain a fair competition process. 
(2)  Prepare and submit application. 
a.  Submission deadlines. Applications for a project to be scored shall be accepted on or before March 1 (hereinafter, the "first session") and September 1 (hereinafter, the "second session") of each year. When the submission date falls on a weekend or official holiday, the applications shall be due on the first business day after the weekend or holiday. 
b.  Initial land use application. An application for project scoring shall be the initial land use application submitted for a property. This shall mean that an application for project scoring shall be submitted prior to the submission of a sketch plan application, a special review application or other land use application. For properties that are located outside of the Town limits, the application for project scoring may be submitted subsequent to submission of an annexation petition. Obtaining an eligible score and allotments (if necessary) is a prerequisite to consideration by the Town of any other application required by the Code and does not create a vested right to any such approval. 
c.  Number of applications. No more than one (1) application for project scoring may be submitted at a time for any property. 
d.  Submission contents. The application shall include the following items: 
1.  The Town's development application form. 
2.  If the applicant has a representative, a letter shall be submitted, signed by the applicant, providing authorization for the representative to submit the application and to appear on behalf of the applicant. 
3.  If the applicant is not the owner of the property, a letter shall be submitted, signed by the property owner, providing authorization for the applicant to submit the application. 
4.  A vicinity map, drawn to scale, showing the location and boundaries of the property in relation to the Town limits, the Town street system and significant natural features. 
5.  A brief written description of the existing conditions on the property and adjacent lands. A survey or other map drawn to scale shall be provided depicting the existing conditions. 
6.  A brief written summary of the proposed development, with accompanying maps and other graphics that depict the proposed development. The maps shall show all proposed buildings, streets, open spaces and other significant features and shall reflect the development proposed for the entire property. 
7.  Responses to the scoring system review standards, as described in Section 16-485 of this Article. 
8.  The processing fee for the application, as determined by the Town Planner, pursuant to a schedule of fees approved by the Town pursuant to Section 2-381, et seq., of this Code. 
e.  Commitments are binding. Commitments made by the applicant to obtain an allotment or an exemption from the scoring system are binding upon the applicant. The subsequent land use application(s) submitted by the applicant shall demonstrate precisely how commitments made to obtain a score or an exemption will be implemented. 
1.  Failure of an applicant to implement and demonstrate compliance with any such commitments shall require a determination to be made of whether that failure constitutes a major amendment to the application, pursuant to Subparagraph (8)a. of this Subsection, and would require reconsideration of the application pursuant to the scoring system. However, a commitment made by an applicant that is eliminated from the project because of a direction to do so by the Town's review bodies shall not be considered to be a major amendment to the application. 
2.  If a project loses its allotments as a result of a failure to implement and demonstrate compliance with a commitment, the Town Planner may determine that the project has also lost its standing in the land use application process and must restart the process with a new initial application. The Town Planner shall consider the applicable provisions of this Chapter with respect to minor and substantial amendments to an application in making this determination. 
(3)  Staff review and recommendation. 
a.  Staff review for completeness. Within fifteen (15) days of the semi-annual submission deadline, the staff shall review the applications and determine whether each application is complete. If the staff determines that an application is incomplete, it shall be returned to the applicant and shall not be eligible for resubmission until the subsequent submission deadline. 
b.  Technical Review Committee. The staff will refer the application to members of the Technical Review Committee. Staff will assemble the comments of the Technical Review Committee, review and evaluate each application pursuant to the scoring standards in Section 16-485 of this Article and compile a recommended score for each application. 
(4)  Planning and Zoning Commission scoring of applications. 
a.  Planning and Zoning Commission consideration. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the recommended scoring of each complete application. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make a good-faith effort to act on the application within sixty (60) days after the deadline for submission of applications. 
b.  Scoring procedures. Each member of the Planning and Zoning Commission in attendance at the meeting shall assign scores to each application, considering the staff recommendations, information submitted by the applicant and comments by the public. Applications shall not be scored in comparison to one another, but rather shall be scored based on the degree to which each application complies with the scoring standards in Section 16-485 below. Scores awarded shall take into account the plans for the entire property. Scores shall be awarded in whole numbers only. 
c.  Proportionality. When scoring an application, the Planning and Zoning Commission should consider whether the commitments being made by the applicant are proportional to the size of the allotment being requested. In other words, an applicant seeking a large number of allotments would be expected to make a proportionally greater commitment to obtain a score in any category as compared to an applicant seeking a lesser number of allotments. 
d.  Ranking of Projects. At the conclusion of the scoring the staff shall tally the scores awarded by each Commission member, divide the total of all scores awarded to each project by the number of members scoring and announce the average score for each application. Once the average scores have been announced, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall rank the projects in the order of the score awarded. 
1.  If there is a tie score among two (2) or more projects, then the tie shall be broken by giving the higher rank to the project that scored the greater number of points in the community housing scoring categories. If there is still a tie, then it shall be broken by giving the higher rank to the project that scored the greater number of points in the community facilities scoring categories and then, if the tie is still not broken, to the project that scored the greater total number of points in the environmental quality scoring categories. 
2.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall also identify which projects have received an eligible score and which have received a score that is below the eligible threshold. Residential projects must be awarded a minimum score of twenty (20) points to meet the eligibility threshold. Commercial projects must be awarded a minimum score of fifteen (15) points to meet the eligibility threshold. 
3.  Once the ranking is established, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward the scores to the Town Council. 
(5)  Town Council final ranking of projects. The Town Council shall consider the scores awarded by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Town Council shall make a good-faith effort to consider the scores at a meeting held no more than thirty (30) days after the scores were forwarded. The Town Council shall accept the scores as recommended unless an applicant has submitted an appeal of the scoring or the Town Council calls up one (1) or more of the scores. 
a.  Appeal. An applicant who is aggrieved by a score awarded to his or her project may submit an appeal of the score. The appeal shall be submitted in writing to the Town Planner within ten (10) days after the scores have been forwarded. 
1.  The appeal shall be decided by the Town Council based solely upon the record established at the Planning and Zoning Commission hearing. An appeal shall not be granted unless there is a finding that there was a denial of due process or the Planning and Zoning Commission exceeded its jurisdiction or abused its discretion. 
2.  If the appeal is granted, then the Town Council may modify the scores awarded to the successful appellant or may send the project back to the Planning and Zoning Commission for rescoring. If the project is sent back, it shall be rescored by the Planning and Zoning Commission within thirty (30) days, and the score shall be forwarded to the Town Council. 
b.  Call-up. The Town Council may call up one (1) or more of the scores forwarded by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
1.  The decision to call up one (1) or more of the scores shall occur at the meeting at which the Town Council considers the scores awarded by the Planning and Zoning Commission. A majority vote of the Town Council shall be required for a score to be called up. The call-up procedure is not intended to be a way for an applicant or other interested person to petition the Town Council to reconsider the scores awarded to a project. Instead, a call-up should occur when a majority of the Town Council determines that it wishes to review one (1) or more of the scores awarded by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
2.  If the Town Council decides to call up a score, it shall consider the record that was established at the Planning and Zoning Commission hearing. 
3.  At the conclusion of its consideration, the Town Council may modify the score awarded to the project, send the project back to the Planning and Zoning Commission for rescoring or confirm the recommended score. If the project is sent back, it shall be rescored by the Planning and Zoning Commission within thirty (30) days, and the score shall be forwarded to the Town Council. 
c.  Final ranking. Following the conclusion of any appeals or call-up actions, the Town Council shall confirm the final project ranking and shall identify which projects have received eligible scores and which have received scores that are not eligible for an allotment. 
(6)  Growth rate determination. Once the final ranking of projects has been confirmed, the Town Council shall make a determination of whether there are sufficient allotments available for the projects that have received an eligible score. 
a.  Residential allotments. An annual allotment of thirty-two (32) new free market residential units is hereby established. The annual allotment equates to a simple growth rate of approximately two percent (2%), based on an existing housing inventory of almost one thousand six hundred (1,600) dwelling units in the Town, as documented in the 2009 Housing Needs Assessment, which is less than the 4.8% annual rate of growth the Town had experienced prior to the adoption of the 2007 Master Plan. The two percent allotment rate has been adopted in recognition of the fact that the new community housing units, new units built in previously approved developments and pipe-line projects are not subject to the annual allotment limit but will contribute to the Town's annual rate of population growth, so they must be accounted for in setting the number of new allotments that will be available on an annual basis. 
b.  Allotments for other types of development. An annual allotment limit has not been established for new commercial space or for redevelopment of multi-family residential units or units in mobile home parks. Projects of those types are not subject to a growth rate determination and need only be awarded an eligible score to be authorized to proceed through their subsequent land use reviews. 
c.  Reserve. When awarding residential allotments to eligible applicants, the Town Council shall not award more than seventy-five percent (75%) of the total annual allotments to applications submitted during the first session. Twenty-five percent (25%) of the annual allotments (plus any allotments that remain unused from the first session) shall be reserved for award for applications submitted during the second session. 
d.  Allotments awarded in order of rank. The highest ranked eligible project shall receive the allotments it requested, unless it exceeds the total number of allotments available, in which case, it shall receive the number of allotments that are available. If allotments remain after the first project has received its request, then allotments shall be awarded to the second highest ranked eligible project and so on, until all allotments have been awarded or there are no eligible projects remaining to which allotments might be awarded. 
(7)  Town Council award of allotments. 
a.  Award by ordinance. Allotments shall be awarded to eligible projects via an ordinance that lists the projects that have and the projects that have not received an allotment. 
1.  Receipt of an allotment is a determination that an application may proceed through its subsequent land use reviews and is not a determination of the outcome of those review procedures. 
2.  Projects that do not receive allotments must apply during a subsequent scoring session before they may proceed through their land use reviews, unless the applicant receives an excess allotment or is granted a special exemption from the scoring system pursuant to Subparagraphs (8)b. and c. below, respectively. 
b.  Carryover of unused allotments. If there are any unused allotments at the end of the first session, they shall be automatically carried over to the second session. If there are any unused allotments after the second session, the Town Council may carry them over to the next year's session or may eliminate them. The decision to carry over or to eliminate the unused allotments shall be documented in a Town Council resolution or in the ordinance that awards the allotments. 
(8)  Additional scoring system procedures. 
a.  Amendments to a project awarded an allotment. A minor amendment to a project awarded a scoring system allotment may be authorized by the Town Planner and shall not require reconsideration of the application pursuant to the scoring system. 
1.  A minor amendment may include, but not be limited to, technical or engineering considerations discovered subsequent to the award that could not reasonably be anticipated during the scoring process or any other minor change to a project that the Town Planner finds would not substantially modify the commitments made during the scoring process. 
2.  All other amendments to a project awarded a scoring system allotment shall be considered to be substantial and shall require the applicant to reapply in a subsequent session. Any amendment that requires the project to obtain additional allotments or that would alter the rank order established for the project or cause the project to fall below the eligible score threshold shall be considered to be substantial. 
b.  Requests for excess allotments. Any applicant whose project has been unsuccessful in obtaining allotments for a project because the number of allotments the applicant is requesting exceeds the annual allotment that is available may petition the Town Council for an increase in that year's growth allotment. The petition shall be submitted within thirty (30) days after the Town Council has awarded the available allotments. 
    In making a decision as to whether to increase the number of allotments available in that year, the Town Council shall consider the extent to which the project or projects requesting excess allotments would help to achieve valued community growth priorities as specified in the Town's adopted master plan and in this scoring system. The Town Council may request that the Town Planner provide a report documenting the residential growth rate over the past three (3) years and the number of approved but unbuilt dwelling units in the Town's inventory to help in determining the appropriateness of the excess allotments. The decision as to whether to issue any excess allotments shall be in the sole discretion of the Town Council. The Town Council shall require any excess allotments that are awarded to be deducted from future years' allotments by deducting all of the excess from the next year's allotments or by apportioning the deduction over a period of two (2) or more years. 
c.  Appeals by repeatedly unsuccessful applicants. Any applicant for a project located within the Town limits who has been unsuccessful in obtaining an allotment for the same property during three (3) consecutive scoring sessions due to the failure of the project to receive an eligible score or due to the lack of availability of allotments may petition the Town Council for a special exemption from the scoring system. The Town Council shall consider the petition. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to demonstrate to the Town Council why the special exemption should be granted. The decision as to whether to grant the special exemption shall be in the sole discretion of the Town Council. 
d.  Expiration of allotments. 
1.  An applicant shall be required to submit a land use application necessary for the project's development within one (1) year from the date of the award of an allotment or the allotment shall automatically expire. The Town may exempt a project from this requirement if it determines that multi-year allotments are necessary before a land use application can be submitted. 
a)  An applicant may request an extension of the land use application submission deadline. 
b)  A six-month extension of the deadline may be granted one (1) time by the Town Planner for reasonable causes shown by the applicant. 
2.  If a land use application that received an allotment is withdrawn or denied at any point during its land use review process, then the allotment shall expire. 
3.  Expired allotments may be added to the available allotments for the subsequent scoring session at the discretion of the Town Council, pursuant to Subparagraph (7)b. of this Subsection. 
(Ord. 06 §B, 2009) 
Sec. 16-485. - Scoring system review standards. 
(a)  Scoring categories. There are hereby established eleven (11) scoring system scoring categories, plus a bonus scoring category that is applicable only to projects that meet the eligible score threshold. The categories represent a "menu" from which an applicant can choose the types of commitments he or she is prepared to make. Applicants are not required to provide responses in each of these categories, as certain categories may only apply to certain types of development. However, it shall be the applicant's responsibility to submit responses in a sufficient number of categories to provide an opportunity for the applicant to receive an eligible score, as specified in Subparagraph 16-484(4)d.2. of this Article. The scoring categories, available points and eligible score thresholds for residential and for commercial projects are summarized in Table 2 below. 
Table 2 
Scoring Categories 
Scoring Categories Points Available Community Housing Scoring Categories    1. Exceed housing requirements 10 points    2. Smaller house size/maximum density 9 points   3. Voluntary resident occupancy 3 points Community Facilities Scoring Categories    1. Open space/parks/trails/recreation facilities 5 points    2. Arts and cultural facilities and public gathering places 5 points   3. Transportation system enhancements 5 points   4. Day care and other public facilities 3 points Environmental Quality Scoring Categories    1. LEED certification 8 points    2. River Master Plan implementation 5 points Land Use Scoring Categories    1. Proximity to transit 1 point    2. Substantial net fiscal benefit Reserved Total number of points available 54 points Eligible Score Threshold   Residential projects 20 points   Commercial projects 15 points Bonus Scoring Category   Infill development (only for projects that meet eligible score threshold) 5 points  
(b)  Standards for scoring applications. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider each application with respect to the following standards and shall assign points according to the schedules described below. 
(1)  Community housing scoring categories. 
a.  Exceed housing requirements. The Town encourages the development of projects that exceed the Town's minimum housing mitigation standards or exceed the Town's minimum standards for the quality of community housing units. Points shall be awarded to applicants who propose to exceed the Town's adopted standards as follows: 
1.  Points awarded: 
a)  Points shall be awarded to a project based on the extent to which the project exceeds the Town's adopted minimum residential inclusionary requirements or minimum commercial linkage requirements, as applicable, to a maximum of seven (7) points. 
b)  For residential projects, the applicant shall identify which of the adopted inclusionary options is being satisfied. One (1) point shall be awarded for each one percent (1%) by which the applicant proposes to exceed the total net square footage requirement for community housing for the residential development. One (1) point shall also be awarded for each three percent (3%) by which the applicant proposes to exceed the total net square footage requirement for resident-occupied housing for the residential development. For example, a residential project for which the applicant proposes to satisfy option #1 and in which forty percent (40%) of the total net square footage of the development is community housing (five percent [5%] more than the Code requirement) would receive five (5) points. A residential project for which the applicant proposes to satisfy Option #2 and in which thirty-five percent (35%) of the total net square footage of the development is community housing (five percent [5%] more than the Code requirement = five [5] points) and sixteen percent (16%) of the development is resident-occupied housing (six percent [6%] more than the Code requirement = two [2] points) would receive seven (7) points. 
c)  For commercial projects, one (1) point shall be awarded for each one percent (1%) by which the applicant proposes to exceed the minimum linkage requirement for providing community housing for the percent of employees generated by the project. For example, a commercial project that proposes to provide housing for thirty percent (30%) of the employees that it generates would receive five (5) points. 
2.  Up to three (3) points may be awarded to a project based on a determination that the proposed housing mitigation plan is of exceptional quality. Proposals that would be considered to be exceptional include, but are not limited to, proposals to develop units that are bigger than or contain better features than those required by the Town's Community Housing Guidelines, units that are restricted to lower cost categories than the Town would otherwise require and similar types of creative or highly valued housing proposals. 
b.  Smaller house size/maximum density. The Town encourages the development of small-scale, high-density starter housing that is affordable. Points shall be awarded to applicants who propose to place voluntary limits on the size of the free market single-family and two-family dwellings within their project or who propose to develop such dwellings in a relatively dense project. Points shall be assigned to applicants as follows: 
1.  Two (2) points shall be awarded for each free market dwelling unit in the project that is restricted to a total house size of no more than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, and one (1) point shall be awarded for each free market dwelling unit in the project that is restricted to a total house size of more than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, but no more than three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet, to a maximum of seven (7) points. 
2.  One (1) point shall be awarded if the free market residential portion of the project attains a gross density of at least eight (8), but less than ten (10), units per acre and generally follows the principles of the "Residential Affordable Overlay" typology in the 2007 Master Plan; or 
3.  Two (2) points shall be awarded if the free market residential portion of the project attains a gross density of more than ten (10) units per acre and generally follows the principles of the "Residential Affordable Overlay" typology in the 2007 Master Plan. 
c.  Voluntary resident occupancy. 
1.  The Town promotes the creation of a diversity of housing choices for residents who have various levels of economic and housing needs. One such housing opportunity would limit the occupancy of some of the free market residences within a project solely to persons who occupy the dwelling unit as their primary residence. The occupants shall be deemed to have qualified if at least one (1) person occupied the unit as his or her primary residence by residing in the unit a minimum of nine (9) months out of any twelve-month calendar period. 
2.  One (1) point shall be awarded for each free market unit in a project that is voluntarily limited to permanent resident occupancy, to a maximum of three (3) points. Resident-occupied units may be rental or sale units and may be new or existing units, but in all cases shall be limited by a deed restriction approved by the Town Attorney. Points shall not be awarded to any unit that is otherwise limited to permanent resident occupancy or required to be a deed-restricted community housing unit. 
(2)  Community facilities scoring categories. 
a.  Open space/parks/trails/recreation facilities. 
1.  The 2007 Master Plan identifies goals, objectives and recommended actions to improve the Town's parks and recreation facilities and to preserve desired open spaces. Applicants may be awarded points if their project accomplishes one (1) or more of the following: 
a)  Build, help the Town to obtain or dedicate desired trail or sidewalk segments that link neighborhoods to schools, parks, transit systems, commercial areas and public lands or that enhance connectivity within neighborhoods or commercial areas. Trail alignments that are separated from streets, minimize impacts on sensitive natural areas and serve both commuting and recreational uses are generally preferred. 
b)  Help the Town to obtain or dedicate desired open space lands that can be used for active or passive recreation or that should be protected because of their natural resource, scenic or other values. 
c)  Make, or help the Town to make, desired recreation improvements to existing parks or undeveloped park lands. 
2.  Points shall be awarded based on the extent to which the applicant's proposal would advance the community towards achievement of one (1) or more parks and open space goals, objectives or recommendations listed in the 2007 Master Plan. To receive points in this category, the applicant's proposals must exceed the minimum open space requirements of Subsection 16-73(c) of this Chapter and Section 17-15 of this Code. In the case of a project requesting annexation, the applicant's proposals must be more than two (2) times the minimum park land dedication and improvement requirements of Subsection 16-73(c) and Section 17-15. 
3.  Up to five (5) points may be awarded to a project based on the extent to which the project will help to achieve one (1) or more parks and open space goals, objectives or recommendations. In awarding points, consideration shall be given to the extent to which the applicant's proposal will help the Town to actually complete the parks or open space goal, objective or recommendation, whether the applicant proposes to help to achieve a single or multiple goals, objectives or recommendations and whether it is a high priority or a lesser priority goal, objective or recommendation for the community to accomplish. 
b.  Arts and cultural facilities and public gathering places. 
1.  The 2007 Master Plan provides a definition of what "small town character" means in the Town and identifies directions in which the Town could evolve that would enhance this desired character. The Plan points out that one (1) small town characteristic is that the Town has events and places that contribute to its sense of community by allowing residents to randomly meet and to connect to each other and to the Town. While features such as this cannot be achieved within every development, there may be some developments that offer the opportunity to create or enhance a formal or informal public gathering place or that can facilitate the establishment of public or private places where arts or cultural activities can occur. 
2.  Applicants may be awarded up to five (5) points if their project proposes to create or enhance a formal or informal public gathering place that contributes to the community or if their project proposes to facilitate the establishment of public or private places where arts or cultural activities can occur that contribute to the community. 
c.  Transportation system enhancements. 
1.  The 2007 Master Plan establishes a list of desired short-term improvements to the Town's circulation system. Applicants may be awarded up to five (5) points based on the extent to which their application would move the Town toward accomplishing one (1) or more of the listed improvements. 
2.  In awarding points, consideration shall be given to the extent to which the applicant's proposal will help the Town to complete the improvement, whether the applicant proposes to contribute toward a single improvement or toward multiple improvements and whether the improvement is a high priority or a lesser priority improvement for the community to accomplish. 
d.  Day care and other public facilities. 
1.  The Town encourages the development of a full range of services and opportunities associated with small town character. Services and facilities that could be provided by applicants include, but are not limited to, day care facilities, meeting spaces for local groups and similar rooms or buildings intended to serve community needs. 
2.  Up to three (3) points may be awarded to a project that provides such facilities, makes the facilities available to the general public and provides guarantees that the facilities will remain in operation and available to the general public for a minimum of three (3) years after the initial occupancy of the project. 
(3)  Environmental quality scoring categories. 
a.  LEED certification. 
1.  The Town wishes to encourage developments to reduce their consumption of natural resources, utilize renewable energy sources and employ efficient building techniques. Points shall be awarded to applicants who propose to develop a project that is designed pursuant to the most recent version of the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) standards of the U.S. Green Building Council. Points shall be awarded as follows: 
Bronze certification: 2 points. 
Silver certification: 4 points. 
Gold certification: 6 points. 
Platinum certification: 8 points. 
2.  For an applicant to obtain points in this category, the applicant must describe the elements of the project that will justify the proposed level of LEED certification. The project must receive LEED design review certification prior to completion of the land use review process and must receive LEED construction review certification before the project receives a certificate of occupancy. The applicant may be required to provide financial security to the Town to assure that the project will complete its construction at the certified level. 
b.  River Master Plan implementation. 
1.  The Roaring Fork River Stewardship Master Plan was adopted by the Town in 2002. This Plan lists the Town's goals and recommendations for managing the river corridor to reduce the hazards associated with it and make it more of a community amenity. Up to five (5) points may be awarded to a project based on the extent to which the project will help to accomplish one (1) or more of the Plan's recommendations. 
2.  In awarding points, consideration shall be given to the extent to which the applicant's proposal will help the Town to accomplish the recommendation, whether the applicant proposes to help to achieve a single recommendation or multiple recommendations and whether it is a high priority or a lesser priority recommendation for the community to accomplish. 
(4)  Land use scoring categories. 
a.  Proximity to transit. The Town encourages new development to be located within walking distance of existing bus stops. Applicants shall be awarded one (1) point if the edge of their property is located no more than one-quarter (1/4) mile from a designated bus stop. 
b.  Substantial net fiscal benefit. (Reserved) 
(5)  Bonus scoring category: Infill development. Any project that meets the eligible score threshold may receive bonus points that would count towards the project's final ranking prior to its growth rate determination (but not towards its eligibility determination). Bonus points shall be awarded to such projects based on the following schedule: 
a.  Projects located within the original Basalt Townsite shall receive five (5) points. 
b.  Projects located outside of the original Basalt Townsite but within the Town boundaries shall receive three (3) points. 
c.  Projects located outside of the Town boundaries shall receive zero (0) points. 
(Ord. 06 §B, 2009) 
Secs. 16-486-16-500. - Reserved. 
CHAPTER 17 - Subdivisions 
ARTICLE I - General Provisions 

Sec. 17-1. - Purpose. 
    This Chapter embodies minimum standards for design, improvements and ownership of land subdivision projects or modifications to ensure that each individual estate and/or building site meets certain minimum regulations, is capable of accommodating a particular use and/or structure devoted to the intended use of the land, is served by a street system providing safe and convenient access, and is provided with accessible utility installations and maintenance of an adequate rental housing supply, with all the foregoing intended to promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Town. 
(Prior code 57-1) 
Sec. 17-2. - Territorial jurisdiction. 
    The territorial jurisdiction of the Town's Subdivision Regulations shall include all land located within the boundaries of the Town as presently constituted or as altered by annexation and disconnection. Such jurisdiction shall extend to all land lying within three (3) miles outside such boundaries, but shall be limited therein to control with reference to the Town's major street plan. The procedure outlined in this Chapter may be instituted to subdivide land in an area proposed for annexation at any time after the passage of a resolution of intent to annex, after a resolution finding a petition for annexation to be in the form required by law or after an annexation election favoring annexation has been completed. No subdivision shall be approved prior to the date of the passage of an ordinance annexing the territory to be subdivided. 
(Prior code 57-2) 
Sec. 17-3. - Applicability. 
    This Chapter shall apply to all subdivisions of land and to all resubdivisions of approved, platted subdivisions resulting in a greater number of tracts or lots. This Chapter shall not apply to any subdivision of land which results from a conveyance or other transfer of land to the Town which is accepted by the Town. 
(Prior code 57-3; Ord. 2 §1, 1996) 
Sec. 17-4. - Word usage and definitions. 
(a)  Word usage. 
(1)  The word lot includes plot or parcel . 
(2)  The phrase used for shall be construed to include arranged for, designed for, intended for, maintained for and occupied for. 
(3)  Words used in the singular number include the plural and words in the plural include the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(4)  The word shall is always mandatory. The w rd may is permissive. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
    Alley means a public right-of-way within a block, upon which rear building lots generally abut. It is used generally for secondary access to the lot and for service and emergency purposes. 
    Condominium means a subdivision in which the interests created are separate fee simple estates in individual air space units of a multi-unit property, together with individual fee simple interests in common elements, as defined by state statute. 
    Drainage or erosion control structure means all facilities necessary to control the direction, depth, velocity and volume of water flow within a proposed subdivision and to mitigate the erosion and related water quality impacts resulting from development. Such facilities are considered to be public improvements, as defined by this Chapter. 
    Easement means a conveyance or reservation of the use of real property for a specialized purpose in the public interest, such as streets, alleys, pedestrianways, drainage, utilities and similar uses. 
    Floodplain means the area that can be anticipated to be inundated by the one-hundred-year-frequency storm. This area shall be divided into two (2) subareas: 
a.  High hazard area means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood, as defined in Section 16-351, without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot. This area shall not be developed with structures or encroachments but shall be reserved for open space unless a technical evaluation acceptable to the Town Engineer demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of base flood discharge. 
b.  Low hazard area means the portion of the one-hundred-year floodplain that is not in the high hazard area. Development in this area shall be governed by the requirements of Chapter 11 of this Code, so far as alleviation of flood-related risks are concerned, and this Chapter as regards to other development criteria. 
    Lot means the individual parcels or separate interests into which a tract of real property or the air space above a tract of real property is divided for the purposes of occupancy or transfer of ownership. 
    Planned unit development means an area of land controlled by one (1) or more landowners acting in concert, to be developed under a unified plan of development for any use or combination of uses, whether or not delineated in the Zoning Code, which plan need not necessarily correspond to the requirements of the Zoning Code relating to lot size, type of use, density, lot coverage, open space or other restrictions, except for those regulations in the Zoning Code specifically applicable to planned unit developments. 
    Public improvements means the physical improvements to property made by a developer or subdivider that are necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the community. Public improvements include but are not limited to roads, streets, water, sewer, gas, electrical lines, landscaping, drainage and erosion control structures and measures taken to protect water quality. 
    Street means a right-of-way reserved for public or private use, which provides vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties, including designation as street, road, highway, thoroughfare, avenue, boulevard, lane or alley . Streets shall be classified as follows: 
a.  Arterial means those streets with the primary purpose to facilitate traffic flow through the Town rather than circulation within the Town. Arterial streets are designed to accommodate higher volumes of traffic than local or collector streets. 
b.  Collector means those streets with moderate traffic volume, that provide access to residential and commercial areas and channel traffic from these areas to arterial streets. Collector streets may be further divided into major or minor collectors, with such designation dependent upon the traffic volume, degree of access control and proximity to residential areas. 
c.  Local means those streets with low traffic volumes that are intended to provide direct access to adjacent residential or commercial lots. 
    Subdivider means any person or entity participating as the owner or agent of the owner in the platting, planning, development, promotion, sale or lease of a subdivision. 
    Subdivision means any parcel of land which is to be used for condominiums, apartments or any other multiple-dwelling units, unless such land was previously subdivided into a subdivision of substantially the same density, or the division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, plats, sites or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or of building development. It includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or territory subdivided. The definition of subdivision does not include a division of land resulting from a conveyance or transfer of land to the Town which is accepted by the Town. 
a.  Minor subdivision means the division of land which meets at least one (1) of the following conditions: 
1.  The division of a parcel of land into three (3) lots or less. 
2.  The relocation or adjustment of a lot line that does not create new lots or create or increase any nonconformity of one (1) of the lots. 
3.  The correction of survey or plat errors, relocation of easements or similar technical matters. 
4.  The condominiumization of an existing building that does not involve the creation of new residential units. 
5.  The division of a parcel of land owned by the Town, under contract for purchase by the Town or partially owned by or under contract for purchase by the Town. However, this provision shall only be effective if the Technical Review Committee shall make a finding that the minor subdivision is primarily in furtherance of a public purpose. This provision is not intended to apply in the circumstance where the only Town-owned property is a right-of-way. The purpose of this provision is to facilitate subdivision of property owned by the Town and the purchase and sale of property by the Town, not circumvention of the subdivision process. 
b.  Major subdivision means any subdivision of land that does not fall within the definition of a minor, community serving subdivision, or development site subdivision. 
c.  Community serving subdivision means a subdivision of land into two (2) or more lots to further a public purpose meeting at least one (1) of the following conditions. 
1.  A division of a parcel of land owned by the Town, under contract for purchase by the Town or partially owned by or under contract for purchase by the Town as provided above under condition No. 5 of the definition of a minor subdivision. 
2.  The property or portion of the property is zoned CSC. 
3.  The property is owned by a Community Development Corporation for which a letter of determination of nonprofit status pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code has been issued by the Internal Revenue Service at the time the community serving subdivision is submitted for review and at the time the community serving subdivision is recorded. 
d.  Development site subdivision means the subsequent subdivision within a community serving subdivision that has been recorded in the public records. 
(Prior code 57-4; Ord. 2 §2, 1996; Ord. 6 §1, 1998; Ord. 12 §B1, 2005; Ord. 21 §B2, 2005; Ord. 10 §5(Exh. D), 2012) 
Sec. 17-5. - Powers and duties of Planning and Zoning Commission. 
    The Planning and Zoning Commission is responsible for making investigations and reports on the design and improvements of proposed subdivisions and requiring conformity of such subdivisions with the Master Plan of the Town, the state statutes and this Chapter, utilizing the assistance and cooperation of the elected and appointed officials of the Town, the County and the State, as well as the services of consultants when they are required. No plat of the subdivision of land shall be filed and recorded until the Planning and Zoning Commission has approved the preliminary plat and the Chairman of the Planning and Zoning Commission has signed the final plat. The final plat must be consistent with the preliminary plat approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. If there are major changes or discrepancies between the preliminary plat and the final plat, the final plat must be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission before the Planning and Zoning Commission Chairman is authorized to sign the final plat. 
(Prior code 57-5) 
Sec. 17-6. - Powers and duties of the Town Council. 
    The Town Council has final jurisdiction in the acceptance of lands and improvements proposed for dedication to the Town as a result of the subdivision process, and such approval shall be indicated by the signature of the Mayor on the final plat, which shall be attested by the Town Clerk and dated. 
(Prior code 57-6) 
Sec. 17-7. - Existing subdivision agreements and covenants. 
    Subdivisions filed and recorded on a final plat or subdivisions having been granted preliminary plat approval prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter shall not be regulated by this Chapter unless proposed for resubdivision in such a manner as to fall within the provisions of Section 17-3 above. 
(Prior code 57-7) 
Sec. 17-8. - Relationship of other legislation and agreements. 
    If this Chapter imposes greater or stricter restrictions than those imposed by existing provisions of law or ordinance, the provisions of this Chapter shall control. Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to impair private agreements or restrictive covenants running with the land, but if this Chapter imposes greater or stricter restrictions than such private agreements or restrictive covenants, the provisions of this Chapter shall control. Nothing in this Chapter shall require the Town to enforce private agreements or restrictive covenants running with the land, except for the power of the Town to enforce the provisions of planned unit development plats and plans, annexation agreements, subdivision agreements and zoning agreements to which the Town is a party. 
(Prior code 57-8) 
Sec. 17-9. - Compliance required; actions upon finding of fraud. 
(a)  No subdivision plat shall be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and accepted by the Town Council unless it conforms to the provisions of this Chapter and unless it conforms to the Master Plan adopted by the Town as then in effect. 
(b)  Upon hearing and such notice as the Town Council may deem appropriate, the Town Council may suspend or withdraw the approval of any subdivision upon a finding that the subdivider presented false information in obtaining the subdivision approval or a finding that the subdivider fraudulently induced the approval of the subdivision. If such falsification or fraud has occurred prior to final plat approval, the Town Council may revoke any prior approvals by the Town Council or by the Planning and Zoning Commission, upon hearing and such notice as the Town Council deems appropriate. 
(Prior code 57-9; Ord. 17 §3, 1999) 
Sec. 17-10. - Reserved. 
Sec. 17-11. - Planned unit development. 
(a)  To promote excellence of subdivision design and improvements, the Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend the approval of a subdivision that departs from the usual design of regular platted lots and blocks devoted to a single classification of land use, but the planned unit development shall conform to the requirements of Article IV, Chapter 16 of this Code. Variations as described in the definition of a planned unit development in Section 17-4 above may be followed separately or in combination. 
(b)  In the event that the land is to be subdivided and developed as a planned unit development, the subdivider shall submit, in addition to the required information and documents required in this Chapter, such additional information as may be required in Article IV, Chapter 16 of this Code. 
(c)  Simultaneous hearings may be held for the review and approval of a subdivision and planned unit development involving the same land. In such instances, the following may apply: 
(1)  The sketch plan requirements for the planned unit development may also serve as the sketch plan requirements for a subdivision or annexation. 
(2)  It is intended that the preliminary plat and preliminary development plan for a planned unit development be considered concurrently if the planned unit development is proposed for subdivision. The documents submitted for the planned unit development, preliminary development plan, may also serve as the preliminary plat application, provided that the information required for the preliminary plat is submitted. 
(3)  Each simultaneous hearing must be preceded by notice consistent with Sections 16-269 and 17-151. 
(4)  The subdivider must agree, in writing, to any delay and waive his or her right to hearings held strictly according to the timetables and provisions in this Chapter or Article IV, Chapter 16, so that such hearings can be combined and held simultaneously. 
(Prior code 57-11) 
Sec. 17-12. - Technical Review Committee. 
(a)  A Technical Review Committee shall be established by the Town Council to review and evaluate proposals for subdivisions and annexations, as well as for rezoning, special review and planned unit developments. The Technical Review Committee shall meet at a regular time each month to review submittals prior to those items being reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Technical Review Committee shall provide comments and recommendations to be included as a part of the Town Manager's report and recommendations on each item. 
(b)  The Technical Review Committee shall be comprised of representatives of various Town departments, utility companies and other governmental entities that may be impacted by the proposals. These representatives may include but are not limited to the Town Engineer, Town Manager, Town Planner, Building Inspector, Town Attorney, Police, Fire District, Basalt Sanitation District, State Highway Department, Holy Cross Electrical Association, U.S. West, Rocky Mountain Natural Gas, Division of Wildlife and the school district. In the event that a member of the Technical Review Committee is unable to attend a scheduled meeting, comments regarding the applications shall be given to the Town Manager or his or her designee. 
(Prior code 57-12; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 17-13. - Distribution of copies. 
    The Town Manager shall distribute appropriate sheets of preliminary plats to the following entities for their review and comments: 
(1)  All concerned Town departments. 
(2)  The school district. 
(3)  All utility companies serving the area. 
(4)  All special districts serving the area. 
(5)  The State Department of Public Health, when any new sewage treatment facilities are proposed. 
(6)  The planning office of each county in which the proposed subdivision or annexation is located. 
(7)  The State Division of Highways, when the proposed subdivision or annexation abuts any state highway. 
(Prior code 57-13; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 17-14. - Number of copies to be submitted. 
    The Town Manager shall establish guidelines indicating the number of copies to be filed for a sketch plan, preliminary plat and final plat or map. 
(Prior code 57-14; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 17-15. - Dedication of land for parks; payment of fees for park improvements. 
(a)  If the subdivision results in one (1) or more additional dwelling units or building sites, the Town shall require the subdivider to dedicate and improve and develop as a park a parcel of land, chosen by the Town, from the subdivision area, the size of which parcel shall be calculated based on the formula of one (1) acre for every one hundred twenty-five (125) potential residents. At the Town's option, the subdivider, in lieu of dedicating the land, shall pay a fee that is equivalent to the cost of acquiring and developing new land for parks or recreation areas in the vicinity of the developing area where the subdivision is located. This fee shall be based upon land values and cost of developing parkland within or adjacent to the subdivision in the Town. The Town shall establish said values and costs by resolution of the Town Council annually or establish formulas for said calculations including requirements for appraisals of land costs within the subdivision. Any land dedication shall be included on the final plat, and any payment of fee-in-lieu of land dedications shall be paid prior to recording the final plat. The developer's fee-in-lieu of dedication contribution shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  Requirement: one (1) acre per one hundred twenty-five (125) potential residents. 
(2)  Future population shall be based upon the following household occupancy table: 
Type of Unit Number of Persons per Unit Single-family 3.00 Duplex 3.00 Multiple-family 2.50 Mobile home 2.50 Accessory dwelling unit 1.00  
(b)  For any subdivision for which there is a requirement for dedication of land for park or recreational areas, the developer shall, in addition to dedicating a parcel of land (or paying a fee-in-lieu thereof), improve the parcel with municipal-type park improvements or pay a fee for amounts associated with improvements to parks and recreational areas. This fee shall be based upon the costs experienced by the Town to improve parks (on a per acre basis) and shall be established by resolution of the Town Council each year. 
(c)  Commercial development shall be exempt from this public land dedication requirement or fee-in-lieu payment because said development does not create the same impacts on the public park land requirements of the Town as residential development. 
(d)  The Town may establish specific standards for park improvements and related fee-in-lieu requirements based on the type of park. Such standards may be adopted by resolution annually and may include park improvements for neighborhood parks, community parks, urban parks, river parks and nature preserve park areas. Any such adopted standards shall be applicable in accordance with Subsections (a) and (b) above. 
(Prior code 57-15; Ord. 3 §B, 1999; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 17-16. - School district land dedication requirement. 
(a)  To help offset the financial impact of new residential development on school districts serving the Town, any subdivision or resubdivision of real property within the Town for residential purposes shall require the dedication of land, chosen by the Town after a referral to the school district (which may include a joint meeting between the Town Council and the School District Board of Directors for consideration of the district facilities plans for the Basalt attendance area), from the subdivision area for schools in accordance with the provisions of this Section. Selection of land shall be based on general compliance with the Master Plan and related land use considerations. In subdivisions or resubdivisions where the dedication of land from the subdivision for school purposes is unreasonable or impractical, at the Town's option, the subdivision may pay a fee equivalent to the cost of acquiring new land for schools instead of dedicating land. The amount of the developer's fee-in-lieu of land dedication shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  The land dedication requirement shall be one thousand seven hundred seventy-six (1,776) square feet of land per potential student. 
(2)  The number of students generated per type of dwelling unit shall be based on the following table: 
Students per Unit Single-family units 0.54 Multifamily unit 0.38 Accessory dwelling unit 0.00  
(3)  The fee-in-lieu of dedication payable shall be determined by multiplying the number of students generated by the development by one thousand seven hundred seventy-six (1,776) square feet of land per student to determine the number of square feet of land to be dedicated for the subdivision. The fee-in-lieu of dedication of land shall be the total land area required to be dedicated for the subdivision multiplied by the fair market value of land in the area of the subdivision. School land dedication requirements may be modified pursuant to the Town's affordable housing regulations to exempt affordable housing units from all or part of the land dedication requirements. 
(4)  The Town shall establish the value of lands in the area of the subdivision annually by resolution or establish formulas for said calculations including requirements for appraisals of land costs within the subdivision. Said value of lands shall be established on a per-acre basis and converted to a per-square foot basis for the purposes of the above calculations. 
(b)  Land dedicated shall be dedicated on the final subdivision plat, or, if a fee is paid in lieu of dedication of land, the fee shall be paid to the Finance Director prior to recording the final subdivision plat. Within thirty (30) days following receipt of each fee-in-lieu of land dedication for schools, the Finance Director shall pay the fee directly to the school district serving the Town. The school district shall use the fees so paid for the purchase of land for school district facilities within the Basalt attendance area. The procedures for payment of the fees may be jointly agreed to by the Town and the school district and may include an intergovernmental agreement or regular meetings to consider the appropriate lands to be purchased with the fees. 
(Prior code 57-16; Ord. 3 §B, 1999; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 17-17. - Development review and agenda scheduling. 
    Development review considerations and public hearings shall be subject to the following guidelines and restrictions: 
(1)  Development review items will be scheduled for consideration as agenda time is available. Nothing herein shall require the scheduling of additional or special meeting times, unless required subject to applicable state statutes. Agenda scheduling shall be subject to approval by the Planning and Zoning Chairman for the Planning and Zoning Commission and subject to approval by the Mayor for the Town Council. 
(2)  Continuations of development review, subject to provisions of applicable state statutes, shall be an option for the Town Council and Planning and Zoning Commission subject to reasonable findings including but not limited to: (a) need for additional time for public input; (b) requests for additional information from the applicant; (c) lack of available agenda time; (d) need for additional time for Councilor or Commissioner comments; (e) direction to staff for additional information, analysis or review; (f) incomplete, inconsistent or unclear application materials requiring clarification or additional refinement; (g) the need for additional referral comments or coordination of review with neighboring jurisdictions; (h) failure of the applicant to provide requested information. 
(Ord. 5 §2, 1997; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 17-18. - Action by ordinance. 
    Any act of the Town pursuant to this Chapter which places a burden on or limits the use of private property shall be by ordinance approved by the Town Council in accordance with the procedures described in the Town Charter. 
(Ord. 33 §B2(18), 2003) 
Secs. 17-19-17-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II - Design Standards and Requirements 

Sec. 17-31. - Standards to control; hiring of independent experts. 
(a)  All subdivisions shall be designed, developed and improved in accordance with the standards and requirements in this Chapter. 
(b)  To the extent that these design standards conflict with any other resolution or ordinance of the Town, these design standards shall control. 
(c)  If the Town does not have sufficient personnel or expertise in its staff members to analyze properly and review engineering data, land use designs or any other data required to be furnished by a subdivider by this Chapter, the Town Manager may select and hire independent experts to conduct such analysis and review for the Town, and the subdivider shall pay the reasonable costs and fees charged by such experts. 
(Prior code 57-20) 
Sec. 17-32. - Natural hazards. 
    New development shall not be permitted in areas where the environmental characteristics of the area may create hazardous conditions for new residents or for adjoining property owners or where there are valued natural resource lands that should be conserved. This shall require a proposed subdivision to demonstrate compliance with the following Town regulations, as applicable to the subject property: 
(1)  Section 16-187, Steep slope regulations; 
(2)  Chapter 16, Article XVII, Flood Damage Prevention; and 
(3)  Chapter 16, Article XXI, Rivers, Wetlands and Environmentally Sensitive Areas. 
(Prior code 57-21; Ord. 05 §G, 2012) 
Sec. 17-33. - Survey data; monumentation. 
(a)  The boundary survey, internal property lines and monumentation as depicted on the final plat shall meet all requirements established under state statute. Survey data shall be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission prior to approval of the final plat. Monuments shall be set to specifications of the Town Council with at least one (1) monument on the boundary established as a permanent benchmark prior to the recording of the final plat. All survey traverses shall close within an allowable error of no more than one (1) foot in five thousand (5,000) feet. 
(b)  No approval of a final plat shall be deemed an assurance, guaranty or representation by the Town that the survey data is accurate. 
(c)  The Town Council shall require a survey, prepared by a Colorado licensed land surveyor, showing the location of proposed improvements prior to the issuance of a building permit in an approved subdivision. 
(d)  All final subdivision plats shall bear the seal and signature of a Colorado licensed land surveyor attesting to the following: 
    I, ______________________, being a licensed land surveyor in the State of Colorado, duly swear that this map or plat, entitled ____________________________ ____________________________, has been prepared by me or under my supervision and that the survey is accurately represented on this map and the statements contained thereon are true, based upon my knowledge. 
      Name         Number   (Seal) 
(Prior code 57-22; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 17-34. - Lot and block design. 
(a)  Each lot shall be designed to provide an adequate accessible building site for a structure devoted to the intended use of the land. 
(b)  Each lot shall meet or exceed the minimum requirements of the applicable zone district regulations or planned unit development plan, whichever applies, and shall have a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet of linear footage on a dedicated public street if access to said lot is by a dedicated public street. For multiple-family townhouse planned unit developments, the Planning and Zoning Commission may waive the required twenty-five (25) feet of frontage on a public street. 
(c)  Blocks shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) feet unless a pedestrian walkway is provided through the block. The walkway shall consist of a twenty (20) foot easement near the middle of the block. 
(d)  In tracts containing more than one (1) block, the blocks shall be designated in numerical order. Lots shall be designated numerically, beginning with the number one (1), in each block. Large tracts of land that are not further subdivided into lots and blocks shall be designated alphabetically beginning with the letter "A." Out-lots shall also be numbered alphabetically. 
(e)  Double frontage or through lots may be permitted, provided that access control restrictions are provided on the plat. 
(Prior code 57-23) 
Sec. 17-35. - Street design. 
(a)  The street pattern shall be designed to afford safe and convenient access to all lots within the subdivision. 
(b)  Streets shall have a logical relationship to the topography and be designed to be parallel to the existing contours as much as possible. 
(c)  All streets shall intersect at right angles. 
(d)  Streets or alleys shall not be closer than one hundred fifty (150) feet to another street intersection. 
(e)  Proposed streets which are extensions of existing public rights-of-way shall be designed to effect a smooth transition from existing to proposed improvements and shall be named accordingly. 
(f)  Where developable but unplatted land is separated by a proposed subdivision from an existing public right-of-way, the street pattern of the proposed subdivision shall include streets extended to the boundary common to both tracts to prevent landlocking of the unplatted tract and to promote access for future development of adjacent unplatted land. 
(g)  Dead-end streets shall be provided with a cul-de-sac with a minimum radius of forty-five (45) feet. The maximum length of a dead-end street shall be five hundred (500) feet measured from the right-of-way line of the connecting street to the center of the turnaround area at the closed end of the cul-de-sac. 
(h)  The minimum street gradient shall be five-tenths percent (0.5%) and the maximum street gradient shall be seven percent (7%). Except where, in the Town's opinion, the terrain requires a greater gradient, streets shall not exceed a gradient of four percent (4%) within one hundred (100) feet of an intersection. Changes in street grades shall be accomplished by vertical curves of sufficient length to maintain safe sight distances. 
(i)  Street names. All street names shall be subject to the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission, subject to the approval of the Town Council, may adopt a uniform street-naming policy. 
(j)  All public and private streets, alleys, curbs and gutters shall be laid out and graded, a base course of gravel installed and an asphalt wearing course installed to the full width of the traveled way, all to the specifications of the Town's road regulations adopted May 11, 1977, or as subsequently amended. 
(k)  Minimum street widths and design characteristics shall be shown on the schedule in Section 17-36. 
(Prior code 57-24; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 17-36. - Street Design Schedule of Requirements. 
    The Street Design Schedule of Requirements is as follows: 
Local Street Collector Arterial Cul-de-sac Comments Minimum right-of-way 
(feet) 50 80 80-120 40-50 Note 1 Travel lanes 
Number 
Width (feet) 2 
11 2 
12 2 or 4 
12 On-street parking lanes 
Number 
Width (feet) 2 
9 2 
9 - 
- Curb & gutter 
Number 
Width (feet) 
2 
2.5 
2 
2.5 
4 
2.5 
See Road 
Specifications 2 Minimum pavement 
width-curb to curb 
(feet, with parking) 
Number 
Width (feet) 
  
26, 44 
2 
4 
  
36, 54 
2 
4 
4 lanes: 68 
2 lanes: 44 
2 
5 Sidewalk 
  
Number 
Width (feet) Attached curbwalk 
2 
4 Detached 
2 
5 Detached 
2 
5 Planting strip or 
utility area 
Number 
Width 2 
4 feet 
  
  
  
  
2 
6 feet between 
curb and sidewalk 
  
  
2 
11 feet between 
curb and sidewalk Minimum radius of 
curvature (feet)   
100   
375   
550 See Road Specifications 2 Minimum radius at 
intersection (feet)   
25   
35   
50 See Road 
Specifications 2 Maximum percent 
of grade   
7   
5   
5 See Road 
Specifications 2 Median or left-turn 
lane (feet)   
-   
-   
16 Radius of cul-de-sac 
minimum paved area 
right-of-way (feet)   
  
45-50   
  
55-60   
  
- Bicycle path May be designated on selected streets Selected streets 6 feet 0 inches minimum each direction Separated from high-way with planting strip 6 feet 0 inches minimum each direction located in utility or planting strip area Type of curb design Vertical or roll over Vertical Vertical See Road 
Specifications 2  
NOTES: 
  
1 Final determination of required cul-de-sac right-of-way width shall be established by the Town Council subject to the following criteria: cul-de-sacs that serve residential areas, that allow for on-street parking or have the potential for future extensions are required to maintain a 50-foot right-of-way width consistent with a local street. The Town Council may allow for reductions in the 50-foot right-of-way requirement to a minimum of 40 feet in cases where the cul-de-sacs do not have the characteristics noted above and subject to consideration of the following: 1) industrial, commercial or dense residential uses resulting in high-traffic volumes; 2) any street over 500 feet in length leading in to a cul-de-sac; 3) consistency with existing connecting rights-of-way; 4) necessity to accommodate existing or future utility easements and installations. 
  
2 Editor's Note: The Road Specifications are on file in the Town offices and can be found in Appendix B. 
(Prior code 57-25; Ord. 22 §1, 1991; Ord. 19 §1, 1994; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
____________ 
Sec. 17-37. - Alleys and easements. 
(a)  Alleys may be required in any subdivision. The minimum width of alleys shall be twenty (20) feet. 
(b)  Easements for utility purposes of a minimum of seven and one-half (71/2) feet may be required along any lot line and shall be depicted on the subdivision plat. If wider utility easements are required to serve the subdivision or to provide service to any other part of the Town, or both, easements in excess of seven and one-half (71/2) feet along lot lines may be required. Easements for drainage purposes shall be designed to accommodate expected runoff based on information submitted by or required to be submitted by the subdivider and on generally accepted engineering principles and specifications, and such drainage easements may be required anywhere within the subdivision or the lots therein. 
(Prior code 57-26) 
Sec. 17-38. - Street improvements. 
    All street improvements shall be in accordance with the design standards of this Article, the Town's road specifications and the provisions of Article V, Public Improvements Acceptance and Guaranties. 
(Prior code 57-27) 
Sec. 17-39. - Drainage easements, site grading and improvements. 
(a)  On slopes greater than ten percent (10%), slope stabilization and revegetation will be required. Plans shall include a description of existing vegetation to be removed, vegetation to be planted and other slope stabilization measures to be installed. New vegetation shall be selected and located so as to be compatible with surrounding vegetation, soil and ecological characteristics of the area. Criteria for cut and fill slopes are as follows: 
(1)  2:1 slope - generally steepest slopes allowed. 
(2)  11/2:1 slope - allowed in mountainous areas if the plan contains specific erosion control, matting, hydroseeding and/or irrigation measures. These specific measures must meet the approval of the Town Engineer and the Town Council. 
(3)  Less than 11/2:1 slope - not allowed under any circumstances. 
(b)  Slopes shall be finished to match or blend with the natural contours of adjacent terrain by rounding off sharp angles at the top, toe and sides of all cut and fill slopes. 
(c)  All trees over three (3) inches in diameter, measured at four (4) feet above grade, to be preserved shall be protected during grading operations and during construction by the placement of fencing outside of the drip line of the trees. 
(d)  A drainage plan shall be submitted which provides, in general, that, after development, stormwater runoff shall not be released at a greater rate than the historical rate for the ten-year storm, unless it can be shown to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer that a stormwater drainage system can be developed or exists to convey runoff to an acceptable site. The amount of runoff to be detained on site for those developments required to release runoff at the historic ten-year rate shall be the difference between the ten-year runoff under developed conditions and the ten-year historic runoff. Conveyance facilities for the development may be designed on the basis of the ten-year storm unless it is determined by the Town Engineer that there is a potential for damage or flooding of residences or other property. Further, conveyance facilities for arterial and collector streets and for existing watercourses and dry washes, and where potential damage to residences or other property exists as determined by the Town Engineer, shall be designed on the basis of a one-hundred-year storm. All detention ponds shall be designed so that no standing water will remain beyond five (5) days after the end of the storm. 
(e)  Off-site runoff entering the development may be included in this detention system, and if this is the case, the analysis for the system must include this additional runoff. Off-site runoff should be analyzed under present conditions. 
(f)  Detention facility design shall be in conformance with the requirements of the Town Engineer. For any detention facility design, specific soil information shall be included. This report shall include but not be limited to soil-boring logs, water-table elevations and soil classifications. 
(g)  For grassed detention areas, the minimum channel slope shall be one and five-tenths percent (1.5%) to two and zero-tenths percent (2.0%). Side slopes shall not be greater than four (4) horizontal to one (1) vertical to allow access for maintenance vehicles. Space shall be provided around the perimeter of the detention area in order to permit desilting operations. 
(h)  The developer shall make all practical efforts to assure that the water quality of the postdevelopment runoff is not less than the predevelopment runoff. 
(i)  Drainage easements shall be provided if required to ensure perpetuity of detention areas when constructed as permanent drainage facilities. 
(j)  Responsibility for maintenance of detention areas shall be determined as a part of the subdivision agreement. 
(k)  Drainage for roads and streets shall be in accordance with the approved Town street specifications. 
(l)  If a proposed development causes a downstream drainage course which is unable to handle one-hundred-year or ten-year storm events as determined by the Town Manager based on a recommendation by the Town Engineer, then the storm runoff rate from the developed site shall be limited to the historic rate for the one-hundred-year or ten-year storm event as appropriate. 
(Prior code 57-28; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 17-40. - Bridges. 
    Any bridge planned as part of a proposed subdivision shall be designed, constructed and paid for by the subdivider in accordance with the American Association of State Highway Officials recommendations, which recommendations are incorporated herein by this reference as if set forth verbatim. Where an existing bridge is a part of a proposed subdivision and does not meet the specifications of this Chapter, it is the responsibility of the subdivider to repair or replace such bridge as necessary to meet the requirements of an H-20 live load prior to acceptance by the Town Council for maintenance. No lot served by such bridge shall be built upon or occupied until such improvements shall have been completed. The width of such bridge shall not be less than the width of the roadways approaching it on either side. 
(Prior code 57-29; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 17-41. - Water distribution systems. 
    Water distribution systems shall be designed to connect with the Town water system and make water available to each lot and proposed site of use in the proposed subdivision. Fire hydrants shall be located to ensure protection of each lot based on utilization of existing fire district fire-fighting equipment and recommendations made by the Fire Chief. The design and engineering of the system shall be the responsibility of the subdivider, with all plans subject to approval of the Town. Installation of the system shall be to Town specifications. Financial responsibility for the water distribution system shall be the subdivider's and shall be subject to existing Town regulations and agreements executed by the Town and the subdivider. 
(Prior code 57-30) 
Sec. 17-42. - Sanitary sewer systems. 
(a)  The sewage collection system for the subdivision shall be designed to connect with the Basalt Sanitation District's system and shall provide service for each lot and proposed site of use within the subdivision. The subdivider shall design the system and shall obtain the approval of the Basalt Sanitation District for all plans and specifications. Installation of the system shall be subject to the specifications of the Basalt Sanitation District. 
(b)  If the Basalt Sanitation District sewage collection system is not accessible, the subdivision shall not be approved. 
(c)  The developer shall pay for the sanitary sewage collection system, subject to all regulations of the Basalt Sanitation District. 
(Prior code 57-31) 
Sec. 17-43. - Energy conservation. 
    It is important that special attention be given to the conservation of energy throughout the planning, design and construction of new subdivisions. New subdivisions in the Town should be designed to provide for energy efficiency in the orientation of streets, lots and buildings. The following provide guidelines to be considered in the design and review of future subdivisions. While it may not be possible to follow these guidelines in every instance, every subdivision should be based on these fundamental site planning principles that can result in lower energy costs. 
(1)  Take advantage of south-facing slopes for solar orientation, especially for higher density development. 
(2)  Lot layouts should emphasize north-south orientation as much as possible. 
(3)  Street layout and design of single-family subdivisions should have an east-west orientation as much as possible within the limits of the topography to assure proper orientation of buildings. 
(4)  Lots should generally face on these east-west streets. 
(5)  If north-south orientation of streets is necessary, then the lots or buildings should be planned to maximize southern solar access. 
(6)  Lot lines should extend from north to south even if streets are necessarily designed intercardinally. 
(7)  Special consideration should be given to the potential shadows created on a lot by building development and by landscaping. 
(8)  Subdivision covenants should encourage building development close to the north property line, therefore allowing greater area to the south for solar access. 
(Prior code 57-32) 
Secs. 17-44-17-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III - Application Requirements 

Sec. 17-61. - Payment of fees; deposit requirements. 
(a)  Application fee. The applicant for a development review approval pursuant to this Chapter shall pay a nonrefundable application fee upon filing the application in an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. The application fee may include a credit for a designated number of hours of staff fees as described below. 
(b)  Payment of fees and costs. The applicant for a development review approval pursuant to this Chapter shall reimburse the Town for any and all costs, staff fees and consultant fees incurred by the Town during and after a review process associated with the property. Costs include, but are not limited to, publication fees, recording fees and any other actual out-of-pocket costs incurred by the Town with regard to the property. Staff fees include, but are not limited to, reimbursement for time spent by the Town Manager, Town Planning staff and the Public Works staff for inspection, review and other work performed with regard to the development application, at hourly rates established by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. Consultant fees shall include, but are not limited to, all actual out-of-pocket costs incurred by the Town in connection with the applicant's development review application for consultants providing the Town legal, engineering, planning and other professional advice, which consultants are not on Town staff, at the rate of the amount actually paid by the Town for such review and advice. Additionally, to partially defray administrative handling and review costs incurred by the Town with regard to the property, the applicant for any development review application shall pay to the Town an administrative fee in an amount equal to fifteen percent (15%) of all of the costs and consultant fees. Collectively, the costs, staff fees, consultant fees and administrative fees are referred to in this Section as review expenses . 
(c)  Deposit requirement. To secure the payment of the Town's review expenses, all applicants filing applications pursuant to this Chapter shall pay to the Town a deposit in an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. In the event the applicant's deposit exceeds the actual review expenses owed to the Town pursuant to Subsection (a) above, upon completion of all aspects of the development review, including the payment of all costs associated therewith, such excess deposit shall be refunded to the applicant within a reasonable time after final action by the Town or withdrawal of the application and payment of all costs associated with the application. 
(d)  Monthly payment and interest. The Town will bill the applicant on a monthly basis for all review expenses. All bills for review expenses are due and payable to the Town within fifteen (15) days of the date of the bill. Interest shall be charged on any overdue amounts unpaid within one (1) month of the date of the bill until paid at an interest rate set by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 et seq. 
(e)  Continuing obligation. By filing an application for development review under this Chapter and accepting the benefits thereof, a property owner agrees and acknowledges that there shall be a continuing and binding obligation on the applicant, so long as the applicant owns the property, and any future owners of the property to reimburse the Town for any and all expenses associated with the property incurred by the Town for counseling and advice, including, but not limited to, monitoring compliance with development approvals, enforcement of development permits or approvals, participation in litigation or depositions (whether or not the Town is a party), consideration of potential amendments to development approvals, and any other expenses directly associated with the property and incurred by the Town. 
(f)  Reimbursement agreement. On filing an application for development pursuant to this Chapter, the applicant shall enter a reimbursement agreement with the Town providing for the payment to the Town of the application fee, deposit and review expenses and acknowledging the continuing obligation to pay such review expenses. 
(g)  Processing applications. No application for development review pursuant to this Chapter shall be processed until such time as the application fee and the deposit required above have been paid and the reimbursement agreement required above has been executed by the applicant. If at any time during the review of a development application the applicant has not paid its bill for review expenses in a timely manner, then all processing of the application, including staff review and scheduled hearings, shall cease until such time as the applicant pays all amounts outstanding. 
(h)  Use of fees. The fees and expenses paid and collected by virtue of this Section shall not be used for general or other governmental proprietary purposes of the Town, except to pay each new development's equitable share of the costs of accounting, planning, management, administration and government of the Town, and to pay each new development's costs and expenses. Other than as described in this Section, the fees charged herein shall be used solely to pay for the costs of planning, operation, administration, maintenance, repair, improvement, renewal, replacement, reconstruction or other services provided by the Town on behalf of or as a result of new development within the Town. 
(Ord. 28 §2, 1990; Ord. 13 §2, 1991; Ord. 32 §2, 1996; Ord. 12 §B43, 2003) 
Sec. 17-62. - Sketch plan. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the sketch plan is to provide a general concept of the proposed annexation or subdivision for review by the staff, Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council. The intent is to identify the major problems that must be resolved and the overall feasibility of the request. Detailed engineering plans are not required at this time. 
(b)  Written information. This information shall be provided on the subdivision/annexation summary form, including the following information: 
(1)  A description of proposed land uses. 
(2)  A statement of planning objectives. 
(3)  A description of adjoining land uses. 
(4)  Existing and proposed zoning. 
(5)  An estimate of proposed residential units; an estimate of population on square footage commercial area. 
(6)  The names and addresses of the owner, applicant and the individual who prepared the sketch plan. 
(7)  The total area of the parcel. 
(8)  A statement as to how the development will be served by utilities. 
(9)  A general statement describing the geological characteristics of the land, soil types, slope stability and floodplain information. This information may be based on secondary data available from the Town, soil conservation service or other sources. The Town Manager may request that an environmental summary of the above characteristics be submitted in graphic form. 
(c)  Site plans and supporting documents. The sketch plan shall be drawn to a scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet or larger and include the following: 
(1)  A vicinity map, drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equals two thousand (2,000) feet, showing the general location of the land for consideration and the surrounding area within a one-mile radius. 
(2)  The topography of the land. 
(3)  The location of proposed land uses. 
(4)  The approximate location of proposed public or private open space areas. 
(5)  The location of existing or proposed water and sewer lines to serve the area. 
(6)  The proposed lot or block pattern and street layout. 
(Prior code 57-36; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 17-63. - Preliminary plat. 
(a)  Purpose. It is intended that the preliminary plat provide the necessary information to permit the staff, Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council to properly review the proposal and to resolve potential planning or engineering details that may arise before the final plat is prepared. The preliminary plat, therefore, requires extensive information and engineering studies. 
(b)  Written information. 
(1)  The name and address of the owner and applicant. 
(2)  The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the surveyor, engineer and planner of the subdivision. 
(3)  The names and addresses of all property owner within a three hundred (300) foot radius of the property. This information is to be provided on forms provided by the Town. All names and addresses shall be as they appear upon the records of the County Assessor's office or on the tax records of the Town or of Eagle or Pitkin County. 
(4)  All data and information required on the subdivision/annexation summary form that is required for the sketch plan. 
(5)  A description of any proposed covenants. 
(6)  Proposed terms of reservations and dedications of public rights-of-way, easements and other public lands. 
(c)  Plans and supporting data. 
(1)  A plat of the proposed subdivision shall be drafted in preliminary form to a scale of at least one hundred (100) feet to the inch, on a sheet at least twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches, and shall show the information listed below. In addition, an eight and one-half (81/2) by eleven (11) inch reduction of the plat shall also be provided to the Town. 
(2)  The title, north arrow, graphic and numerical scale and date of preparation. 
(3)  A key diagram if the area requires more than one (1) twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inch sheet. 
(4)  The name of the proposed subdivision, which shall be different from any existing recorded subdivision in Eagle or Pitkin County. 
(5)  The street layout of the proposed subdivision, including relationship to existing public rights-of-way and the widths and names of proposed streets. 
(6)  The lot and block layout of the proposed subdivision, including a block and lot numbering system, and in the case of a planned unit development, the types of uses, the supplementary requirements and area setback information on each lot, if at variance with otherwise applicable zone district regulations, are also required. 
(7)  Existing and proposed easements and structures for irrigation, drainage and utilities. 
(8)  Contours of the areas proposed for roads and buildings shall be at two-foot intervals. The Town Manager may approve contours to be mapped at lesser intervals for areas not to be developed. Topographic maps shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor or licensed engineer. 
(9)  Drainage plan. When the plat of a proposed subdivision includes a stream course, a mudflow course or dry wash subject to flood crest or heavy runoff generated by precipitation or rapid spring-thaw runoff, a drainage plan, based on an engineering analysis of the catchment and the tributary area and detailed drainage easements and structures necessary to accommodate a design one-hundred-year storm, mudflow or flooding, shall be provided by an engineer registered in the State. 
(10)  Utility plan. A plan corresponding to the preliminary plat, showing the line and related facilities' locations, sizes and gradients for the proposed subdivision in relation to existing Town installations and those of any special district. The utility plan shall also indicate underground distribution of electrical power and communications lines to be utilized, and a description of the system or systems shall be shown on the plan. 
(11)  Street profile. Center-line profiles of proposed streets shall be plotted at a horizontal scale of one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet at a distorted vertical scale, with sufficient detail to ensure that the proposed streets meet the gradient limitations established by this Chapter and bear a logical relationship to the grade of existing public streets at points of intersection. 
(12)  Geological/Soils. Sufficient field soil sampling shall be performed throughout the development to allow accurate determination of soil stratigraphy and bedrock lithology. A report shall be submitted by a registered engineer licensed by the State of sufficient detail to indicate any potential problems to development. Potential problems to development will be determined by the Town Manager based on a recommendation by the Town Engineer, and may include, by way of example only, problems resulting from groundwater, slope stability, expansive soils and soil bearing strength. The report shall include laboratory results and analyses. 
(13)  Unless waived by the Town Planner, a final comprehensive landscaping and irrigation plan shall be submitted designating all existing and proposed species, size and placement. The plan shall specify all irrigation features and a program for continued maintenance. The comprehensive landscaping and irrigation plan shall be reviewed and approved by the Public Works Director and Town Planner. 
(Prior code 57-37; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 11 §8, 2011) 
Sec. 17-64. - Final plat. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the final map or plat for an annexation or a subdivision is to provide a legal document that will be a part of the Town and county records describing the development conditions and land descriptions for the property. The final plat application shall include all binding agreements between the owner(s) and the Town. 
(b)  Written information. The final plat shall include: 
(1)  All information required for the preliminary plat. 
(2)  The title under which the subdivision is to be recorded. 
(3)  The names and addresses of all property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the property to be annexed or subdivided. 
(4)  A surveyor's certificate, signed and sealed by a licensed Colorado surveyor responsible for the survey and preparation of the final plat. 
(5)  A Planning and Zoning Commission certificate, certifying that the final plat is consistent with the approved preliminary plat and is approved subject to acceptance by the Town Council. 
(6)  A Town Council certificate of approval and acceptance. 
(7)  A Clerk and Recorder's certificate for time and date of recording. 
(8)  Three (3) copies of any protective covenants or restrictions placed on the subdivision. 
(9)  The name and address of the person to whom the notice of public hearing should be sent. 
(10)  A subdivision agreement, to be executed by the Town and by the subdivider, wherein the subdivider covenants and agrees to perform all conditions imposed by the Town. Such conditions and agreement may include, and the Town is empowered to require, the obligation of the subdivider to pay for and install or cause to be installed all required water distribution systems; trash collection facilities and areas; storm drain structures; devices to inhibit access to such structures by children; curbs and gutters; street base course material; asphalt wearing course material; bridges; underground wiring; ornamental streetlighting; underground communications systems; underground gas distribution systems; underground cable television wiring; fire hydrants; fire alarms; street signs; traffic control devices; measures to stabilize soil or to limit floods, mudslides and snowslides, as may be required by and according to the specifications of the Town; and sanitary sewer collection systems as required by the Basalt Sanitation District. The Town may also require specific procedures to be followed in order to mitigate potential problems caused by and during construction activities. Such measures may include, but are not restricted to, dust control, fencing, road patch requirements, provision of temporary sanitation facilities, scheduled work hours, emergency access and off-street parking for construction employees. 
(11)  An agreement and covenant of the subdivider to convey ownership to the Town of any or all of the foregoing facilities and improvements upon demand of the Town, except the following: sanitary sewer facilities of the Basalt Sanitation District; cable television wiring and related facilities; those facilities which by public utilities tariffs become the property of the public utility, its customer or its user. At the time of the conveyance, the subdivider shall supply a statement of the costs of the facilities conveyed; mechanic's lien waivers from all involved contractors, subcontractors and suppliers; and existing as-built specifications and other available data concerning the location, construction, operation and maintenance of such facilities. The subdivider shall also warrant the conveyed facilities to be fit for the purpose intended and of merchantable quality and to be free for one (1) year from the date of conveyance from all defects in materials and workmanship. All warranties of vendors or suppliers of such facilities or components shall be assignable upon demand to the Town, and the subdivider shall notify the vendors and suppliers that the warranties are to be assigned to the Town. Nothing herein shall limit the right of the Town as to any expressed or implied warranties concerning such facilities from persons manufacturing, selling or installing the facilities. The Town Council shall require cash to be deposited in an escrow account, an acceptable letter of credit or a surety bond approved by the Town to be posted with the Town Clerk in an amount equal to the cost of installing all improvements described in the subdivision agreement. The Town Council may release all or portions of the deposited funds or reduce the amount of the bond or letter of credit upon the completion according to the Town's specifications of all or a portion of the required improvements. 
(12)  An owner's title policy shall provide verification that all owners and lienholders have signed the final plat. A title policy naming the Town as beneficiary shall be provided to the Town indicating that any property to be dedicated is free and clear of all encumbrances whatsoever which would impair the dedicated property to be utilized as proposed by the final plat. The title policies shall be effective within twenty-four (24) hours after the date of approval by the Town Council. The title policies must be provided to the Town Clerk within fourteen (14) days after action by the Town Council; provided, however, that the Town Council may extend said fourteen-day period, either before or after its expiration, for subsequent additional fourteen-day periods, each such extension to be approved by a meeting of a quorum of the Town Council. 
(13)  A copy of all other documents needed to effectuate the development approvals as determined by the Town Attorney, including but not limited to community housing deed restrictions, declaration of covenants and an estimation of the annual HOA budget and projected fees for a period of two (2) years from total build-out in current dollars. The Town will review the documents to ensure that there will be a sufficient capital improvements fund established for the development to aid in reducing the need for special assessments. Pursuant to the Community Housing Guidelines, the Town will review the documents to ensure that any community housing units in a proposed subdivision will have reasonable initial HOA fees and assessments and that there are regulations ensuring that the fees and assessments will not unreasonably increase, making the units unaffordable. 
(c)  Final plat. Plans and supporting documents: 
(1)  The final map or plat shall be drawn in ink on a permanent reproducible Mylar sheet that is twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches. The final map or plat shall be drawn to a scale of at least one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet. If the area requires more than one (1) sheet, then a key diagram shall be provided on each separate sheet. In addition, an eight and one-half (81/2) by eleven (11) inch reduction of the final map or plat shall be submitted. 
(2)  Accurate dimensions shall be shown for all lines, angles, curves used to describe lot boundaries, streets, alleys, easements, areas to be reserved for public use and other important features. All curves shall be circular arcs and shall be defined by radius, central angle, tangent, arc and chord lengths. All dimensions, both linear and angular, are to be determined by an accurate control survey in the field which must balance and close within a limit of one (1) in ten thousand (10,000). Approximate dimensions (plus or minus indications) shall not be approved on a final map or plat. 
(3)  The name of adjoining subdivisions shall be shown with dotted lines indicated for abutting lots. 
(4)  All lots or blocks shall be properly numbered in accordance with an approved identification system. 
(5)  Identification of the streets, alleys, easements, parks and other facilities as shown on the plat, and a dedication thereof to public use. Areas reserved for future public acquisition shall also be delineated on the map or plat. 
(6)  A legal description of the area to be subdivided or annexed with reference to its location in the records of Eagle or Pitkin County. The total area of the tract and the area of each lot created by the subdivision. The names of all streets within the subdivision. 
(7)  A description of all monuments, both found and set, which mark the boundaries of the property and a description of all control monuments used in conducting the survey. This shall include a tie to a section corner. 
(8)  Final engineering documents, including plans and specifications for streets, water, sewer and drainage and the engineer's cost estimates for all improvements to be installed by the subdivider in dedicated land, rights-of-way or easements or as may be required by this Chapter. 
(9)  A certification of ownership and dedication by the owner(s) that he, she or they are the sole owner in fee simple of all the real property depicted in the plat and a dedication for the public use of the streets, avenues, drives, courts, places, alleys and public lands shown on the plat for their dedicated use, a dedication of utility and drainage purposes, and a dedication for public use of other lands and areas as may be required by the Town to comply with the subdivision agreement and the contents of the plat. 
(10)  Concurrent with the recording of a final plat, the applicant shall provide to the Town a copy of the approved plat in an electronic computerized format of a type approved by the Town Engineer or Public Works Director. In addition, all as-built mapping and diagrams for utility installations shall be provided to the Town in an electronic computerized format of a type approved by the Town Engineer or Public Works Director. The as-built drawings shall be provided prior to the complete release of security for the installation of said improvements. In its sole discretion the Town may exempt certain minor subdivision plats and amended plats from the above requirements where computerized mapping is found to be inappropriate. 
(11)  The landscaping submittal requirements for preliminary plat as set forth in Paragraph 17-63(c)(13) of this Article. 
(Prior code 57-38; Ord. 29 §1, 1996; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 16 §1, 2009; Ord. 11 §9, 2011) 
Sec. 17-65. - Condominium application requirements. 
    In addition to the general requirements for a subdivision, a condominiumization request shall provide the following: 
(1)  Sketch plan. 
a.  Lot sizes of each proposed condominium unit and in relation to the overall project. 
b.  Existing and proposed off-street parking areas. 
c.  Existing and proposed landscaping. 
d.  Existing and proposed facilities, including all buildings and structures. 
(2)  Preliminary plat. 
a.  Preliminary landscaping plan. 
b.  Plans for access and egress to each condominium unit. 
c.  Building plans indicating compliance with all design, building, fireproofing, soundproofing and utility standards of the Town. 
d.  A copy of the proposed condominium documents needed to effectuate the approvals as determined by the Town Attorney, including but not limited to a copy of the proposed condominium declarations and condominium map, bylaws and rules and regulations of the condominium or homeowners' association and an estimate of the annual budget of the condominium or homeowners' association for a period of two (2) years from the conversion or creation of the condominium units. In addition to all other requirements imposed in this Section, the developer shall submit a proposed condominium agreement with the Town setting forth, at a minimum: 
1.  Notice procedures for granting existing tenants not less than ninety (90) days' written notice of intent to condominiumize, which notice shall specify the sale price of the particular unit. A provision whereby each tenant shall have a ninety (90) day nonassignable option to purchase his or her unit at said specified sale price, which price shall not be varied by more than ten percent (10%) for a period of six (6) months after completion of condominiumization. 
2.  The applicant shall state and demonstrate that the supply of low- and moderate-income housing and rental space will not be significantly decreased as a result of condominiumization. The applicant shall also demonstrate that any community housing units in a proposed condominium development will have reasonable initial homeowners' association fees and assessments, that the fees and assessments will not unreasonably increase once the project is developed and that a sufficient capital improvements fund is established for the entire development for the purposes described in Paragraph 17-64(b)(13) of this Article. 
3.  The developer shall state whether or not it intends to make special provisions for the elderly or low-income citizens now residing within the structure proposed for condominiumization. 
(3)  Final plat requirements. To the extent possible, the final plat shall correspond with all requirements of Section 17-64 of this Chapter. 
(4)  Additional public notice requirements. In addition to the public notice requirements of Section 17-151, all tenants of a building proposed for condominiumization shall be sent notices at least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearings on the preliminary and final plats. 
(Prior code 57-39; Ord. 13 §§2, 3, 2009) 
Secs. 17-66-17-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV - Plat Approval Procedures 

Sec. 17-81. - Preapplication conferences. 
    Before commencing the annexation or subdivision of any parcel of land, the applicant shall consult with the Town Manager or his or her designated representative for general information regarding the Town's regulations, procedures and policies. Any statements made by the Town Manager or staff concerning a proposed development shall not be binding on the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Town Council. 
(Prior code 57-45; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 17-82. - Filing deadlines. 
    All applications shall be filed thirty (30) days in advance of the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting at which the matter is to be considered. Final plats shall be filed fifteen (15) days in advance of a regularly scheduled Technical Review Committee meeting. The Town Manager shall prepare a list of filing dates and meeting dates for each year. Applications to be accepted must be complete. If an application is determined to be incomplete, the Town Manager shall not schedule the matter for review by the Planning and Zoning Commission or Town Council. All application fees must be paid at the time of filing the application. 
(Prior code 57-46; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 17-83. - Minor subdivision procedure. 
(a)  Technical Review Committee action. Following the preapplication conference, the applicant may file a final subdivision plat meeting the requirements for final subdivision applications where applicable. The final plat shall then be reviewed by the Technical Review Committee at its next regular meeting. 
(1)  For minor subdivision applications relating to a lot line adjustment, relocation of easements, or condominiumization not involving the creation of new residential units, and correction of plat or survey errors deferred to the Town Council by the Technical Review Committee, the Technical Review Committee shall determine whether a publicly noticed hearing (as opposed to a hearing without public notice) shall be held at the Town Council for final review of the minor subdivision application. If the Technical Review Committee determines that the minor subdivision will have potential impacts on property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed minor subdivision, the Technical Review Committee shall require a publicly noticed hearing for the Town Council. Following review by the Committee and after all necessary additions or corrections are made, the final plat will be scheduled for consideration by the Town. The Town Planner shall forward the final plat and the recommendations of the Technical Review Committee to the Town Council. 
(2)  For minor subdivision applications relating to Town-owned property or property under contract for purchase by the Town which does not meet at least one (1) of the other conditions under the definition of minor subdivision in Section 17-4, the subdivision application shall be forwarded first to the Planning and Zoning Commission for a recommendation to the Town Council unless the need for the Planning and Zoning recommendation is waived by the Technical Review Committee. After Planning and Zoning Commission review and recommendation, the minor subdivision request will be forwarded to the Town Council for review and either denial, approval or approval with conditions. The hearing at the Town Council shall be a duly noticed public hearing, unless the Technical Review Committee waives the requirement for public notice following the procedures in Subsection (1) above. 
(3)  For minor subdivision applications relating to the correction of plat or survey errors, or technical corrections, the Technical Review Committee may review and approve of a final plat to make such corrections pursuant to the requirements of Section 17-64, final plat, for signature by the Mayor of the Town. At the discretion of the Technical Review Committee, the Technical Review Committee may defer review of a minor subdivision application relating to the correction of plat or survey errors or technical corrections to the Town Council, in which case, the application shall be reviewed by the Town Council pursuant to the procedure established in Section 17-83(a)(1) and 17-83(b)(2). 
(b)  Town Council action. 
(1)  For all minor subdivisions involving the creation of subdivided lots, the minor subdivision application and the recommendations of the Technical Review Committee shall be considered at a noticed public hearing. The Town Council shall then make a final decision to approve the minor subdivision, grant approval of the minor subdivision subject to modifications or conditions or deny the minor subdivision application. 
(2)  For minor subdivision applications relating to a lot line adjustment, correction of plat or survey errors, relocation of easements, technical corrections, condominiumization not involving the creation of new residential units or property owned by or under contract for purchase by the Town, the Town Council shall consider the minor subdivision application and the recommendation of the Technical Review Committee at a public hearing (without the necessity of public notice unless otherwise determined by the Technical Review Committee). The Town Council shall make the final decision to approve the minor subdivision application, grant approval of the minor subdivision application subject to modifications or conditions or deny the minor subdivision application. 
(Prior code 57-47; Ord. 6 §2, 1998; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 12 §B1, 2005; Ord. 21 §B2, 2005; Ord. 6 §2(Exh. B), 2014 ) 
Sec. 17-84. - Major subdivision procedures. 
(a)  Sketch plan. 
(1)  Planning and Zoning Commission action. At its next regular meeting, not more than thirty (30) days after filing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the sketch plan and the staff comments pertaining to the application. The Planning and Zoning Commission may then recommend to the Town Council approval, approval with modification or denial. The approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission of the sketch plan does not bind the Commission to accept the preliminary plat. 
(2)  Town Council action. At a regular meeting following the Planning and Zoning Commission action, the Town Council shall consider the sketch plan. The Town Council may then approve the application, grant approval with modifications or deny the application. The approval of the Town Council of the sketch plan does not bind the Town Council to accept the preliminary plat. 
(b)  Preliminary subdivision plat or annexation map. 
(1)  Technical Review Committee action. The Town Manager shall refer the matter to the representatives of the various departments and agencies assigned to the Technical Review Committee. Copies of the plan may be mailed to the other agencies or utility companies. Within fifteen (15) days following the filing deadline, the Technical Review Committee shall meet to review the application. The applicant shall be notified of the technical meeting and invited to be in attendance. Based upon the comments of the Technical Review Committee, the Town Manager shall then prepare his or her report and recommendations to the Planning and Zoning Commission. If the deficiencies in the application warrant additional work by the applicant or require further discussion by the Technical Review Committee and the developer, the Town Manager may defer sending the matter to the Planning and Zoning Commission. In such case, the applicant will be required to waive the statutory requirement of review within thirty (30) days. 
(2)  Planning and Zoning Commission action. The Planning and Zoning Commission, at a regular meeting thirty (30) days after the filing of the complete application, shall hold a public hearing on the application and consider the recommendation of the planning staff and the merits of the proposed annexation or subdivision. The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend to the Town Council approval, approval with modifications or denial of the application. 
(3)  Town Council action. The Town Council, at a regular meeting following the Planning and Zoning Commission hearing, shall consider the application. The Town Council may then approve the application, approve with modifications, deny the application or refer the matter back to the Planning and Zoning Commission for further study. 
(c)  Final subdivision plat or annexation map. 
(1)  Technical Review Committee action. Once the Town Council has approved the preliminary plan, the final plan may be submitted (unless considered concurrently). Within fifteen (15) days after the filing deadline, the Technical Review Committee shall meet to review the final details and to assure that the final plan is consistent with the preliminary plan. The Chairman of the Planning and Zoning Commission will be requested to review the final plat to determine if the final plat is consistent with the preliminary plat approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. If there are major changes or discrepancies between the preliminary plat and the final plat or if unanticipated or additional planning issues exist, as determined by the Chairman of the Planning and Zoning Commission, the final plat shall be subject to additional review by the Planning and Zoning Commission prior to final Town Council approval and before the Planning and Zoning Commission Chairman is authorized to sign the final plat. 
(2)  Town Council action. Following review by the Technical Review Committee and if all matters are complete, the final plat will be scheduled for a public hearing before the Town Council. The Town Council may then approve the application, approve with modifications or deny the request. If the final map is an annexation request, the ordinances for annexation and zoning may be considered concurrently in the manner prescribed by state statutes. The order of consideration shall generally be as follows: 
a.  Annexation proceedings. 
b.  Zoning. 
c.  Planned unit development application. 
d.  Subdivision. 
(Prior code 57-48; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 17-84.5. - Community serving subdivisions and development site subdivisions. 
    Community serving subdivision with subsequent filings of development site subdivisions. Where a subdivision satisfies the requirements of a community serving subdivision per Section 17-4 and the land owner desires to create four (4) or fewer lots for future development ("development sites"), the Town Council may approve a community serving subdivision, which allows the development sites to be sold, conveyed or encumbered in order to facilitate development that furthers a specific public purpose, provided that no building permit on a development site will be issued unless and until the land owner or its successors file a development site subdivision. Once the community serving subdivision is recorded in the public records, the property may be sold, conveyed to entities that do not meet the eligibility requirements for filing a community serving subdivision but development must proceed under the conditions established in the land use approvals for that subdivision. The requirements and process for filing for community serving subdivision shall be the same as required for a minor subdivision plat, which application may be combined with an application for rezoning or site plan review with the following exceptions: 
(1)  The Planning and Zoning Commission will provide a recommendation to the Town Council on the subdivision following a public hearing; 
(2)  The application is not eligible for waiving the requirements for a publicly noticed hearing included in Section 17-83(a)(1) for minor subdivisions; 
(3)  If the land use application requires another land use action requiring a sketch plan review, the Applicant shall submit and process for approval a sketch plan subdivision application satisfying Section 17-62. 
    The Town Council's ordinance granting approval of a community serving subdivision must include the explanation of how the plat satisfies the definition of a community serving subdivision and the public purpose that the subdivision is furthering. The individual development site subdivisions for the development sites shall satisfy the requirements for final subdivision approval, except that the Council's approval of the community serving subdivision may contain procedures and requirements for the Town's approval of the development site subdivision or further subdivision or condominium approvals within the development sites to be accomplished administratively by the TRC. 
( Ord. 10 §B.5(Exh. D), 2012) 
Sec. 17-85. - Condominium review procedures. 
    A condominium is defined by these regulations as a subdivision. Therefore, all condominiums shall comply with the provisions of this Chapter insofar as they are applicable, depending on the nature of the condominium request. The review procedures shall be the same as for any subdivision, with the exception that condominiumization not involving new residential units may be reviewed as a minor subdivision in accordance with the definition and review procedures for minor subdivisions. For all other requests, a sketch plan must be reviewed prior to the filing of a preliminary or final plat. However, the developer or applicant may file a preliminary and final plat concurrently. For all condominiumizations, the applicant or developer shall file a condominium map and condominium declarations for review and approval by the Town in accordance with the requirements of state statutes. 
(Prior code 57-49; Ord. 6 §3, 1998) 
Sec. 17-86. - Time limits for approvals. 
(a)  Preliminary plat. Once a preliminary plat has been approved by the Town Council, the applicant shall have a maximum of one (1) year to file a final plat for the entire plat or for the first portion of a phased project. If more than one (1) year has lapsed, a new preliminary plat must be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Town Council. 
(b)  Final plats. Final plats shall be approved subject to a development schedule determined at the time of approval. If the final plat is a part of a planned unit development, the final plat shall be subject to the schedule approved as a part of the planned unit development. If development of buildings has not occurred in accordance with the approved schedule, the Town Council may rescind its approval of the final plat. Procedures for rescinding approval shall be the same as described for termination of special review applications in Section 16-47. 
(Prior code 57-50; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 17-87. - Recording of final map and plats. 
(a)  Within thirty (30) days following the approval of a final subdivision plat or final annexation map, the applicant shall record the final plat, applicable covenants and restrictions and the subdivision agreement with the County Clerk and Recorder's office in the manner prescribed by that office. A notice providing proof of recording shall then be submitted to the Town Clerk within the thirty-day deadline. 
(b)  The provisions of Subsection (a) notwithstanding, the applicant shall not accomplish the required recordation prior to receipt by the Town Clerk of the title policy mandated by the provisions of Section 17-64(b)(12). 
(c)  Any alteration to an approved final subdivision plat or final annexation map prior to its recordation shall constitute fraud and shall subject the applicant to the sanctions provided in Section 17-9(b). 
(Prior code 57-51) 
Secs. 17-88-17-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V - Public Improvement Acceptance and Guaranties 

Sec. 17-101. - Installation. 
    Prior to the issuance of any building permits in any area within any addition or subdivision, all improvements and any other conditions and requirements imposed by this Code or by the Town Council must be installed in a manner acceptable to the Town or a satisfactory guaranty of such installation or performance must be made by the property owner in compliance with the plans and specifications approved by the Town Engineer. 
(Prior code 57-55; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 17-102. - Improvement guaranties. 
(a)  The Town Council shall require that the cost of providing all public improvements applicable to the subdivision shall be paid prior to the issuance of the first building permit for the subdivision. The costs shall include all improvements described in the subdivision agreement. The improvement guaranty may be provided with a surety bond, cash or acceptable collateral, an acceptable letter of credit, or other security acceptable to the Town Council. Upon final plat, the property owner shall provide either an improvement guaranty as provided for in this Section or, to ensure that lots are not sold until such time as an acceptable guaranty has been provided by the property owner, the property owner shall provide the Town with security acceptable to the Town, such as a deed of trust on the property for the benefit of the Town, until substituted with an improvement guaranty pursuant to this Section. The Town Manager may waive or partially waive the public improvement security requirements for buildings or development projects proposing considerably more affordable housing than is required by the Town Code. 
(b)  All guaranties shall be deposited with the Town Clerk in an amount not less than the estimate of the entire amount of the uncompleted public improvements required by the subdivision agreement. The cost estimates shall be prepared by a professional engineer or architect registered in the State and subject to the approval of the Town Engineer. The amount of the guaranty shall be reviewed every six (6) months and shall be adjusted to reflect actual costs. 
(Prior code 57-56; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003; Ord. 19 §C(Exh. B), 2015) 
Sec. 17-103. - Time for completion; release of bond. 
    The time for completion or performance of all such improvements shall be twelve (12) months from the date of the application for the first building permit. The Town Council may extend the time period for completion or performance. Upon completion or performance of such improvements, conditions and requirements within the required time and the approval of the Town Manager, the bond, deposit of escrow or letter of credit shall be released within thirty (30) days of written notice that the required improvements are completed or performed and have been approved in writing by the Town in its sole discretion and conveyed to the Town in a form approved by the Town Attorney. If the improvements are not completed within the required time, the moneys may be used to complete the improvements. The Town Manager may cause a portion of the improvement guaranties to be released as specific improvements are completed and approved. Such release shall be within thirty (30) days after receiving written notice that the improvements are completed and have been accepted by the Town in writing. 
(Prior code 57-57; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 17-104. - Development area boundaries established. 
    For developments containing ten (10) lots or less, all required improvements must be completed or the entire estimated cost of improvements must be guaranteed, as specified below, before a building permit can be issued. For larger subdivisions, the subdivider may establish boundaries for areas containing at least ten (10) lots, provided that there is a phasing plan established in the subdivision agreement and that such smaller areas be designed to be integrated with the overall system. The cost of improvement for this area must be guaranteed prior to the issuance of the first building permit; however, the subdivider must provide the Town with acceptable security, such as a deed of trust, for the entire property at final plat to secure installation of the public improvements until substituted with an improvement guaranty pursuant to this Article. 
(Prior code 57-58) 
Sec. 17-105. - Acceptance of public improvements; dual jurisdiction. 
    Utilities improvements that are under the jurisdiction of a special district or entity other than the Town must be inspected, approved and accepted by that entity prior to the final acceptance of the public improvements by the Town and the release of improvement guaranties held by the Town. 
(Prior code 57-59) 
Secs. 17-106-17-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI - Vested Property Rights 

Sec. 17-121. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to provide the procedures necessary to implement the provisions of Article 68 of Title 24, C.R.S. 
(Prior code 58-1) 
Sec. 17-122. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this Article, certain terms and words are hereby defined and shall have the following meanings unless it shall be apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended. 
    Commercial means those land uses not including residential dwelling units that are listed as either permitted uses or as uses allowed by special review in the C-1, C-2 and C-3 Zone Districts. 
    Development agreement means an agreement between the Town and a land owner or developer which shall include, but not be limited to, size and density of development, phasing of a development, construction of public improvements, and shall be the agreement referred to in Section 24-68-104(2), C.R.S. The development agreement may be part of a subdivision improvements agreement referred to in Section 17-64(b)(11) or a PUD final development plan agreement referred to in Section 16-66(4)e. 
    Residential means those land uses listed as permitted uses allowed by special review in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, C-2 and C-3 Zone Districts which are designed to be dwelling units for long-term occupancy by citizens of the Town. Major residential subdivision projects shall mean any residential subdivision project that does not fall within the definition of a minor residential subdivision project. A minor residential subdivision project shall mean three (3) residential lots or less. 
    Site specific development plan shall mean the last of any of the following required for development of property to be finally approved and recorded in the County records: special review approval pursuant to Section 16-44(f); planned unit development approval pursuant to Section 16-65(5); site plan review or site plan exemption review pursuant to Section 16-111(b) or (c); flood damage prevention pursuant to Section 16-360 or 16-362; environmentally sensitive areas approval pursuant to Section 16-463 or 16-468; minor subdivision approval pursuant to Section 17-83(b); or final plat for major subdivision approval pursuant to Section 17-84(c)(2) 
    Vested property rights means the right to undertake and complete the development and use of property under the terms and conditions of a site specific development plan and development agreement with the developer or owner. 
(Prior code 58-2; Ord. 31 §5, 2000) 
Sec. 17-123. - Duration. 
    A property right which has been vested pursuant to this Article shall remain vested for a period of three (3) years or longer if agreed to by the Town and Developer and warranted in light of circumstances. In the event amendments to a site specific development plan are proposed and approved, the effective date of such amendments, for duration of a vested property right, shall be the date of the approval of the original site specific development plan, unless the Town Council specifically find to the contrary and incorporates such finding in its approval of the amendment. 
(Prior code 58-3; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 17-124. - Notice and hearing. 
    No site specific development plan shall be approved until after a public hearing, preceded by written notice of such notice and hearing as required by Section 24-68-103(1), C.R.S. Such notice and hearing may, at the Town's option, be combined with notice and hearing required by Section 16-269 or with any other required notice or hearing affecting the proposed development. At such hearing interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. 
(Prior code 58-4) 
Sec. 17-125. - Establishment and forfeiture of vested property rights. 
(a)  Establishment. Vested property rights shall be established upon the execution of an approved development agreement with a developer which shall specifically provide that property rights are vested at that time, but in no case shall rights be vested prior to approval of a site specific development plan as provided in Section 17-122(1). In the event that no development agreement is entered into between the Town and a developer, then property rights shall vest at the time of site specific development plan approval. 
(b)  Forfeiture. The failure of a developer to abide by the terms and conditions contained in the development agreement, the site specific development plan, a subdivision improvements agreement referred to in Section 17-64(b)(11) or a final PUD development plan agreement referred to in Section 16-66(4)e, shall result in a forfeiture of vested property rights. 
(Prior code 58-5) 
Sec. 17-126. - Subsequent regulation and review. 
(a)  A vested property right, once established as provided for in this Article, precludes any zoning or land use action by the Town or pursuant to an initiated measure which would alter, impair, prevent, diminish or otherwise delay the development or use of the property as set forth in a site specific development plan except: 
(1)  With the consent of the land owner; 
(2)  Upon the discovery of a natural or manmade hazard on or in the vicinity of the subject property, which hazards could not reasonably have been discovered at the time of the development plan approval, and which hazards, if uncorrected, would pose a serious threat to the public health, safety and welfare; or 
(3)  To the extent the affected land owner receives just compensation for all costs, expenses and liability incurred by the land owner, after the creation of the vested right, including but not limited to, all fees paid in consideration of financing, and all architectural, planning, marketing, legal and other consultant fees incurred after the approval by the Town, together with interests thereon at the legal rate until paid. Just compensation shall not include any diminution in the value of the property which is caused by such action. 
(b)  Establishment of a vested property right shall not preclude the application of ordinances and regulations which are general in nature and applicable to all property subject to land use regulations by the Town, including, but not limited to, building, fire, plumbing, electrical and mechanical codes. 
(Prior code 58-6) 
Sec. 17-127. - Notice of approval. 
    Each site specific development plan shall contain the following language: "Approval of this plan may create a vested property right pursuant to Article 68, Title 24, C.R.S., and pursuant to Chapter 17 of the Municipal Code of the Town of Basalt." Failure to contain this statement shall invalidate the creation of a vested property right. In addition, a notice describing the type and intensity of use, the specific parcel or parcels of property affected and stating that property right has been created shall be published once and not more than fourteen (14) days after approval of the site specific development plan and execution of the development agreement, in a newspaper of general circulation. 
(Prior code 58-7) 
Sec. 17-128. - Payment of costs. 
    In addition to any and all other fees and charges imposed by this Code, the applicant for approval of a site specific development plan shall pay all costs incurred by the Town as a result of the site specific development plan review, including for example, costs of publication of notices, public hearings and review. 
(Prior code 58-8) 
Sec. 17-129. - Other provisions unaffected. 
    Approval of a site specific development plan and development agreement shall not constitute an exemption from or waiver of any other provisions of this Code pertaining to the development and use of property. 
(Prior code 58-9) 
Sec. 17-130. - Limitations. 
    Nothing in this Article is intended to create any vested property right, but only to implement the provisions of Article 68, Title 24, C.R.S. In the event of the repeal of said Article or a judicial determination of that said Article is invalid or unconstitutional, this Article shall be deemed to be repealed, and the provisions hereof no longer effective. 
(Prior code 58-10) 
Sec. 17-131. - Effective date. 
    This Article shall apply to development approvals by the Town occurring after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Article. 
(Prior code 58-11) 
Secs. 17-132-17-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII - Administration 

Sec. 17-151. - Public notice requirements. 
(a)  A public hearing shall be required for consideration of preliminary subdivision plats by the Planning and Zoning Commission and for consideration of final subdivision plats by the Town Council. 
(b)  The following public notice requirements shall be met: 
(1)  A public notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the Town at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the hearing. 
(2)  Notice shall be sent to all property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the property in question at least ten (10) days in advance of the hearing. Postage shall be paid by the applicant. 
(3)  A notice shall be posted on the subject property for at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. 
(4)  All notices shall include the following information: 
a.  A description of the nature of the request. 
b.  The time, date and place of the public hearing. 
c.  The agency or office and phone number where further information may be obtained. 
(Prior code 57-65; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Sec. 17-152. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend the granting of exceptions from the design and improvement standards set forth in Sections 17-32 through 17-43, inclusive, at a public hearing conducted upon notice as set forth in Section 17-151. In recommending the granting of an exception, the Planning and ZoningCommission can recommend the imposition of any of the conditions set forth in Section 17-64(b)(10) and (11). In order to obtain an exception, the applicant must show and the Planning and ZoningCommission must find all of the following where applicable: 
(1)  The strict application of the relevant standards will result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional and undue hardship upon, the owner of the property in question, due to the exceptional shape, topographic condition or other extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of the property in question, which does not occur generally to other property in the same zone district. 
(2)  The exception to be granted is the minimum necessary to alleviate the practical difficulties and undue hardship upon the owner of the property. 
(3)  The exception to be granted does not substantially impair the intent and purpose of the master plan, of this Chapter, of the Zoning Code and of the standard from which the exception is sought. 
(4)  The circumstances relating to or causing the practical difficulties or hardship upon the owner of the property were not created through or induced by any fault or action of the owner of the property, are not due to or the result of general conditions in the zone district or in the surrounding area outside the zone district and cannot practically be corrected by a means other than an exception. 
(5)  Notwithstanding the above, an exception to the subdivision regulations may be recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the Town Council if the exception is considered necessary to achieve the objectives of a planned unit development. 
(b)  The Planning and Zoning Commission may, in recommending the granting of an exception, recommend the imposition of any conditions set forth in Section 17-64(b)(10) and (11) above or which it deems necessary to carry out the intent of the provisions of this Chapter or any other provision of the Code. 
(c)  An exception shall not be allowed until the application for an exception is reviewed and approved by the Town Council. If the Planning and Zoning Commission recommends an exception with or without conditions, the Town Council shall review and act upon the application for exception after giving the same type of notice as was given prior to the hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Town Council may grant, deny or grant with conditions an application for an exception, and the decision of the Town Council shall be final, from which an appeal may be taken to a court of law. 
(Prior code 57-66; Ord. 33 §B1, 2003) 
Secs. 17-153-17-170. - Reserved. 
CHAPTER 18 - Building Regulations 
ARTICLE I - Contractor Licensing 

Sec. 18-1. - Contractor licenses required. 
(a)  Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity ("firm") who undertakes with or for another to perform construction work within the scope of building codes adopted by the Town, is a contractor. Every contractor must have taken and passed a contractor examination and provide proof of insurance to be approved for a license. A license shall be required of any person or firm which contracts to perform labor or services in any of the following categories: 
    Arborist 
    Concrete 
    Construction Management 
    Drywall 
    Excavation 
    Fireplace 
    Framing 
    General Contractor 
    Insulation 
    Masonry 
    Mechanical 
    Metal stud/Drop ceiling 
    Roofing 
    Structural steel 
    Stucco/EIFS 
The term of all contractor licenses issued by the Town shall by three (3) years. Those exempted from this subsection are: 
(1)  Any person constructing, remodeling, or adding to a single-family dwelling or accessory building which they own and occupy, provided he or she does all the work himself or herself or with the aid of no more than one (1) other compensated person. Homeowner/builders shall be required to provide proof of builder's risk insurance with a policy limit not less than the valuation of the home as set forth in the building permit. Persons having more than one (1) employee will be required to provide proof of workers' compensation insurance to the Town. 
(2)  The owner/builder exemption in Section 18-1(a), of this Code does not apply to a homeowner/builder constructing, remodeling or adding to more than one (1) single-family dwelling or accessory building, which they own and occupy, over a three-year period. 
(3)  Any electrical contractor holding a current license from the State. 
(4)  Any plumbing contractor holding a current license from the State. 
(b)  A license in one (1) of the following classifications is required for contracting for or performing work within the scope of the building code in the Town of Basalt: 
(1)  General contractor (unlimited). This license shall entitle the holder to contract for the construction, alteration or repair of any structure of any type of construction or occupancy classification permitted by the building code. 
(2)  General contractor (commercial). This license shall entitle the holder to contract for the construction of any structure of any type of construction and occupancy classification permitted by the building code, with the exception of Type I construction. This license also entitles the holder to contract for the alteration or repair of any structure of any type of construction or occupancy classification permitted by the building code. 
(3)  General contractor (light commercial). This license shall entitle the holder to contract for the construction, alteration or repair of A-2, A-3, B, E-3, H-4, M, R, S or U occupancy classifications of any type of construction with the exception of Type I construction as set forth in the building code. 
(4)  General contractor (homebuilder). This license shall entitle the holder to contract for the construction, alteration or repair of R-3 and U occupancies of Type VB construction. 
(5)  Specialty. This license shall entitle the holder to contract for work involving any specialty trades regulated by building codes, including but not limited to: 
    Alarm installation 
    Alteration and maintenance 
    Awning installation 
    Boiler (hot water heater) 
    Carpentry 
    Concrete 
    Drywall 
    Excavation 
    Fire sprinkler 
    Gas fitter 
    Glass and glazing 
    Insulation 
    Irrigation 
    Landscape construction 
    Masonry 
    Mechanical contractor 
    Metal stud installation 
    Roofing 
    Solid fuel and gas appliance 
    Structural steel erection 
    Stucco 
    Warm air heating 
Electrical contractors, plumbing contractors and manufacturers' representatives are exempt from this licensing requirement. 
(c)  Arborist contractor license. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any business to engage in cutting, trimming, removing, pruning or other treating of trees on public property within the Town for commercial gain or profit without first procuring an arborist license from the Town in accordance with the provisions of this Section. 
(2)  Any licensee under this Article must comply with the directives and specifications established by the Public Works Director and approved by the Town Manager. Any licensee not complying with this requirement will be subject to penalties pursuant to Section 1-82 of this Code. 
(3)  The provisions of this Section shall not apply to the production and maintenance of trees in a nursery setting. 
(Ord. 13 §1, 2007; Ord. 11 §§10, 11, 2011) 
Sec. 18-2. - Contractor testing. 
(a)  Contractors must have taken and passed a contractor examination as described in Subsection (b) below. To be approved for a Town contractor's license, firms must appoint a person ("examinee") who is a certified arborist with the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA). Upon issuance of a contractor's license to the firm, all construction and/or tree work performed by the firm shall be under the direction and control of the examinee. Examinees must present proof of certification from SIA every three (3) years. 
(b)  The examinations given for the purpose of licensing general contractors or specialty contractors shall be the current examinations in use under the B.E.S.T. (Board of Examiners for Standardized Testing) program as participated in under a current, active intergovernmental agreement with other jurisdictions. In the licensing of general contractors or specialty contractors, the Town may recognize the examinations successfully completed by the applicant examinee in other jurisdictions, at the discretion of the Building Official. 
(c)  Examinations under the B.E.S.T. program given in the Town will be administered by the Building Official or his or her designated representative. The costs for these examinations will be an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381, et seq., of this Code. Examinations shall be in a classification appropriate for the license requested. 
(d)  To qualify for an arborist contractor's license, an individual must present proof of certification from the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA). Contractor licenses are obtained through the Building Department pursuant to Section 18-3 below. 
(Ord. 13 §1, 2007; Ord. 11 §§12, 13, 2011) 
Sec. 18-3. - Licensing requirements. 
(a)  Holders of contractors' licenses issued by the Town or the State shall pay a registration fee according to amounts and classifications as approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381, et seq., of this Code. 
(b)  There shall be no prorating of license fees or registration fees for a period of less than twelve (12) months. The renewal fee shall be applicable only if the applicant was properly licensed for the immediately preceding year. The term of the licenses and registrations shall be from the first day of January of each year, and the license or registration fee renewal must be applied for and the renewal fee paid prior to the first day of March in order to qualify for the renewal fee. All such fees shall be paid annually on or before the first day of March of each year. 
(c)  Holders of contractors' licenses issued by the Town shall be required to maintain throughout the time that their licenses are in effect liability insurance coverage covering fire and all risk claims for personal injury and property damage with limits not less than amounts approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381, et seq. Persons having more than one (1) employee will be required to provide proof of workers' compensation insurance to the Town. 
(d)  Any electrical contractor, properly licensed by the Colorado State Electrical Board, performing work within the Town limits shall have in force general liability insurance covering fire and all risk claims for personal injury and property damage with limits in amounts approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381, et seq. and shall have workers' compensation insurance on all employees and shall meet all other requirements set by the Colorado State Electrical Board. 
(e)  Any plumbing contractor, properly licensed by the Colorado State Plumbing Board, performing work within the Town limits shall have in force general liability insurance covering fire and all risk claims for personal injury and property damage in limits not less than an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381, et seq., and shall have workers' compensation insurance on all employees. 
(f)  There shall be a multiple license rate by which the holder of one (1) license shall be charged one-half (1/2) of the license fee for each additional license held by the holder. Application for a contractor's license shall be submitted to the Building Inspector on forms provided by him or her. Said application shall be accompanied by a certificate evidencing that the person, or appointee of a firm, has passed the Town's test relating to the type of license applied for. Said application must also be accompanied by a certificate of insurance for both workers' compensation and general liability in the amount listed above. 
(g)  Failure of any person or firm holding a Town contractor's license to maintain in the Town offices a certificate of liability insurance and proof of workers' compensation insurance in compliance with this Section, showing the policies to be in force, shall be subject to immediate revocation of such license by the Building Inspector in addition to being subject to the general penalty for violations of this Code set forth in Section 1-82. If the contractor has no employees, a waiver of workers' compensation insurance may be filed with the Town. 
(h)  The general contractor or homeowner/ builder on a job site within the Town shall ensure that any subcontractor he or she has hired is in compliance with the regulations set forth in this Section. The failure of any contractor or subcontractor to be in compliance with this Section constitutes a violation of this Code, and the contractor responsible and/or subcontractor are subject to the general penalty for violations set forth in Section 1-82 of this Code in addition to immediate revocation of his or her contractor's license. Each day such violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense, subject to penalty. 
(i)  No arborist license shall be issued or renewed until the applicant has presented to the Chief Building Official a certificate of insurance satisfactory to the Town showing that the applicant has acquired a commercial general liability insurance policy covering all risk claims for personal injury and property damage associated with the applicant's proposed tree service operations in the Town, with a minimum limit established by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381, et seq., of this Code, and shall have workers' compensation insurance on all employees. For work being done in the public rights-of-way, the Town must be named as an additional insured on such policy. 
(Ord. 13 §1, 2007; Ord. 11 §14, 2011) 
Secs. 18-4-18-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II - Construction Codes 

Sec. 18-11. - Construction sites. 
(a)  All construction sites shall be required to be kept clean and free of debris, specifically: 
(1)  All dirt and other materials tracked onto any public rights-of-way shall be removed at the end of each week; 
(2)  All loose material on the construction site shall be secured to keep from being carried off the site; 
(3)  An adequate trash receptacle shall be kept on site at all times, not on public property without permission of the Building Official, and used to dispose of all construction and personal trash. The receptacle is to be removed to a landfill site in an appropriate and timely manner and is to be covered in transit; 
(4)  Adequate sanitary facilities shall be maintained and available for all workers; 
(5)  Backflow protection must be provided for any temporary connection to the municipal water source; 
(6)  Adequate signage and pedestrian protection shall be provided and maintained as required by this Section; and 
(7)  The site shall be posted and secured to discourage trespassers. 
(b)  Excavations for building construction, water or sewer lines or any other purpose shall be protected to prevent the potential for hazard to adults and children. In addition, all excavations are determined to be a potential attractive nuisance for children and are to be protected to prevent and discourage entry into this hazardous area. Protection systems are to be in place at all times that excavation work is underway or the excavation is open. Systems used for providing this protection shall be approved by the Building Official or the Public Works Director. 
(c)  Whenever the Building Official determines that any existing excavation or embankment or fill on private property has become a hazard to life and limb, or endangers property, or adversely affects the safety, use or stability of a public way or drainage channel, the owner of the property on which the excavation or fill is located, or other person or agent in control of said property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the Building Official, shall within the period specified therein repair or eliminate such excavation or embankment to eliminate the hazard and to be in conformance with the requirements of this Code. 
(d)  Any person found to be in violation of this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor shall be punished as provided in Section 1-82 of this Code. 
(Ord. 13 §1, 2007) 
Sec. 18-12. - Construction noise. 
(a)  Definition. Construction noise shall include the noise of saws, chain saws, air-powered equipment, nail guns, hammers, earth-moving equipment, pumps, compressors, power drills, concrete trucks, jackhammers or radios on job sites. 
(b)  No contractor or owner builder shall allow or cause construction noise before 7:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. Use of heavy equipment with back-up alarms in residential zone districts is prohibited before 8:00 a.m. 
(c)  No contractor or owner builder shall allow or cause construction noise at any time on Sundays or at any time on the following holidays: 
(1)  New Year's Day (January 1). 
(2)  Memorial Day (last Monday in the month of May). 
(3)  Independence Day (July 4). 
(4)  Labor Day (first Monday in the month of September). 
(5)  Veteran's Day (November 11). 
(6)  Thanksgiving Day (fourth Thursday in the month of November). 
(7)  Christmas Day (December 25). 
(d)  Exemptions. 
(1)  This Section shall not apply to emergency work necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a calamity. 
(2)  This Section shall not apply to work not requiring a building permit such as normal home repairs, small projects, landscaping, etc. 
(e)  Waiver. The Town Manager may waive the enforcement of this Section as it applies (which waiver may include appropriate conditions and time limits to be determined by the Town Manager) to those owners/builders who can establish or demonstrate that: 
(1)  Enforcement of this Section would result in unreasonable economic hardship to the owner/builder; 
(2)  Each neighbor within a three-hundred-foot radius of the owner/builder's construction site has consented to construction noise on Sundays and holidays; 
(3)  The location of the owner/builder's construction site is such that good cause exists for the Town Manager's waiver of enforcement of this Section; or 
(4)  Other factors exist establishing good cause for the issuance of a waiver. 
(f)  Penalties. Any person found to be in violation of this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor shall be punished as provided in Section 1-82 of this Code. 
(Ord. 13 §1, 2007) 
Sec. 18-13. - Tree management. 
(a)  Trees and declaration of policy. The Town Council hereby finds that trees provide important environmental and aesthetic benefits to the residents of the Town and to its visitors that extend beyond the property upon which trees may grow. The Town Council further finds that trees enhance the real estate values of property upon which trees grow and of neighboring properties. Large trees are a resource that cannot be fully replaced if injured, damaged or removed. Property development and construction activities can result in injury or loss of valuable trees in the Town. It is the intent of this Section to preserve to the fullest extent possible existing trees considered desirable by the Public Works Director as herein set forth and to prevent the net loss of tree volume, both in quantity and quality. 
(b)  Definitions and applicability. 
(1)  The terms and provisions of this Section shall apply to all private and public real property situated in or subsequently annexed to the corporate limits of the Town. 
(2)  The term tree shall include, for purposes of this Section, all deciduous trees having a trunk diameter of six (6) inches or more; Quercus gambelii (Gambel Oak); Acer glabrum (Rocky Mountain Maple); Amelanchier spp . (Serviceberry); and Prunus virginiana (Chokecherry) with a trunk diameter of three (3) inches or more; and coniferous trees having a height of twelve (12) feet or more. Trunk diameters shall be measured in inches measured as close to four and one-half (41/2) feet above ground as possible. For purposes of this Section, the species of trees known as Ulmus pumila (Siberian Elm) and Elaeagnus angustifolia (Russian Olive) are not included within the term tree . 
(3)  The term damage shall mean, for purposes of this Section, any cut below the surface of the outer bark of any part of a tree more than one-half (1/2) inch in depth or more than two (2) inches in length. 
(c)  Removal or damage to trees prohibited without permit. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person, without first obtaining a permit as herein provided, to damage, remove or cause to be damaged or removed any tree. 
a.  It shall be unlawful for any person, without first obtaining a permit for tree removal as herein provided, to dig, excavate, turn, compact or till the soil within the dripline of any tree in such a manner as to cause material damage to the root system of the tree. For purposes of this Subsection, the dripline of a tree is a cylinder extending from grade level down to a depth of ten (10) feet below grade, having a radius equal to the length of the longest branch of a tree measured horizontally, with the center of the cylinder located at the center of the trunk of the tree. Material damage means, for any tree, damage, breakage or destruction to any root one (1) inch in diameter or larger, or to roots whose cross-section aggregation exceeds that of a root one (1) inch in diameter. 
b.  It shall be unlawful for any person in the construction of any structure or other improvement to park or place machinery, automobiles or structures; or to pile, store or place soil, excavated material, fill or any other matter within the dripline of any tree. During construction, the Building Official or the Public Works Director may require the erection of suitable barriers around all trees, including trees not included in the definition set forth at Subsection (b) of this Section, to be preserved. Roots shall be protected from exposure to the elements with a landscape fabric. In addition, during construction, no attachments or wires, other than protective guy wires, shall be attached to any tree. 
c.  It shall be unlawful for any person, without first obtaining a permit for tree removal as herein provided, or approval from the Public Works Director of a project site plan, to pave or cover, with any nonporous material, more than ten percent (10%) of the area within the dripline of any tree. 
d.  It shall be unlawful for any person, without first obtaining a permit for tree removal as herein provided, to intentionally damage, girdle or poison any tree. The intent of this Subparagraph is to prohibit the practice of topping on public and private trees. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or Town department to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public and private property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Crown reduction by a qualified arborist may be permitted where appropriate as determined by the Public Works Director. Trees severely damaged by storms or other cause, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical, shall be exempted from this Subparagraph. In the instance where a tree needs to be significantly pruned for utility purposes, the utility company shall coordinate with the Town Horticulturist to ensure that the trimming is conducted in an appropriate manner and to the minimum extent necessary. 
e.  It shall be unlawful for any person, without first obtaining a permit as herein provided, to relocate any tree. If a relocated tree dies within two (2) years of relocation and is not replaced with a tree of equal size, the death of the relocated tree shall be deemed an unpermitted tree removal. This Section shall not apply to the initial planting of trees obtained from nursery stock. 
f.  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to provide the Public Works Director with written notice, delivered at least three (3) working days in advance, of the time and date on which removal of any tree will occur. Written notice pursuant to this Section is required even if a permit for tree removal, as herein provided, has been obtained. 
(2)  Pruning. 
a.  Pruning to promote tree health or to prevent possible damage to a structure by limbs of a tree is exempt from the provisions of this Section. Pruning by, or at the direction of, organizations furnishing service through aerial transmission lines is not exempt from the provisions of this Section. 
b.  Pruning of trees on public property is subject to permitting under Section 11-91 of this Code. If the Town becomes aware of landscaping and/or trees causing a potential nuisance, and the landscaping or trees on private property pose threats and are considered a nuisance to public safety or other private property and/or facilitate the spread of communicable insects or disease, the Town has the authority to inspect private trees and require action by the owner to eliminate any problems if necessary. For purposes of this Section, the Public Works Director is hereby authorized to go upon private property within the Town for the purpose of inspecting trees or shrubs as further authorized in Section 1-101 of this Code. 
c.  Enforcement of this Section by the Public Works Department shall generally follow these guidelines unless the landscaping poses an immediate danger to public safety: 
1.  First contact : Notification by personal visit or phone to the property owner requesting that the nuisance landscaping be removed or properly mitigated. The property owner will be given fourteen (14) days to remove the nuisance landscaping. In the event that the property owner cannot be reached by personal visit or phone, the Public Works Department, after first making this attempt, shall send a letter to the property owner requesting compliance. 
2.  Additional contact : If compliance is not completed within the above fourteen (14) days of first contact as described in Subparagraph 1. above, the Public Works Department shall recontact the property owner by personal visit, phone or by letter reminding him or her of the Town's regulations related to nuisance landscaping and asking him or her to comply within the next seven (7) days. 
3.  Notice of violation : If the compliance is not completed within the time period allotted in Subparagraph 1. above, the Public Works Department shall send a certified letter to the property owner reminding him or her of the Town's regulations related to nuisance landscaping and requiring compliance within two (2) business days and identifying penalties for noncompliance as set forth in Section 1-82 of this Code. The Town Manager can extend the compliance time period if it is determined at the sole discretion of the Town Manager that there are special circumstances. By way of an example, special circumstances may include, but are not limited to, a property owner not being able to be contacted. 
In the instance where a hazard tree on private property poses an immediate danger to public safety, the Town Manager may authorize the Public Works Director to remove the hazard tree. 
(3)  Each violation of the above Subparagraphs (c)(1)a.-f. shall be a separate offense. 
(d)  Tree removal permits. 
(1)  Any person wishing to obtain a permit or to relocate a tree shall file an appropriate application with the Public Works Director. Such application shall contain such information as the Public Works Director shall require to facilitate adequate enforcement of this Section. Any application for a tree removal permit or to relocate a tree shall be accompanied by a tree permit application fee in an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381, et seq. of this Code. 
(2)  On request of the Public Works Director, Building Official or appropriate Town designee, and when necessary to adequately apprise the Public Works Director of the intended tree removal, said application shall include information necessary to evaluate the tree removal and may include a site plan showing the following: 
a.  Location of proposed driveways, other planned areas of structures and impervious surfaces on said site; 
b.  Location of all trees with trunk diameter four (4) inches or over, all oak trees with trunk diameter of two (2) inches or over and all conifers more than ten (10) feet in height, identified by trunk diameter or height and species; 
c.  Designation of all diseased trees and any trees endangering any roadway pavement or structures, and trees endangering utility service lines; 
d.  Designation of any trees proposed to be removed, retained and relocated and areas which will remain undisturbed; 
e.  Any proposed grade changes which may adversely impact any trees on the site. 
(3)  After filing said application, the Public Works Director shall review the application (and site plan if required) and determine what effect the intended removal or relocation of trees will have on the natural resources of the area. More specifically, the Public Works Director shall consider: 
a.  Whether the trees intended for removal or relocation are necessary to minimize flood, snowslide or landslide hazards; 
b.  Whether retention of the trees is necessary to prevent excess water runoff or otherwise protect the watershed or riparian habitat; 
c.  Whether the removal or relocation of the trees will cause wind erosion or otherwise adversely affect air quality; 
d.  The condition of the trees with respect to disease, danger of falling and interference with utility lines; 
e.  The number and types of trees in the neighborhood, the contribution of the trees to the natural beauty of the area and the effect of removal or relocation on property values in the area; 
f.  The necessity, or lack thereof, to remove the trees to allow reasonable economic use and enjoyment of the property; 
g.  The implementation of good forestry practices, including consideration of the number of healthy trees that the parcel of land in question can support; and 
h.  The adequacy of the methods proposed to be used to relocate any trees. 
(4)  Based on review of these factors, the permit shall either be granted or denied by the Public Works Director. 
(5)  The Town Building Official shall initiate inquiry as a part of each building permit application regarding the possibility of construction-related impacts to trees and shall provide to each applicant, as appropriate, a copy of this Section and a tree removal permit application. 
(6)  Tree removal permits/tree mitigation. The Public Works Director or appropriate Town designee may, as a condition of any tree removal permit, require that the owner replace any removed or relocated trees with a tree or trees of comparable value on the affected property. When, in the opinion of the Public Works Director or appropriate Town designee, replacement or relocated trees cannot reasonably be accomplished within the current planting season, the applicant shall escrow funds with the Town equal to the comparable value or, if a comparable value cannot be obtained, equal to the basic value as calculated below, of the aggregate of all trees required for mitigation. Upon acceptance of planted trees by the Public Works Director or appropriate Town designee, funds escrowed with the Town will be released. Comparable value, for purposes of this Section, shall mean the replacement cost of a tree or trees of aggregate value, cross-section and species equal to the trees removed or relocated. Such cash-in-lieu payments shall be used by the Town to acquire and plant trees. 
(e)  Valuation of trees. When, in accordance with this Section, the value of a tree must be determined because an aggregate comparable value cannot be obtained, the basic value shall equal thirty-six dollars ($36.00) per square inch of the cross-sectional area of the tree at the point where the diameter of the tree is measured. In calculating the basic value, the following equation shall be used: 
Basic Value = $36.00 x 3.14 x (D/2) 2 
  
Where D = the diameter of the tree in inches 
(f)  Removal of trees from Town property. No trees of any size or species shall be removed from Town property, other than by direction of the Public Works Director or appropriate Town designee, except in accordance with this Section. 
(g)  Removal of dead trees. The removal of dead trees shall be governed by the same regulations as the removal of living trees and shall be in accordance with this Section. 
(h)  Emergency tree removal. In case of an emergency caused by a tree being in a hazardous or dangerous condition posing an immediate threat to person or property, such tree may be removed without resort to the procedures herein described; provided, however, that evidence of such an emergency is provided to the Public Works Director, or appropriate Town designee, within twenty-four (24) hours after the removal of the tree and the Public Works Director, or appropriate Town designee, provides written agreement with such evidence that a hazardous or dangerous condition existed that posed an immediate threat to persons or property. 
(i)  Enforcement. Any person convicted of violating any provision of this Section shall be subject to punishment as set forth in Section 1-82 of this Code. 
(Ord. 13 §1, 2007; Ord. 11 §§15-17, 2011) 
Sec. 18-14. - Fees. 
(a)  Permit fees. On buildings, structures, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems requiring a permit, a fee for each permit, in an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381, et seq. of this Code shall be paid as required. 
(b)  Plan review fee. When construction documents are submitted for a building permit, a plan review fee shall be paid. Said plan review fee shall be sixty-five percent (65%) of the building permit fee determined by the Building Official. 
(c)  Energy code review fee. The Town shall assess a fee of ten percent (10%) of the associated building permit fee for review of and compliance with the Town's Energy Conservation Code. Said fee shall not exceed four hundred dollars ($400.00). 
Exception: Structures that comply with Colorado E-STAR Home Energy Rating System shall not be subjected to this fee. 
(d)  REMP Fees. REMP fees will be collected by the Building Department at the time of the permit issuance. REMP fees will be used to offset the greenhouse gas emissions of these applications through community investments in renewable energy and energy efficiency. Expenditures of REMP funds for community projects will be recommended for Town Council approval by a joint committee of the Community Office for Resource Efficiency and the Building Official. 
(1)  Under the Renewable Energy Mitigation Program (REMP), houses over three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet of habitable space must install a renewable energy system on site (e.g., a two-panel solar hot-water system, a two-module photovoltaic array or a geothermal system) or pay an REMP fee as set forth in the Town of Basalt's Fee Schedule. 
(2)  For exterior uses of energy, such as snowmelt, pools, spas and garages, the REMP fees are based on the cost of electricity for the equivalent amount of BTUs used over twenty (20) years. Except one hundred percent (100%) of the energy required is permitted if one hundred percent (100%) of the annual energy required is produced with renewable energy systems and installed on site or if one hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of the annual energy required is produced with renewable energy systems off site, if approved by the Town Building Official. 
    Calculation of the REMP fee is made as per the following schedule: 
_____ 
Energy Use BTUs per sq. ft.
per year "Free allowed
square footage" Fee per sq. ft.
for 20 years* Snowmelt 34,425 200 See Town's fee schedule Small Spa 430,000 64 See Town's fee schedule Summer Pool 29,000 200 See Town's fee schedule Winter Pool 332,000 none See Town's fee schedule Heated Garage 19,500 see Section 18-84(f) See Town's fee schedule * These fees must be adjusted for efficiency.  
Example: Snowmelt system of 400 square feet is needed for a driveway, boiler efficiency is 85%, 200 square feet is free. 
  
REMP Fee = (Price per sq. ft. in Town's fee schedule divided by 0.85) times (400-200 sq. ft.) 
  
Example: Summer pool with surface area of 600 square feet, boiler efficiency is 87%, 200 square feet is free. 
  
REMP Fee = (Price per sq. ft. in Town's fee schedule divided by 0.87) times (600-200 sq. ft.). 
_____
(e)  Special improvement fee. 
(1)  In addition to all other fees provided by this Code, a special improvement fee shall be paid to the Town at the time of issuance of a building permit. The special improvement fee shall apply to the construction of any building or additions to existing buildings for which a building permit is required by this Code. The special improvement fee shall be in an amount approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381, et seq., of this Code. All area shall be counted using the definition of total square feet as set forth in Section 16-4 of this Code, with the exception that any area used for underground parking and associated access shall not be counted in determining the fee. Parking shall be deemed underground if more than fifty percent (50%) of the parking structure is below finished grade. 
(2)  The fees paid and collected by virtue of this subsection shall not be used for general or other governmental proprietary purposes of the Town, except to pay for each new development's equitable share of the cost of accounting, planning, management, administration and government of the Town. Other than as described above, the fees charged herein shall be used solely to pay the costs of planning, operation, maintenance, repair, improvement, renewal, replacement, reconstruction or other services provided by the Town on behalf of or as a result of new development within the Town. 
(f)  Construction deposit. 
(1)  A deposit in a form acceptable to the Town shall be posted with the Town as a condition of the issuance of any building permit for new construction or additions. The purpose is to insure that the requirements of Section 3305.2 of the International Building Code, as amended, are met. The amount of such deposit shall be within the range approved by the Town Council pursuant to Section 2-381 of this Code, as determined by the Building Official. 
(2)  In the event that the construction site is not maintained as set forth in Section 18-1 of this Code, the Town may, after providing written notice to the permittee and construction contractor of such violations, draw upon such security for the purpose of performing the requirements as set forth. In the event that the deposit is reduced by this process, the permittee shall post additional security with the Town so that the full amount of the security is available at all times. In the event that the permittee does not post additional security, the Town may, after providing written notice to the permittee and the construction contractor of such failure, cancel the building permit and take any other necessary legal action to prevent any further construction activity and to ensure that such permittee or construction contractor complies with these requirements. Upon the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, paid construction deposits shall be refunded to the owner/permittee. 
(g)  Fire sprinkler and fire alarm fees. Permit and plan review fees for fire sprinkler and fire alarm systems, as determined by the Basalt and Rural Fire Protection District, are payable direct to the Basalt and Rural Fire Protection District. 
(Ord. 13 §1, 2007; Ord. 21 §1(Exh. A), 2015) 
Sec. 18-15. - Adoption of codes by reference. 
(a)  Pursuant to Title 31, Article 16, Part 2, C.R.S., the following codes are hereby adopted, by reference thereto, as the Codes of the Town, as amended hereby: 
(1)  The International Building Code, 2015 Edition, and Appendix Chapters G (Flood Resistant Construction), and J (Grading) thereto, as amended herein, published by the International Code Council, Inc., 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, Illinois 60478-5795. 
(2)  The International Residential Code, 2015 Edition, and Appendix Chapters C (Exit Terminals of Mechanical Draft and Direct-Vent Venting Systems), F (Passive Radon Gas Controls), J (Existing Buildings and Structures), and K (Sound Transmission), as amended herein, published by the International Code Council, Inc., 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, Illinois 60478-5795. 
(3)  The International Existing Buildings Code, 2015 Edition, and Appendix Chapter B (Supplementary Accessibility Requirements), published by the International Code Council, Inc., 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, Illinois 60478-5795. 
(4)  The International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, Illinois 60478-5795. 
(5)  The edition of the International Fuel Gas Code adopted by the State of Colorado, in effect at the time of permit application. 
(6)  The edition of the International Plumbing Code adopted by the State of Colorado, in effect at the time of permit application. 
(7)  The edition of the National Electrical Code, adopted by the State of Colorado, in effect at the time of permit application. 
(b)  These adopted codes include comprehensive provisions and standards regulating the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of buildings and structures for the purpose of protecting public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Prior code 23-1; Ord. 24 §I, 1996; Ord. 11 §A, 1999; Ord. 13 §1, 2007; Ord. 19 §A.2, 2017) 
Sec. 18-16. - Amendments to the International Building Code. 
(a)  Adoption of the International Building Code, 2015 Edition is subject to the following deletions, amendments, additions and modifications: 
(1)  Section 101.1, Title, is amended by the insertion of "Town of Basalt" as the name of the jurisdiction. 
(2)  Section 107.1, General, is amended to read as follows: 
    " 107.1 General. Submittal documents consisting of construction documents , statement of special inspections , geotechnical report and other data shall be submitted in two or more sets with each permit application. The construction documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional licensed by the State of Colorado where required by state statute. All foundation designs shall be prepared by a structural engineer licensed in the State of Colorado. Where special conditions exist, the building official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional licensed in the State of Colorado. 
    " Exception: The building official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that reviewing of construction documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with this code." 
(3)  Section 109.3, Building permit valuations, is amended by the addition of the following paragraphs, to read as follows: 
    "The value to be used in computing the building permit and building plan review fees shall be the total value of all construction work for which the permit is issued, as well as all finish work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, elevators, fire-extinguishing systems and any other permanent equipment. 
    Building Valuation may be determined by using the current Building Valuation Data , published by the International Conference of Building Officials, in Building Safety Journal and online at the ICC website: iccsafe.org. The regional modifier for the Town shall be 1.5. This valuation shall be the minimum valuation. Valuations may be higher based on reasonable contractor estimates." 
(4)  Section 111.1, Use and occupancy, is amended as follows: the last sentence is hereby eliminated and replaced with: 
    "Issuance of a certificate of occupancy in accordance with this code and with town administrative policy regarding issuance of certificates of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code, any development approval granted by the Town or of other ordinances of the Town. Certificates presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code, any development approval granted by the Town or other ordinances of the Town of Basalt shall not be valid." 
(5)  Section 903.2.13.1 is added as follows: 
    " [F] 903.2.13.1 Building area over 5,000 square feet. New buildings in excess of 5,000 square feet in area or any new building in a location that is difficult to access, as determined by the fire code official, shall be equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system including the installation of a fire department connection. A minimum of a three-sprinkler-head hydraulic calculation shall be submitted for approval by the fire code official, and the official may require a larger number of sprinkler heads, depending upon the structural design submitted. Fire separations shall not constitute separate buildings for this purpose, including all R-3 (townhome) occupancies." 
(6)  Amend Section 903.4.3, Floor control valves, to read as follows: 
    " 903.4.3 Floor control valves. Approved supervised indicating control valves shall be provided at the point of connection to the riser on each floor in buildings of three stories or more. 
(7)  Section 1301.1.1, Criteria, is amended to read as follows: 
    " 1301.1.1 Criteria. Buildings shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the 2015 International Energy Conservation Code. The following exterior design conditions shall apply within the Town of Basalt: 
Winter, Design Dry-bulb 3° F Summer, Design Dry-bulb 90° F Summer, Design Wet-bulb 64° F Degree days heating 8,106 Degree days cooling 0 Climate zone 6 Degrees North Latitude 39° F"  
(8)  Add Section 1302, Snowmelt: 
    " 1302 Snowmelt. Electric snowmelt is not permitted, except cables used to assist drainage of roofs. " 
(9)  Section 1503.4, Roof drainage, is amended with the addition of new subsections as follows: 
    " 1503.4.4 Over public property. Roof drainage from a building shall not be permitted to flow over public property. Snow shall not be permitted to shed from a building onto public property." 
    " 1503.4.5 Over occupied areas. All building exits and potentially occupied areas such as sidewalks, driveways and decks under downslope eaves shall be protected from sliding snow and ice." 
    1503.4.6 Over private land area. Roof drainage, including snow, from a building shall not be permitted to flow over adjacent private property not under the ownership or control of the building owner unless there is an easement or other legal document in place allowing for such drainage. 
    " 1503.4.7 Utility meters. Gas and electric utility meters under downslope eaves shall be protected from roof drainage, sliding snow and ice." 
(10)  Section 1608.2, Ground snow loads, is amended to read as follows: 
    " 1608.2 Ground snow loads. Basalt is located in area designated CS on Figure 1608.2, where site specific Case Studies are required to establish ground snow loads. The ground snow load for the Town of Basalt, Colorado, shall be fifty five (55) pounds per square foot, as designated in Table 1.1a of Colorado Design Snow Loads , 2016 edition, a case study published by the Structural Engineers Association of Colorado." 
(11)  Section 1807.2, Retaining walls, is amended to read as follows: 
    " 1807.2 Retaining walls. Retaining walls shall be designed by a design professional licensed by the State of Colorado in accordance with Sections 1807.2.1 through 1807.2.3." 
(12)  Method 1 of Section 1809.5, Frost Protection, is amended to read as follows: 
    "1. Extending thirty six (36) inches below finished grade, the frost line for the Town of Basalt. 
(13)  Section 3403, Additions, alterations or repairs, is amended by the addition of Section 3403.5, Utilities, to read as follows: 
    " 3403.5 Utilities. For the purpose of this section, any remodeling of an existing building or structure which requires the replacement of an existing utility or installation of a new utility system or part thereof shall be placed underground as is required for new buildings or structures." 
(Ord. 13 §1, 2007; Ord. 19 §A.3, 2017) 
Sec. 18-17. - Amendments to the International Residential Code. 
(a)  Adoption of the International Residential Code, 2015 edition is subject to the following deletions, amendments, additions and modifications: 
(1)  Section R101.1, Title, is amended by the insertion of "Town of Basalt" as the name of jurisdiction. 
(2)  Section R106.1 is amended to read as follows: 
    " R106.1 Submittal documents. Submittal documents consisting of construction documents and other data shall be submitted in two sets with each application for a permit . Foundation designs included in the construction documents shall be prepared by a design professional licensed in the State of Colorado. Where special conditions exist, the building official is authorized to require construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional licensed in the State of Colorado. 
    Exception: The building official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that reviewing of construction documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with this code." 
(3)  Section R106.1.5 is added as follows: 
    "Retaining walls on the site greater than 4 feet in height shall be designed by a registered design professional licensed in the State of Colorado." 
(4)  Section R108.2, Schedule of permit fees, is amended to read as follows: 
    " R108.2 Schedule of permit fees. On buildings, structures, mechanical systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the current Town of Basalt Fee Schedule, as approved by Town Council." 
(5)  Table R301.2(1) should be completed as follows: 
TABLE R301.2(1)
CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHICAL
DESIGN CRITERIA 
GROUND
SNOW
LOAD WIND DESIGNSpeed d 
(mph) Topographic 
effects k Special 
wind 
region l Wind-borne 
debris zone m 55 psf 115 No No No  
SEISMIC
DESIGN
CATEGORY SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROMWINTER 
DESIGN 
TEMP e Weathering a Frost line 
depth b Termite c B Severe 36" None to slight 3° F  
ICE BARRIER 
UNDERLAYMENT 
REQUIRED h FLOOD 
HAZARDS g AIR 
FREEZING 
INDEX j MEAN 
ANNUAL 
TEMP i Yes Ord. No. 25, Series 2000 2500*** degree days (F) 44° F  
(6)  Section R303.3, Bathrooms, is deleted in its entirety and replaced with: 
    " R303.3 Bathrooms. Bathrooms, water closet compartments and other similar rooms shall be provided with aggregate glazing area in windows of not less than 3 square feet, or artificial light. Bathrooms, water closet compartments and other similar rooms shall be provided with a mechanical ventilation system. The minimum local exhaust rates shall be determined in accordance with Section M1507. Exhaust air from the space shall be exhausted directly outside." 
(7)  Section R313, Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems, is deleted in its entirety. 
(8)  Section R408.1 is amended to read as follows: 
    " R408.1 Ground cover. Earth shall not be exposed under wood-framed buildings. Polyethylene sheet-plastic, not less than 6-mil in thickness, or other approved Class I vapor retarder material shall cover the ground in under-floor spaces." 
(9)  Section R408.2, Openings for under-floor ventilation, is amended to read as follows: 
    " R408.2 Ventilation. The under-floor space between the floor joists and earth under residential buildings (except space occupied by a basement or cellar) shall be provided with ventilation openings through foundation walls or exterior walls. The minimum net total area of ventilation openings shall be not less than 1/1500 of the under-floor area. A minimum of two openings must be located to provide cross-ventilation of the space. Ventilation openings shall be covered for their height and width with any of the following materials provided that the least dimension of the covering shall not exceed 1/4 inch: 
1.  Perforated sheet-metal plates not less than 0.070 inch thick. 
2.  Expanded sheet-metal plates not less than 0.047 inch thick. 
3.  Cast-iron grill or grating. 
4.  Extruded load-bearing brick vents. 
5.  Hardware cloth of 0.035 inch wire or heavier. 
6.  Corrosion-resistant wire mesh, with the least dimension being 1/8 inch. 
Exceptions: 
1. Ventilation openings are not required where continuously operated, timed, or humidistat-controlled mechanical ventilation is provided at a rate of 1.0 cfm for each 50 squares feet of under-floor space floor area. 
2. The under-floor space is conditioned and within the thermal envelope of the building." 
(10)  Section R1001.1 is amended to read: 
    " R1001.1 General. Masonry fireplaces shall be constructed in accordance with this section and the applicable provisions of Chapters 3 and 4. Masonry fireplaces shall not burn solid fuel. In areas where natural gas service is currently available or where natural gas lines are located within three hundred (300) feet of a building, no solid-fuel-burning fireplace, stove or furnace shall be installed unless it is an approved, listed nonpolluting system meeting or exceeding Colorado Phase III or Phase II EPA emissions standards. Fireplaces must otherwise be a natural gas appliance. The installation of these devices shall be in accordance with the instructions provided by the manufacturer for installation." 
(11)  Section R1002, Masonry Heaters, is deleted in its entirety. 
(12)  Section R1004.1 is amended to read: 
    " R1004.1 General. Factory-built fireplaces shall be listed and labeled and shall be installed in accordance with the conditions of the listing. No solid-fuel-burning fireplace, stove or furnace shall be installed unless it is an approved, listed nonpolluting system meeting or exceeding Colorado Phase III or Phase II EPA emissions standards. Approved solid-fuel burning fireplaces shall be tested in accordance with UL 127. Factory-built fireplaces must otherwise be a natural gas appliance in areas where natural gas service is currently available, or where natural gas lines are located within three hundred (300) feet of a building." 
(13)  Section N1101.7 is amended to read: 
    " N1101.7 (R301.1) Climate Zones. Climate Zones from Figure N1101.7 or Table N1101.7 shall be used in determining the applicable requirements in Sections N1101 through N1111. The Town of Basalt is in (Dry/B) Climate Zone 6." 
(14)  The first sentence of Dwelling Unit Fire Sprinkler Systems, Section P2904.1, General, shall be amended to read as follows: 
    " P2904.1 General. The design and installation of residential fire sprinkler systems shall be in accordance with NFPA 13D, as amended by the Basalt & Rural Fire Protection District and the Town of Basalt, or Sec. P2904, which shall be considered equivalent to NFPA 13D." 
(Ord. 13 §1, 2007; Ord. 19 §A.4, 2017) 
Sec. 18-18. - Amendments to the International Existing Buildings Code. 
(a)  Adoption of the International Existing Buildings Code, 2015 Edition, is subject to the following deletions, amendments, additions and modifications: 
(1)  Section 101.1, Title, is amended with the insertion of "Town of Basalt" as the name of the jurisdiction. 
(2)  Add Section 111.1.1 to read as follows: 
    " [A] 111.1.1 Utilities undergrounded. For the purpose of this section, any remodeling of an existing building or structure which requires the replacement of an existing utility, or installation of a new utility system, or part thereof, shall be placed underground as is required for new buildings or structures." 
(3)  Section 1102.3 is amended to read as follows: 
    " 1102.3 Fire protection systems. Existing fire areas increased by the addition shall comply with Chapter 9 of the International Building Code , as amended by the Town of Basalt. Additions to existing buildings that exceed 5,000 square feet; or additions to existing buildings that cause the total area to exceed 5,000 square feet; or additions to existing buildings that are in a location that is difficult to access, as determined by the fire code official, shall be equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system including the installation of a fire-department connection. A minimum of a three-sprinkler-head hydraulic calculation shall be submitted for approval by the fire code official, and the official may require a larger number of sprinkler heads, depending upon the structural design submitted. For purposes of this Section, a fire wall of noncombustible material, not less than three-hour fire-resistive construction, and complying with Section 705 of the International Building Code, shall separate existing buildings of more than 5,000 square feet from an addition; or an approved automatic sprinkler system may be installed throughout the building." 
(4)  Section 1401.2, Applicability, is amended with the insertion of "January 13, 1975" as the date to be inserted by the jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 13 §1, 2007; Ord. 19 §A.5, 2017) 
Sec. 18-19. - Amendments to the International Mechanical Code. 
(a)  Adoption of the International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition is subject to the following deletions, amendments, additions and modifications: 
(1)  Section R101.1, Title, is amended by the insertion of "Town of Basalt" as the name of the jurisdiction. 
(2)  Section 106.5.2 is amended to read as follows: 
    " 106.5.2 Fee Schedule. The fees for mechanical work requiring a permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the current Town of Basalt Fee Schedule, as approved by Town Council." 
(3)  Sections 106.5.3 (2) and (3) are amended with the insertion of "80% (eighty percent)" where prompted. 
(4)  Section 108.4 is amended to read as follows: 
    " 108.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, installs, alters or repairs mechanical work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official , or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law." 
(5)  The last sentence of Section 108.5, Stop work orders, is amended to read as follows: 
    "Any person who shall continue any work on the system after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law." 
(Ord. 13 §1, 2007; Ord. 19 §A.6, 2017) 
Sec. 18-20. - Amendments to the International Fuel Gas Code. 
    This section is reserved for any future amendments to the International Fuel Gas Code. 
(Ord. 13 §1, 2007; Ord. 19 §A.7, 2017) 
Sec. 18-21. - Amendments to the International Plumbing Code. 
    This section is reserved for any future amendments to the International Plumbing Code. 
(Ord. 13 §1, 2007; Ord. 19 §A.8, 2017) 
Sec. 18-22. - Amendments to the National Electrical Code. 
    This section is reserved for any future amendments to the National Electrical Code. 
(Ord. 23 §1, 2007; Ord. 19 §A.9, 2017) 
Sec. 18-23. - Type I Sustainable Building Regulations. 
(a)  Purpose. The intent of the Sustainable Building Regulations is to encourage cost-effective sustainable building methods to create durable, energy-efficient structures that conserve natural resources, promote the efficient use of building materials and improve indoor air quality. 
(b)  Applicability. These Sustainable Building Regulations apply to all new single-family, duplex and townhouse (attached single-family) construction, additions, reconstruction of over fifty percent (50%) of the existing floor area; and exterior energy uses such as snowmelt, spas and pools over sixty-four (64) square feet or patio heaters. Prior to the issuance of a residential building permit for new construction, additions, reconstruction of over fifty percent (50%) of the existing floor area and exterior energy uses, compliance with the appropriate threshold level established by Subsection (d) below, based on conditioned building area, must be demonstrated. Exterior energy uses must be mitigated one hundred percent (100%) on site per Subsection 18-24(a) of this Article. Commitments to construction methods and materials are binding toward issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
    Exception: Manufactured housing approved by Colorado Department of Housing. 
(c)  Definitions: 
    Biomass fuel means any plant-derived fuel available on a renewable or recurring basis, including agricultural crops and trees, wood and wood waste and residues (including wood pellets), plants (including aquatic plants), grasses, residues and fibers. 
    Conditioned building area means the area in a building, inside insulated walls, being heated or cooled, containing uninsulated ducts or with a fixed opening directly into an adjacent conditioned space. 
    Renewable energy source means incoming solar radiation and photosynthetic processes; natural phenomenon, including wind, hydropower and lake or pond thermal differences; from decomposition of waste material; and processes that use regenerative materials, including wood and bio-based products; and from the internal heat of the earth. 
(d)  Minimum requirements. Residential design and construction must meet the minimum thresholds below. For projects with more than one (1) dwelling unit, each unit must meet the minimum threshold. Minimum point thresholds and individual project scores upon completion will be entered on the certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  Methods and materials identified on a checklist by the applicant will be verified as part of the plan review or on field inspections, accordingly. Checklists may be revised over the course of a project, provided that minimum threshold points are maintained. Threshold levels for residential buildings and residential portions of mixed-use buildings are: 
a.  Zero (0) to two thousand (2,000) square feet of conditioned building area would need to meet sixty (60) points or more. 
b.  Two thousand one (2,001) to three thousand (3,000) square feet of conditioned building area would need to meet seventy (70) points or more. 
c.  Three thousand one (3,001) to four thousand (4,000) square feet of conditioned building area would need to meet eighty (80) points or more. 
d.  Four thousand one (4,001) to five thousand (5,000) square feet of conditioned building area would need to meet ninety (90) points or more. 
Threshold levels increase ten (10) points for air conditioning. 
(2)  For measures where a graduated point scale is possible, the following shall apply: 
a.  Quantity Level 1: 10-25% 
b.  Quantity Level 2: 26-50% 
c.  Quantity Level 3: 51-75% 
d.  Quantity Level 4: 76--00% 
For example, if a programmable thermostat (Paragraph 18-25(d)(17), one [1] point per Quantity Level) is installed that controls fifteen percent (15%) of the habitable space, then one (1) point would be applied. If programmable thermostats controlled one hundred percent (100%) of the habitable space, then four (4) points would be applied. 
(Ord. 11 §1, 2009; Ord. 21 §2, 2015) 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. 21 , adopted Dec. 8, 2015, changed the title of § 18-23 from "Sustainable Building Regulations" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 18-24. - Type I Sustainable Building Regulations-Exterior Energy Uses. 
(a)  Mitigation required. Sustainable Building Practices discourage exterior energy uses. Approval for snowmelt and outdoor spas/hot tubs can be gained only through one-hundred-percent on-site mitigation with renewable energy. Any energy use by snow and ice melt systems, patio heaters and similar outdoor features or equipment requiring a building permit must be offset by on-site renewable energy generation equivalent to the energy used. 
(b)  Snowmelt energy use for dwelling units is thirty-four thousand four hundred twenty-five (34,425) BTUs per square foot per year at one-hundred-percent efficiency. Outdoor hot tubs/spas energy use is four hundred thirty thousand (430,000) BTUs per square foot per year. 
(c)  To determine required mitigation, calculate the energy consumption from depletable sources used. Energy use must be adjusted for actual appliance efficiency. 
For example: 
For one thousand (1,000) square feet of snowmelt from a ninety-percent efficient boiler: (34,425/0.90)1,000 = 38,250,000 BTU/s.f./year must be mitigated. In kWh, that is 38,250,000/3,412, or 11,210 kWh per year of photovoltaic (PV) mitigation. 
(Ord. 11 §1, 2009; Ord. 21 §3, 2015) 
Editor's note- Section 3 of Ord. 21 , adopted Dec. 8, 2015, changed the title of § 18-24 from "Exterior energy uses" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 18-25. - Type I Sustainable Building Regulations-Point Details. 
(a)  Site/water conservation. 
(1)  Limit site impact to ten (10) feet beyond building footprint. 
a.  Benefit: Unaltered natural native vegetation outside of impacted construction area and driveway. Not applicable for sites not meeting minimum landscaping requirements or for previously impacted landscape. Thinning required for wildfire mitigation is exempt. 
b.  Qualification: Show detailed construction management plan with sediment fence/limits of construction no more than ten (10) feet around proposed building footprint. Driveway and material storage exempted. Show areas impacted by construction on landscaping plan. 
c.  Points: 3. 
d.  Confirmation will be at plan review and foundation inspection. 
(2)  Ultra-low or dual-flush toilets. 
a.  Benefit: Toilets typically use the most water of any household fixture or appliance on a daily basis. New and improved high-efficiency models use less water per flush. 
b.  Qualification: All toilets must be ultra-low or dual-flush. A toilet using one and four-tenths (1.4) gallons per flush (GPF) or less qualifies as an ultra-low-flush toilet. 
c.  Points: 2 per fixture (6 maximum). 
d.  Confirmation will be at final inspection. 
(3)  Low-flow showerheads. 
a.  Benefit: According to the EPA, showering represents approximately seventeen percent (17%) of residential indoor water use in the United States. Low-flow showerheads reduce water consumption and the energy used to heat shower water. 
b.  Qualification: Showerheads emitting two (2) gallons per minute or less must be installed on all showers. Provide any documentation for on-site inspection. No more than one (1) showerhead per one thousand two hundred ninety-six (1,296) square inches of shower stall floor area and require showerheads to be at least thirty-six (36) inches apart. 
c.  Points: 1 per fixture (3 maximum). 
d.  Confirmation will be at final inspection. 
(4)  Low-flow bathroom faucets. 
a.  Benefit: Faucets account for more than fifteen percent (15%) of indoor household water use. Low-flow bathroom sink faucets and accessories can reduce a sink's water flow by thirty percent (30%) or more without sacrificing performance. 
b.  Qualification: Bathroom sink faucets must be WaterSense listed and labeled. Listings of approved products are available at www.epa.gov/watersense . 
c.  Points: 1 per fixture (3 maximum). 
d.  Confirmation will be at final inspection. 
(5)  Water efficient clothes washer and/or dishwasher. 
a.  Benefit: Traditional washing machines average about forty-one (41) gallons of water per load, but new, energy- and water-conserving models (front-loading or top-loading, nonagitator ones) use only sixteen (16) to twenty (20) gallons per load. Efficient dishwashers use about one-third ( 1/3 ) less water and forty-one percent (41%) less energy to heat water and dry. 
b.  Qualification: The clothes washer and dishwasher must be listed on www.aceee.org or www.energystar.gov or must be shown to have similar water usage. 
c.  Points: 1 per appliance. 
d.  Confirmation will be at final inspection. 
(6)  Storm water reuse plan. 
a.  Benefit: Recycling storm water from buildings for landscape irrigation reduces water usage and restores groundwater. One (1) inch of water on one thousand (1,000) square feet of roof equals two hundred sixty-five (265) gallons of fresh water. Collection and storage of natural precipitation is prohibited by state law. 
b.  Qualification: Provide a grading plan which illustrates the principal and construct swales to maximize distribution of surface drainage to planted areas on site or direct surface drainage to a larger, neighborhood eco-system. Subsurface "deep-root" irrigation for individual plantings also qualifies. 
c.  Points: 4. 
d.  Confirmation will be at plan review and final inspection. 
(b)  Recycling and reuse. 
(1)  Use of pine beetle salvage wood. 
a.  Benefit: Pine beetle affected lumber harvested in the State can be utilized as dimensional framing material, as well as siding, flooring, trim, etc. 
b.  Qualification: Material must be used for over fifty percent (50%) of structure. 
c.  Points: 3 per application. 
d.  Confirmation will be at framing and final inspection. 
(2)  Surplus/deconstructed materials donated to building materials exchange. 
a.  Benefit: Extra onsite materials, either new or deconstructed, can be donated to a local materials exchange yard. Currently, the RECON yard in Wolcott, the Habitat for Humanity ReStore in Glenwood Springs and Pitkin County Landfill accept most dimensional lumber and new or used building products. Site pickup is available. 
b.  Qualification: Keep records and receipts of donated materials on job site. 
c.  Points: 1 per trailer load. 
d.  Confirmation will be at final inspection. 
(3)  Wood, scrap metal, cardboard recycled on site. 
a.  Benefit: Reduced impact on landfill from construction materials. The landfill offers a fifty-percent reduced tipping fee for separated wood waste. 
b.  Qualification: Show on construction management plan. Labeled containers for wood, metal and cardboard construction waste located on site with evidence of use and service. 
c.  Points: 2 per material type recycled. For example, if cardboard and wood scrap were being recycled in containers on site, 4 points would be given. 
d.  Confirmation will be at framing inspection. 
(4)  Reclaimed and/or recycle-content materials. 
a.  Benefit: Use of construction materials reclaimed from another structure and/or any materials with recycle content in them. Material reclaimed from local deconstruction provides added benefit. 
b.  Qualification: Provide material info with building permit. Materials that are architectural salvage, purchased from a reclaimed materials distributor, deconstructed by the owner/applicant from another structure or that are purchased from a used building materials exchange (RECON yard in Wolcott, Habitat for Humanity ReStore in Glenwood Springs, etc.) all qualify as reclaimed materials. Some common recycle-content materials include fly-ash concrete, steel studs/I-beams, composite decking, recycle-content faux shake/slate roofing, cellulose or shredded cotton batt-insulation, recycle-content carpets, countertops, tile, etc. Material must be used for over fifty percent (50%) of building component. Documentation must be on job site. 
c.  Points: 2 per material used. 1 additional point for reuse of local materials (from the Western Slope). 
d.  Confirmation will be at framing inspection. 
(5)  Built-in recycling center. 
a.  Benefit: A conveniently located recycling center in the home will encourage the process. Up to thirty (30) square feet of space dedicated to recycling will be exempted from FAR calculations as mechanical/utility space. 
b.  Qualification: Design and build a recycling center, in or adjacent to the kitchen, with at least two (2) bins for glass, cans, plastic, paper, compost and other common recycling items. 
c.  Points: 3. 
d.  Confirmation will be at plan review and final inspection. 
(c)  Materials and framing. 
(1)  Materials manufactured within the State. 
a.  Benefit: Limit transportation and reduce the environmental effects. 
b.  Qualification: Provide documentation on site for any materials used that are manufactured in the State. Concrete does not qualify. 
c.  Points: 2 per material used. 
d.  Confirmation will be at plan review and framing inspection. 
(2)  Insulated Concrete Forms (ICFs). 
a.  For foundation. 
1.  Benefit: Insulated Concrete Forms (ICFs) are expanded-polystyrene foam blocks which are stacked with concrete poured into the internal void. ICFs provide improved insulation and reduced moisture transport over conventional foundation walls. 
2.  Qualification: ICFs shown on structural drawings. 
3.  Points: 5. 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review and framing inspection. 
b.  For basement/foundation walls plus above-grade walls. 
1.  Qualification: ICFs shown on structural drawings must be used for more than seventy-five percent (75%) of exterior walls. 
2.  Points: 10. 
3.  Confirmation will be at plan review and framing inspection. 
(3)  Structural/framing dimensions in two-foot increments. 
a.  Benefit: Even dimensions reduce material waste and labor. 
b.  Qualification: Show exterior dimensions on site/floor plans. Exterior dimensions in two-foot increments must be incorporated in seventy-five percent (75%) or more of the building footprint. 
c.  Points: 2. 
d.  Confirmation will be at plan review. 
(4)  Optimum value engineering techniques used. 
a.  Benefit: Conserve building materials. 
b.  Qualification: Use twenty-four-inch on center studs for over fifty percent (50%) of the structure. Use two-stud corners for over fifty percent (50%) of framing. Use efficient headers in over fifty percent (50%) of framing. Efficient headers refers to insulated headers on exterior walls (minimum R-10) or eliminating headers in non-load-bearing walls. 
c.  Points: 2 per feature; maximum of 6. 
d.  Confirmation will be at plan review and framing inspection. 
(5)  Engineered structural lumber used in floors, walls and/or roofs. 
a.  Benefit: Smaller, fast-growing tree species are used in engineered lumber, and there is little or no waste involved in the production and end use of the products. Engineered lumber products are an innovative alternative to the solid sawn lumber materials that have to be harvested in diminishing old-growth forests. 
b.  Qualification: Must be in place for over fifty percent (50%) of the structure. 
c.  Points: 1 for floors only; 2 for floors, roof and/or walls. 
d.  Confirmation will be at plan review and framing inspection. 
(6)  Pre-cut studs, trusses, walls and/or sections. 
a.  Benefit: Pre-cut or off-site construction of structures reduces material waste. 
b.  Qualification: Use precut studs and trusses for over seventy-five percent (75%) of the structure (2 points). Use panelized or prefabricated walls. (2 additional points). Use prefabricated sections or modular construction for over seventy-five percent (75%) or more of the building (2 additional points). 
c.  Points: 2 to 4. 
d.  Confirmation will be at plan review and framing inspection. 
(7)  FSC- or SFI-certified materials used. 
a.  Benefit: Preserve old-growth forests by promoting sustainably harvested wood products. 
b.  Qualification: Wood certified by either the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) or Sustainable Forestry Initiative (SFI). Greenspot, in Glenwood Springs, and Valley Lumber, in Basalt, are certified by both organizations for chain of custody. Material must be used in over fifty percent (50%) of building. 
c.  Points: 2 points per material used. 
d.  Confirmation will be at plan review and framing inspection. 
(8)  Structural Insulated Panels (SIPs) or straw bale used for exterior walls. 
a.  Benefit: SIPs (a foam core laminated to oriented strand board) and straw bale construction provide superior R-values and reduced air infiltration to conventional two-by-six wall construction. 
b.  Qualification: Must be used for more than seventy-five percent (75%) of exterior walls. 
c.  Points: 10. 
d.  Confirmation will be at plan review and framing inspection. 
(d)  Energy. 
(1)  HERS rated house. 
a.  Benefit: The overall energy efficiency of Home Energy Rating System (HERS)-rated homes is usually higher than minimum building code standards. E-Star is an accredited HERS provider and the major trainer and certifier of Home Energy Raters in the State. An E-Star energy rating gives each home a score expressed on a scale from zero (0) to one hundred (100), with one hundred (100) as the 2003 IECC baseline. The goal is to be "better than code" and ultimately "net zero." Complete information, including local rating professionals, is available at www.e-star.com . 
b.  Qualification: Submit documentation with plans from an HERS professional showing calculations showing an index of eighty (80) or less and, at completion of the project, an As-Built Energy Rating Report with a rating of eighty (80) or less. 5 points additional for an index rating of seventy-five (75) or less; 5 points additional for an index rating of seventy (70) or less; and 5 points additional for net zero. 
c.  Points: 5 to 20. 
d.  Confirmation will be upon presentation of the qualifying As-Built Energy Rating Report. 
(2)  Blower door test only. 
a.  Benefit: Promotes tighter construction and pinpoints areas of air infiltration. Air tightness is one (1) of the main principles of energy conservation; this is the only way to quantify it. 
b.  Qualification: Complete a blower door test by a certified professional that accurately shows air changes per hour (ACH). Test results must show ACH of 0.40 or less. 
c.  Points: 5. 
d.  Confirmation will be upon presentation of the qualifying test results. 
(3)  Roof/ceiling insulation. 
a.  Benefit: Increased insulation levels reduce heat loss. This is the most effective use of insulation to reduce overall heat loss. 
b.  Qualification: Show roof/ceiling insulation plan. Install per plan. Post completed Insulation Certificate in mechanical room. 
c.  Points: 1 to 15 - 1 point for each R-value over thirty-eight (38), up to 15 points maximum. For example, if an R-50 roof is installed, 12 points would be given. 
d.  Confirmation will be at insulation inspection. 
(4)  Reflective radiant barrier. 
a.  Benefit: A reflective radiant barrier installed in a vented attic space reduces ceiling heat gains and cooling loads in summer. 
b.  Qualification: Show and specify a reflective radiant barrier on roof/ceiling insulation plan. Install a reflective radiant barrier on the "ceiling" or "floor" of the attic or under the roof sheathing of a vaulted ceiling. 
c.  Points: 2. 
d.  Confirmation will be at framing if installed on or under roof sheathing; or insulation inspection if laid over insulation. 
(5)  Wall insulation. 
a.  Benefit: Increased insulation levels reduce heat loss. 
b.  Qualification: Show wall insulation in construction plans. Install per plan. Post completed insulation certificate in mechanical room. 
c.  Points: 1 to 15 - 1 point given for each R-value over nineteen (19), up to 15 points maximum. For example, if an R-30 wall is installed, 11 points would be given. 
d.  Confirmation will be at insulation inspection. 
(6)  Exterior insulation. 
a.  Benefit: The so-called Residential Exterior Membrane Outside-Insulation Technique (REMOTE) eliminates thermal bridging, thereby increasing the effective R-value of the insulation. A REMOTE shell provides a very tight air envelope. 
b.  Qualification: Detail a REMOTE system on plans. Specify a minimum three-inch rigid (EPS or XPS) exterior insulation. Requires effective mechanical ventilation system and sealed combustion appliances. Visit www.cchrc.org/remote.aspx for more information. 
c.  Points: 5 points for three-inch minimum exterior rigid insulation; 10 points for six-inch minimum insulation. 
d.  Confirmation will be at insulation inspection. 
(7)  Slab insulation. 
a.  Benefit: Increased insulation levels reduce heat loss. 
b.  Qualification: For slab-on-grade and basement floor, show compression-resistant insulation under the slab on construction plans. Install per plan. 
c.  Points: 1 point for R-5 insulation; 2 points for R-8 insulation; 3 points for R-16 insulation; 4 points for R-20 minimum insulation. 
d.  Confirmation will be prior to slab pour. 
(8)  Crawl space/basement wall insulation. 
a.  Benefit: Increased insulation levels reduce heat loss. 
b.  Qualification: For crawl space and/or basement walls, show insulation of wall in construction plans. Install per plan. Insulation must be continuous for entire wall area below main floor. 
c.  Points: 1 to 3 - For minimum R-10, 1 point; for minimum R-15, 2 points; for R-19 or higher, 3 points. 
d.  Confirmation will be at insulation or final inspection. 
(9)  Blown or sprayed insulation. 
a.  Benefit: Blown or sprayed insulation reduces air infiltration and offers higher effective R-values than batt insulation. 
b.  Qualification: Specify blown fiberglass or cellulose or spray-foam insulation on plans. Blown insulation installed in attics/ceilings, walls and basements/ crawl spaces. 
c.  Points: 1 per Quantity Level - 1 point given for each quantity level of blown or sprayed insulation installed. For example, if eighty percent (80%) of the insulation in a structure is blown-in, then quantity level 4 (76-100%) or 4 points would be given. 
d.  Confirmation will be at insulation inspection. 
(10)  Insulate hot water pipes at all locations. 
a.  Benefit: Insulating hot water pipes reduces heat loss through the plumbing system. Hot water is delivered to point of use faster, reducing water waste. 
b.  Qualification: Closed cell foam or fiberglass pipe insulation with a minimum 2.5 R-value must be installed on all hot water pipes. Install R-5 for 2 points. 
c.  Points: 1 to 2. 
d.  Confirmation will be at plumbing rough-in inspection. 
(11)  Energy-efficient windows. 
a.  Benefit: High performance windows significantly increase a wall's thermal resistance, helping keep the interior warmer in the winter and cooler in the summer. 
b.  Qualification: Provide window manufacturer specifications with window schedule as part of construction plans. Leave window labels in place until inspected. 
c.  Points: 2 points for each U-.05 below U-.35 (for example, U-.30 = 2 pts). 
d.  Confirmation will be at framing inspection. 
(12)  Insulating window coverings installed. 
a.  Benefit: Windows, even high performance models, are still typically the largest point of heat loss in walls. By utilizing insulating window coverings, a window's thermal performance can be doubled or tripled. 
b.  Qualification: Window coverings must be installed on seventy-five percent (75%), or more, of the windows and have a minimum R-3 to qualify. Some common options are duet/cellular shades or quilted shades. 
c.  Points: 3. 
d.  Confirmation will be at final inspection. 
(13)  Radiant floor/hydronic baseboard heating system. 
a.  Benefit: Buildings with hydronic heating systems have consistently shown lower heating energy use than equivalent structures with forced-air heating systems. Occupants are warmed at lower air temperatures with radiant heat. Hydronic systems can be zoned, which provides the potential for unoccupied rooms to be kept at lower temperatures, which lowers heat loss and reduces fuel consumption. 
b.  Qualification: Either in-floor radiant heat or baseboard hydronic heat qualifies, provided that over fifty percent (50%) of the heating needs of the structure are met by hydronic means. 
c.  Points: 2. 
d.  Confirmation will be at mechanical rough-in and final inspection. 
(14)  Efficient boiler or furnace. 
a.  Benefit: Efficient operation reduces energy consumption and emissions. 
b.  Qualification: Specify and install a heating appliance with an AFUE rating of at least eighty-eight percent (88%). 
c.  Points: 1 to 7 - If a boiler and/or furnace with a combined AFUE rating of eighty-eight percent (88%) is installed, then 1 point is given. For each point of efficiency above eighty-eight percent (88%) up to ninety-four percent (94%), an additional point is given. For example, if a boiler has an AFUE rating of ninety-four percent (94%), then 7 points would be given. 
d.  Confirmation will be at heating inspection. 
(15)  Ductwork in conditioned spaces. 
a.  Benefit: Whenever possible, running ductwork through unconditioned space, especially attics, should be avoided. It creates a potential for heat loss, moisture and mold problems. 
b.  Qualification: Keep all ductwork within thermal envelope, or ducts in unconditioned space should be sealed with mastic at all joints and insulated to a minimum R-6; R-8 minimum in attics. 
c.  Points: 2 for all ductwork within conditioned space; or 1 for properly sealed and insulated ductwork in unconditioned space. 
d.  Confirmation will be at HVAC rough-in inspection. 
(16)  No mechanical air conditioning. 
a.  Benefit: Eliminating the need for air conditioning offers an immediate initial cost savings as well as reduced operational costs for the life of the structure. 
b.  Qualification: Proper design of building aspect, window sizing and placement, overhang shading and insulation can eliminate the need for air-conditioning systems in our climate. No components for a roughed-in system should be installed. 
c.  Points: 4. 
d.  Confirmation will be at final inspection. 
(17)  Programmable thermostats. 
a.  Benefit: Allows occupants to set heating and cooling needs to their lifestyle. 
b.  Qualification: Thermostats that automatically change programmed temperature settings must be installed and be functional. If a programmable thermostat controls fifteen percent (15%) of the habitable space, then 1 point would be applied. If programmable thermostats control one hundred percent (100%) of the habitable space, then 4 points would be applied. 
c.  Points: 1 to 4 (graduated point scale). 
d.  Confirmation will be at final inspection. 
(18)  Thermostats for each room. 
a.  Benefit: A zoned system allows heating and cooling to be isolated to occupied rooms only. 
b.  Qualification: Each enclosed room must have a separate thermostat, not including storage areas, closets, bathrooms, mechanical rooms or nonhabitable space. 
c.  Points: 4. 
d.  Confirmation will be at final inspection. 
(19)  Tankless on-demand water heater or efficient gas water heater. 
a.  Benefit: Efficient operation reduces energy consumption and emissions. 
b.  Qualification: Gas or electric tankless models qualify and must meet over fifty percent (50%) of total domestic hot water needs. Boiler side-arms (water heaters), off of a modulating, condensing boiler ninety-percent efficiency or above; a combined (space and water heating) appliance efficiency rating (CAE) of 0.85 or higher; or a condensing water heater with a thermal efficiency rating of ninety percent (90%) or higher also qualify. Units must have an intermittent ignition device (IID) instead of a standing pilot light. 
c.  Points: 3; or gas water heaters with eighty-eight-percent efficiency or above receive 2 points. 
d.  Confirmation will be at final inspection. 
(20)  Energy Star appliances. 
a.  Benefit: Energy Star appliances are designed and tested for energy efficiency as well as water conservation. 
b.  Qualification: Appliances, other than those credited for water conservation (Paragraph 18-25(a)(4)) with the EPA's Energy Star logo on them and/or listed on www.energystar.gov website qualify. Clothes dryers are not Energy Star rated; however, an outdoor clothesline will qualify. 
c.  Points: 1 to 4 (graduated point scale). 
d.  Confirmation will be at final inspection, with appliances installed and operable. 
(21)  Ceiling fans/air destratification system in common rooms. 
a.  Benefit: Ceiling fans and air-handling systems help to reduce the accumulation of warm air at ceiling level and exfiltration through the ceiling during the winter; and they circulate air in the summer, making a room feel cooler. 
b.  Qualification: Show units/systems in construction plans. 
c.  Points: 1 per fan to a maximum of 4. 
d.  Confirmation will be at final inspection. 
(22)  Installation of whole-house fan natural cooling/ventilation system. 
a.  Benefit: Help cool a structure by flushing warm air from inside living space, as well as the attic. Such ventilation systems can help reduce or eliminate air-conditioning cooling loads. 
b.  Qualification: Whole-house fan natural cooling/ventilation systems installed in the ceilings and attic. Systems must operable manually and by automated thermostat. Fans should be sized to produce between four (4) to five (5) air changes per hour (ACH) at maximum speed. For design purposes, use the following formula: 
    Minimum fan CFMs = Volume of house x 4-5 ACH/60, where Volume = square footage of house interior x average ceiling height. 
c.  Points: 2. 
d.  Confirmation will be at final inspection. 
(23)  Centralized heat recovery ventilation (HRV). 
a.  Benefit: An HRV unit integrated with a forced-air heating system increases heating efficiency. It can be operated independent of the furnace to circulate and freshen indoor air during winter and summer. 
b.  Qualification: Majority of total mechanical ventilation must go through an HRV unit for points. 
c.  Points: 8. 
d.  Confirmation will be at heating inspection. 
(24)  Exterior lighting minimized. 
a.  Benefit: Reduces nighttime light pollution, glaring and offensive light sources and conserves energy. 
b.  Qualification: Exterior lighting plan to be submitted with construction plans. Total exterior lighting must be less than five thousand five hundred (5,500) lumens for points. (One-hundred-watt incandescent or twenty-three-watt CFL light bulbs produce around one thousand six hundred (1,600) lumens; sixty-watt incandescent or thirteen-watt CFL bulbs produce around eight hundred (800) lumens; and forty-watt incandescent or nine-watt CFL bulbs produce around four hundred fifty (450) lumens, according to Energy Star). LED bulbs produce approximately twenty (20) lumens per watt. 
c.  Points: 2. 
d.  Confirmation will be at plan review and final inspection. 
(25)  Efficient lighting. 
a.  Benefit: Alternatives to incandescent bulbs use twenty percent (20%) or less wattage for equivalent lumens. 
b.  Qualification: Compact Fluorescent Lamps (CFLs), T8s, T5s, LEDs or equivalent comply. Over fifty percent (50%) of the bulbs installed must be alternatives to incandescent. 
c.  Points: 2; 4 points for fifty percent (50%) LEDs. 
d.  Confirmation will be at final inspection. 
Note: CFL bulbs contain mercury and must be disposed of properly (as hazardous waste) when broken or burned out. More info at www. cdphe. state. co. us /hm /mercury /cflfact sheet. pdf . 
(26)  Motion-detecting light switches. 
a.  Benefit: Lighting operated by motion detection saves energy while increasing safety and security. 
b.  Qualification: Install motion-detection-controlled lighting as an integrated unit or by a remote motion sensor for closets, basements, etc. 
c.  Points: 1 to 4 - 1 point is given for each motion detection switch installed, up to 4 points. 
d.  Confirmation will be at final inspection. 
(e)  Renewable energy sources. 
(1)  Passive solar design. 
a.  Benefit: Effective passive solar design allows for southeast-facing solar heat gain and heat storage in thermal mass of the interior during the winter, while properly shading south-facing windows to prevent unwanted heat gain during the summer. 
b.  Qualification: Site must have reasonably unobstructed solar access. Deciduous trees are allowable to the south, and desirable to the east and west, for summer shading. Site plan must show a Sun Angles Dial along with the North Arrow, showing at minimum angles of sunrise, angles of the sun at noon and angles of sunset for summer solstice, equinox and winter solstice respectively. In Basalt, the angles of the noon sun are sixty-eight (68), forty-seven (47) and twenty-five (25) degrees for summer solstice, equinox and winter solstice, respectively. 
1.  Optimize glazing. 
a)  Install south-facing (within at least twenty [20] degrees east of due south) glass equivalent to seven percent (7%) or more of total heated floor area. Effective south-facing windows require a high Solar Heat Gain Coefficient (SHGC) - typically 0.60 or higher - to maximize heat gain. 
b)  Points: 10. 
2.  Shading. 
a)  Install south-facing glass equivalent to twelve percent (12%) or less of total heated floor area and provide proper shading according to the formula E = H / 3.38, or conversely, H = E x 3.38, where E = eave depth and H = height of bottom of window from the eave. 
b)  Points: 10. 
3.  Thermal mass. 
a)  For each square foot of south-facing glass, provide at minimum an equivalent square footage of thermal mass interior walls and/or floor reached by the solar gain. Examples of thermal mass include concrete, Gyp-Crete, tile, masonry or stone floors; double-layered sheetrock, masonry, stone, adobe walls. 
b)  Points: 5. 
c.  Confirmation will be at plan review and final inspection. 
(2)  Solar hot water system. 
a.  For domestic hot water. 
1.  Benefit: Supply or supplement hot water for domestic use with little or no energy consumption. 
2.  Qualification: Install a solar hot water system, which includes rooftop or ground-mounted panel collectors connected to a heat exchanger and/or insulated storage tank for domestic hot water supply. System must have unobstructed solar access. Systems may be active, using solar or electric pumps, or they may utilize a thermal siphon. Collectors must be facing within twenty (20) degrees of due south and between thirty (30) and fifty (50) degrees from horizontal. System size is dependent on number of bedrooms. Evacuated-tube collectors are typically twenty-five percent (25%) more efficient than flat-plate collectors. Parenthesized areas are minimum requirements for evacuated-tube collectors. 
a)  One (1) bedroom - forty (40) square feet of collectors (thirty [30] square feet), fifty (50) gallons storage. 
b)  Two (2) bedrooms - forty-eight (48) square feet of collectors (thirty-six [36] square feet), sixty (60) gallons storage. 
c)  Three (3) bedrooms - sixty-four (64) square feet of collectors (forty-eight [48] square feet), eighty (80) gallons storage. 
d)  Four (4) + bedrooms - ninety-six (96) square feet of collectors (seventy-two [72] square feet), one hundred twenty (120) gallons storage. 
3.  Points: 8. 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review and final inspection. 
b.  Integrated solar hot water system that supplements both radiant floor heat and domestic hot water. 
1.  Benefit: Supply or supplement hot water for domestic use and space heating with little or no energy consumption. 
2.  Qualification: Install a solar hot water system sized as previous (bedroom based) that provides heat for radiant floor heating as well as domestic hot water. Show system in construction plans and schematics. 
3.  Points: 16. 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review and final inspection. 
c.  Solar hot water system rough-in only. 
1.  Benefit: Simplifies solar retrofit if undertaken in the future. 
2.  Qualifications: Two (2) runs of copper plumbing pipe, three-quarter-inch minimum, insulated to an R-6 minimum, must be installed in an interior wall and start in the mechanical room or near the area that will house the storage tank/heat exchanger. An 18/2 wire must also be run at the same location for future control installations. The plumbing and wiring should terminate in an attic space under the roof that will support the solar collectors, and it shall be above the insulation for easy sighting. If there isn't an attic space, the piping and wiring shall end after penetrating the roof that will support the collectors. 
3.  Points: 2. 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review and final inspection. 
(3)  On-site power generation. 
a.  Benefit: Power generated on site from natural processes reduces demands on regional power plants. 
1.  Solar photovoltaic system. 
a)  Benefit: Photovoltaic (PV devices) change sunlight directly into household electricity. 
b)  Qualification: Applicant must submit plans from a qualified architect, engineer or designer certifying the kW capacity and proper system design. Photovoltaic panels should be mounted within twenty (20) degrees of due south and between thirty (30) and fifty (50) degrees from horizontal. System must have reasonably unobstructed solar access. Proper protection to prevent electric islanding must be in place in the event of a power outage. Thin film PV is acceptable. 
c)  Points: 10 for every one (1) kW installed, to a maximum of 50 or net zero. 
d)  Confirmation will be at plan review and final inspection. 
2.  Solar photovoltaic system rough-in only. 
a)  Benefit: Simplifies solar retrofit if undertaken in the future. 
b)  Qualifications: A one-inch conduit must be installed between the attic/roof and the future inverter location, in the general vicinity of the electrical panel. Ends of the conduit shall be labeled "solar." Conduit terminating in an attic space under the roof that will support the solar collectors shall be above the insulation for easy sighting. If there isn't an attic space, the piping and wiring shall end on the roof that will support the collectors, in a sealed junction box. Provide three (3) feet by three (3) feet of wall space thirty (30) inches deep (FAR exempt) for a future inverter. Reserve two (2) slots in the main breaker panel for a 240-volt breaker. 
c)  Points: 2. 
d)  Confirmation will be at plan review and final inspection. 
3.  Ground source heat pump (geothermal) system. 
a)  Benefit: Ground source heat pumps utilize glycol loop systems drilled into the ground to heat or cool a structure. 
b)  Qualification: Points are given for each quantity level of the structure's heating/cooling needs met by the system. If utilized for a snowmelt system, total energy calculations must include exterior energy use as well. 
c)  Points: 10 to 40 - 10 points per quantity level. For example, if the system met sixty percent (60%) of the structure's heating/cooling needs, quantity level 3 (51-75%), at 10 points per quantity level, 30 points would be given. 
d)  Confirmation will be at plan review and final inspection. 
4.  High-efficiency wood-burning stove. 
a)  Benefit: Wood- and biomass-fuel burning technology has improved tremendously in recent years. Woodstove efficiency has increased, and emissions rates have been reduced with pellet, soapstone, catalytic and noncatalytic stoves. Additional information may be found at www.static. hpba.org/fileadmin/factsheets/product/EPACertWoodburning.pdf . 
b)  Qualification: Specify stove make and model number on plans. Stoves may generate no more than two (2) grams/hour of particulate and must exceed seventy-five-percent efficiency as determined by EPA (New Source Performance Standard for New Residential Wood Heaters) test methods using Low-Heat Value protocol. Provide EPA "Temporary Label," manufacturer's (IRS) certification statement or other documentation at plan review. Installation must conform to manufacturer's recommendations at final inspection. 
c)  Points: 4. 
d)  Confirmation will be at plan review and final inspection. 
5.  A five-year commitment of wind energy from Holy Cross Energy or Xcel Energy. 
a)  Benefit: Wind is a clean, inexhaustible, indigenous energy resource. On-site wind power is not practical in the Town; however, wind energy credits are available through Holy Cross Energy ( www.holycross.com ). For around two and one-half cents ($0.025) per kWh above the current rate, residents can purchase wind energy for their home use equivalent. 
b)  Qualification: Submit copy of applicable electric bill from utility showing level of wind energy commitment (if available), as well as signed document from the applicant stating a minimum five-year commitment at given levels. 
c)  Points: 2 per Quantity Level - For example, if your wind energy commitment represented one hundred percent (100%) of your average monthly use, then Quantity Level 4 (76%-100%) would apply, 2 points per quantity level, giving the applicant 8 points. 
d)  Confirmation will be at plan review. 
(f)  Indoor air quality. 
(1)  Formaldehyde-free and/or low-toxic insulation. 
a.  Benefit: Formaldehyde resins have been used in the manufacture of fiberglass batts. Out-gassing of formaldehyde, a probable human carcinogen, has been found to contaminate indoor air. Use of alternative insulating products reduces exposure to occupants. 
b.  Qualification: Insulation must be labeled as formaldehyde-free or Green Guard certified at www.greenguard.org. 
c.  Points: Required. 
d.  Confirmation will be at plan review and insulation inspection. 
(2)  Low- or zero-VOC and/or low-toxic interior paint, stain/finishes and adhesives. 
a.  Benefit: Interior paint contributes to total VOC levels. 
b.  Qualification: EPA regulations call for no more than two hundred fifty (250) gm/L of Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs) in low-VOC latex paints and no more than three hundred eighty (380) gm/L for low-VOC oil-based paints/ stains. Products must be either labeled "Low VOC," Green Guard certified ( www.greenguard.org ) or show that VOC levels are below EPA thresholds. 
c.  Points: Required. 
d.  Confirmation will be at final inspection. 
(3)  Low- or non-toxic floor coverings. 
a.  Benefit: Carpet and other traditional floor coverings contribute VOCs to indoor air. 
b.  Qualification: Materials either listed on www.greenguard.org or show that coverings are below EPA thresholds for low- or non-toxicity. 
c.  Points: 1 per Quantity Level - Quantity Level is determined by the percentage of total floor area meeting the above criteria. For example, if eighty percent (80%) of the total flooring was non-toxic, then Quantity Level 4 (76-100%) would apply, 1 point per Quantity Level, so 4 points would be given. 
d.  Confirmation will be at plan review and final inspection. 
(4)  "Smart" vapor retarder in walls. 
a.  Benefit: Eliminating moisture from wall cavities prevents mold and decay fungi from developing. This product allows closed building envelope systems to increase their drying potential with seasonal climatic changes. 
b.  Qualification: Install a vapor-retarder system in exterior walls that allows for moisture permeability above sixty percent (60%) relative humidity. Specify on wall sections. 
c.  Points: 5. 
d.  Confirmation will be at plan review and insulation inspection. 
(5)  All furnaces, fireplaces, boilers, gas water heaters, sealed-combustion/direct-vented. 
a.  Benefit: Sealed-combustion/ direct-vented gas appliances reduce the risk of combustion byproducts entering the indoor environment and supply combustion air from outside directly to the combustion chamber. 
b.  Qualification: Submit appliance specifications with construction plans. 
c.  Points: 4. 
d.  Confirmation will be at plan review and heating inspection. 
(6)  High-efficiency filter on HVAC system (HEPA, UV, etc.). 
a.  Benefit: High-efficiency filters remove contaminates down to 0.3 microns in size from circulating air. Ultraviolet light which kills virtually all microorganisms (98.9%) can be installed. 
b.  Qualification: Install a high-efficiency filter on a forced-air distribution system. Installed filter must be rated at ninety-nine percent (99%) efficiency or higher. 
c.  Points: HEPA 4; UV 5. 
d.  Confirmation will be at final inspection. 
(7)  Heat recovery ventilation. 
a.  Benefit: An HRV system captures potentially lost warm air while ventilating interior space with fresh air. It is an energy-efficient way to remove moisture, odors, allergens and harmful gasses from indoor air while minimizing heat loss. 
b.  Qualification: Majority of total mechanical ventilation must go through an HRV unit for points. 
c.  Points: 5. 
d.  Confirmation will be at mechanical rough-in inspection. 
(8)  Range hood exhausted outside or through HRV. 
a.  Benefit: Removes moisture generated from cooking, as well as cooking odors and products of combustion from gas appliances. 
b.  Qualification: Install a range hood to exhaust not more than two hundred (200) CFM to the outside. Larger hoods are required to provide make-up air to prevent depressurization. Hoods larger than six hundred (600) CFM are not permitted in a residence. (So much make-up air is required that it will need tempering.) 
c.  Points: 2. 
d.  Confirmation will be at permit application and final inspection. 
(9)  Radon mitigation. 
a.  Benefit: Radon is a natural radioactive gas that you can't see, smell or taste. The EPA has determined that it is a carcinogen. 
b.  Qualification: Design and install radon mitigation system that removes radon or other soil gas from under the slab/crawlspace and vent per EPA guidelines. More information may be found at www.epa.gov/radon/index and www.buildingscience.com . 
c.  Points: 3. 
d.  Confirmation will be at final inspection. 
(g)  Innovation points. 
(1)  Innovative product use and/or design points will be given points on a case-by-case basis. 
(2)  The item must specifically meet the intent of the sustainable building regulations as stated at the beginning of this Article. Points will be scaled as the item would apply to similar comparable items in the guidelines, as determined by the plans examiner. 
(3)  Some options eligible for innovation points may include, but are not limited to: Energy 10 Analysis; American Lung Association-certified home; modulating or sequentially staged boilers; net-zero energy home; "Passive House"; frost-protected shallow foundation, trombe wall/interior thermal massing systems, evapotranspiration watering system, on-site cogeneration power system, passive solar lighting, etc. 
(Ord. 11 §1, 2009; Ord. 21 §4, 2015) 
Editor's note- Section 4 of Ord. 21 , adopted Dec. 8, 2015, changed the title of § 18-25 from "Point details" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 18-26. - Type II Sustainable Building Regulations-Non-Residential and Multi-family Residential. 
(a)  Purpose. The intent of the Sustainable Building Regulations Program is to encourage cost-effective sustainable building methods to create durable, energy efficient structures that conserve natural resources, promote the efficient use of building materials, and improve the quality of the indoor environment for non-residential and multi-family residential development. 
(b)  Applicability and checklist. Type II Sustainable Building Regulations apply to all new non-residential, mixed use, and/or multi-family construction not covered by the Type I Sustainable Building Regulations. Type II Sustainable Building Regulations also apply to additions; reconstruction of over fifty percent (50%) of the existing floor area. A completed Sustainable Building Regulations checklist must be submitted along with a building permit application, demonstrating compliance with the appropriate threshold level based on type of use. References in this section to the IECC shall mean the 2015 IECC. The required categories do not apply to tenant finish permits as long as the tenant finish permit meets the required tenant finish threshold set in this section. 
(c)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Manufactured housing approved by Colorado Department of Housing; and 
(2)  LEED certified buildings are excepted from compliance with the Type II Sustainable Building Regulations. Projects achieving LEED gold or better will receive a twenty-five percent (25%) building permit rebate, not to exceed the rebate amount specified in the Town of Basalt Fee Schedule. 
(d)  Definitions. 
    Building component is one (1) of the following: framing, wall, siding, flooring, trim, and other primary elements of a building as determined by the Town Building Official. 
    Conditioned building area is the area in building, inside insulated walls, being heated or cooled, containing uninsulated ducts, or with a fixed opening directly into an adjacent conditioned space. 
    Construction element is one (1) of the following: framing material, siding, flooring, trim, and other primary elements of a building as determined by the Town Building Official. 
    Engineered lumber is a composite wood product made from pieces of recycled/reconstituted/scrap wood and fibers bonded together with adhesive to create a durable and resource friendly substitute for raw-sawn lumber. 
    Occupancy is the occupancy as designated by the building code in affect at the time of perm it submittal. 
    Renewable energy source is incoming solar radiation and photosynthetic processes; natural phenomenon including wind, hydropower, and lake or pond thermal differences; from decomposition of waste material; and processes that use regenerative materials, including wood and bio-based products; and from the internal heat of the earth. 
(e)  Point requirements. All Type II construction must demonstrate compliance with these standards by demonstrating that it meets the minimum point thresholds. The minimum points required for applicable construction projects range from 30-68 points depending on the project type as shown below. 
Required Thresholds Commercial building (complete) 68 points Commercial building (core and shell) 65 points Commercial tenant finish 30 points Multi-family (apartments or condos) 65 points Hotel 68 points  
    Projects not meeting the minimum points shall pay a mitigation fee as follows: 
Fee = Square footage of project x number of points short x $ .15. 
For example, a 4,000 square foot project that is 5 points short would be assessed a fee as follows: 
4,000 x 5 x $ .15 = $3,000.00 
(f)  Commitments must be maintained. Commitments to construction methods and materials are binding toward issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or must be mitigated. Commitments that are credited towards satisfying the Type II cannot be removed after issuance of a certificate of occupancy unless sufficient mitigation is provided for the commitment removed to the satisfaction of the Town Building Official. 
(g)  Point details. 
(1)  Site/water conservation. 
a.  1.01 Construction activity pollution prevention (CAPP). 
1.  Benefit: Proper erosion control measures prevent off-site sedimentation in storm sewers, and ultimately, our rivers. 
2.  Qualification: Include on construction management plan, and field implement. Limits of disturbance to have sediment fencing, staked hay bales in swales/drainage ditches, and revegetation matting in any areas outside fencing disturbed by construction. 
3.  Points: Required. 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review and footing inspection. 
b.  1.02 Site is either a redevelopment location or brownfield redevelopment. 
1.  Benefit: Redevelopment is preferable to sprawl. Brownfields are previously developed industrial and commercial sites that are potentially contaminated. Brownfield redevelopment additionally eliminates the hazard of contaminants. 
2.  Qualification: Show on site plan location of existing or pre-existing structures. Deconstruction is required for existing structures for any reusable/recyclable items. For brownfield redevelopment, show documentation demonstrating previous or existing site contamination and clean-up. 
3.  Points: Redevelopment 5 points. Brownfield redevelopment 10 points 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review. 
c.  1.03 Development density and community connectivity. 
1.  Benefit: High-density development as defined in Site Section Credit 2 of LEED limits sprawl and preserves our natural surroundings and Community connectivity encourages basic services within easy reach of residential neighborhoods as defined in Site Section Credit 2 of LEED. 
2.  Qualification: Demonstrate at plan review that they satisfy both density and connectivity. 
3.  Points: 5. 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review. 
d.  1.04 RFTA bus stop. 
1.  Benefit: Convenience promotes bus ridership. 
2.  Qualification: Development is within one-fourth mile of a RFTA bus stop. 
3.  Points: 1. 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review. 
e.  1.05 Proximity to schools. 
1.  Benefit: A close proximity to schools allows children to easily bike or walk to school and alleviates need for use of vehicles. 
2.  Qualification: Demonstrate that property is within one-half mile of schools. 
3.  Points: 1 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review. 
f.  1.06 Walkability/bikability: The site/design provides connection to a multi-use path network. 
1.  Benefit: A close proximity to bike paths allows employees to easily bike, or walk, to work; or to get to work easily and safely from a bus stop. 
2.  Qualification: Show direct connection to path network on site/vicinity plan that are within 1/2 of a mile of a RFTA bus stop. Measurement shall be along the most direct pedestrian with a sidewalk or improved trail. 
3.  Points: 2. 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review. 
g.  1.07 Covered bicycle racks. 
1.  Benefit: Convenient weather protection and security for bikes. 
2.  Qualification: Planned and constructed bike storage must be covered, at a minimum, and include rack space or other means of security for at least one bike per 10 occupants as defined by the building code. 
3.  Points: 1. 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review and final inspection. 
h.  1.08 Employee changing rooms. 
1.  Benefit: This may encourage employees to bike to work which Benefits not only the environment, but also the employees' fitness level. 
2.  Qualification: Changing rooms must have lockers and shower facilities for employees in commercial buildings. 
3.  Points: 2. 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review and final inspection. 
i.  1.09 Bike share facility. 
1.  Benefit: Having bikes readily available promotes their use for short trips as an alternative to driving. 
2.  Qualification: Development must be within one-fourth mile of a bike share facility. 
3.  Points: 1. 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review. 
j.  1.10 On-site affordable housing unit, live-work mixed use beyond code-required minimum. 
1.  Benefit: Living where you work makes for a short commute. 
2.  Qualification: Show on-site dwelling unit(s) that meet the Town of Basalt Affordable Housing Guidelines for either a deed restricted for sale unit or rental unit, which are beyond the code-required minimum mitigation. 
3.  Points: 5 per unit; 25 maximum. 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review and final inspection. 
k.  1.11 Maximize open space and habitat. 
1.  Benefit: Lessens visual impact of development; increases visual appeal. Natural habitat supports biodiversity. 
2.  Qualification: Total lot coverage is less than 75% of maximum allowable for lot and total surface parking and hardscape area is less than building footprint(s). 
3.  Points: 2. 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review and final inspection. 
l.  1.12 Stormwater design. 
1.  Benefit: Provides a portion of irrigation needs from natural precipitation, eliminates direct discharge of potential pollutants or sediment, and promotes groundwater recharge. 
2.  Qualification: 100% of surface water runoff travels through bioswales, landscaped detention areas, or combination thereof. 
3.  Points: 3. 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review and final inspection. 
m.  1.13 Diverse native landscaping. 
1.  Benefit: Increases survivability rate of plantings; and limits invasive species. 
2.  Qualification: Landscaping plan includes 10 or more native species over 90% of landscaped area. 
3.  Points: 1. 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review and final inspection. 
n.  1.14 Water efficient landscaping. 
1.  Benefit: Reduces irrigation demands and conserves water. 
2.  Qualification: Irrigated turf area must be equal or less than 40% of landscaped area, or 1,000 square feet, whichever is smaller. Show turf areas and drip-irrigation lines/beds on landscaping plan. Irrigation systems shall be controlled with automatic timer and rain sensors. 
3.  Points: 2. 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review and final inspection. 
i.  1.14.1 Use of low-water-demand or xeriscape-rated plants only. 
a.  Benefit: Reduced irrigation demands and water conservation at the next level. 
b.  Qualification: Landscaping plan must only show xeriscape plants listed by Colorado State University Extension Horticulture office, listed on www.xratedgardening.com, or source recognized by the Town Building Official. Any turf area (must meet above standard) shall use species that utilizes at least 25% less water than Kentucky blue grass. 
c.  Points: 1 additional point 
d.  Confirmation will be at plan review and final inspection. 
ii.  1.14.2 Landscape design requires no permanent irrigation. 
a.  Benefit: Conserves water. 
b.  Qualification: Landscape plan must meet landscaping minimum standards. (Temporary irrigation is permissible during plant establishment period.) Landscaping must be planted prior to CO to be eligible. 
c.  Points: 4 total. 
d.  Confirmation will be at plan review and final inspection. 
o.  1.15 Interior water use reduction. 
1.  Benefit: Conserves water. 
2.  Qualification: Demonstrate all water use reductions on interior fixtures, including but not limited to: toilets, showers, sinks, faucets, dishwashers, clothes washers and urinals. Estimates are based on average occupant usage pursuant to the 1992 Energy Policy Act (EPACT) for fixture flow rates. (Need to know what this is.) 
3.  Points: 2 for 20% reduction; and 3 points for 30% or more reduction in use. 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review and final inspection. 
p.  1.16 Fill/Excavation Transport Reduction. 
1.  Benefit: Reduces truck traffic necessary to haul excavation spoils and bring in fill. 
2.  Qualification: Dispose of or store excavation spoils within 1 mile of development. Source fill materials within 1 mile of development. 
3.  Points: 1. 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review. 
q.  1.17 Heat island reduction. 
1.  Benefit: Limits heat island effects on microclimates, the built environment, and nature. 
2.  Qualification: Shade parking lots; use solar-reflective building materials. 
3.  Points: 2. 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review and final inspection. 
(2)  Recycling, reuse, materials. 
a.  2.01 Storage and collection of recyclables in design. 
1.  Benefit: Provides for convenient recycling. 
2.  Qualification: Show on construction plans areas for storage of recycling containers next to trash container(s). Adequate space for a cardboard 2-yard minimum container, and toters for co-mingled and newspaper/mixed paper required. 
3.  Points: Required. 
4.  Confirmation: will be at final inspection. 
b.  2.02 Construction waste recycling. 
1.  Benefit: Reduces construction waste to landfills. 
2.  Qualification: Provide labeled containers during construction for recycling cardboard, wood waste, and/or metal scrap. 
3.  Points: 2 per material type; 6 maximum. 
4.  Confirmation: Labeled containers clean of trash with evidence of use must be in place during inspections. 
c.  2.03 Efficient framing techniques. 
1.  Benefit: Optimum value engineering (OVE) reduces building materials and can increase overall energy envelope performance. 
2.  Qualification: Design and construct using advanced framing techniques consistent with OVE. 
3.  Points: 2. 
4.  Confirmation will be at framing inspection. 
d.  2.04 Use of beetle kill pine. 
1.  Benefit: Use of cosmetically blemished natural resource from Colorado. Left in forests the timber will either decay or burn in forest fires, either way releasing the CO2 they stored while growing. 
2.  Qualification: Structural use as dimensional framing material, or as cross laminated timber (CLT); and/or nonstructural uses such as siding, flooring, trim, etc. Material must be used for over 50% of total construction element. 
3.  Points: 2 for structural; 2 for nonstructural. 
4.  Confirmation will be at framing and/or final inspection. 
e.  2.05 Reclaimed and/or recycled-content materials. 
1.  Benefit: Supports recycling market and reduces use of virgin materials. 
2.  Qualification: Use of construction materials that are either reclaimed from another structure, and/or any materials with recycle-content in them qualify. Materials that are purchased from a reclaimed materials distributor, deconstructed by the owner/applicant from another structure, or that are purchased from a used building materials exchange all qualify as reclaimed materials (must provide documentation). Some common recycle-content materials include composite decking, recycle-content faux shake/slate roofing, cellulose or shredded cotton batt insulation, recycle-content carpets, counter tops, recycle-content tile, etc. Provide material info onsite; field inspected. More than 50% of the material type in place must be reclaimed and/or recycled. 
3.  Points: 2 per material type; 6 maximum. 
4.  Confirmation: Material information/documentation must be on job site with field set of plans for inspection. 
f.  2.06 FSC or SFI certified materials or steel studs. 
1.  Benefit: Promotes sustainable stewardship of forest resources. Steel framing requires less lumber, is recyclable, and reduces scrap material. 
2.  Qualification: FSC (Forest Stewardship Council) or SFI (Sustainable Forestry Initiative) stamped certification on material(s) required. Material must be used in over 50% of the construction element. 
3.  Points: 2 per material type. 
4.  Confirmation: Field inspected. 
g.  2.07 Materials manufactured within Colorado and/or rapidly renewable materials. 
1.  Benefit: Reducing travel distance reduces carbon footprint. Rapidly renewable materials have less of an environmental impact. 
2.  Qualification: Show documentation for any materials used that were manufactured within Colorado, or that consist of rapidly renewable materials (naturally reproducing within 15 years). Material type must be used in over 50% of the building component. 
3.  Points: 2 per material type. 
4.  Confirmation: Field inspected. 
(3)  Energy. 
a.  3.01 Building energy, envelope and systems commissioning. 
1.  Benefit: Confirms performance levels of design and construction that may not be obvious from visual inspection. 
2.  Qualification: A commissioning plan must be provided for buildings over 5,000 s.f. the plan must be followed by an inspection report. 
3.  Points: Required (for all new systems). 
4.  Confirmation will be prior to certificate of occupancy. (Opportunity for innovation points for providing ongoing monitoring system.) 
b.  3.02 Infrared heat loss analysis and remediation. 
1.  Benefit: Infrared cameras can be effective tools for pinpointing areas of heat loss (interior-exterior temperature difference must be at least 25 degrees). 
2.  Qualification: Provide detailed report from an accredited professional on analysis performed, areas of heat loss, and demonstrated remediation (if stated in analysis). 
3.  Points: 3. 
4.  Confirmation will be prior to certificate of occupancy 
c.  3.03 No recessed lights on ceiling to exterior. 
1.  Benefit: Ceiling penetrations allow heat loss and moisture transfer. 
2.  Qualification: Avoid recessed light fixtures in the ceiling of the building envelope. 
3.  Points: 2. 
4.  Confirmation will be at final inspection. 
d.  3.04 Efficient boiler/furnace. 
1.  Benefit: Energy saving. 
2.  Qualification: Design and install heating equipment with an efficiency rating percentage over 87%. For multiple boilers/furnaces, ratings area averaged. 
3.  Points: 1 to 7 (1 point for each percent increase over an AFUE efficiency rating percentage of 87%.) 
4.  Confirmation will be at heating appliance inspection. 
e.  3.05 Cold climate heat pump. 
1.  Benefit: Heat pump technology heats and cools efficiently and is cheaper to operate. 
2.  Qualification: Specify and install heat pump(s) for primary heating and cooling. 
3.  Points: 1 per unit. 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review and final inspection 
f.  3.06 Geoexchange system. 
1.  Benefit: Reduce use of fossil fuels. 
2.  Qualification: Must be designed and constructed to serve the entire building. 
3.  Points: 6. 
4.  Confirmation will be at final inspection. 
g.  3.07 Tankless water heater(s). 
1.  Benefit: Energy saving. 
2.  Qualification: Gas or electric tankless on-demand water heater models qualify, must meet over 50% of total hot water needs. Units must have an intermittent ignition device (IID) instead of a standing pilot light to qualify. 
3.  Points: 1 to 3 (Tankless systems get 3 points. Side-arm boilers qualify for one point as part of a modulating condensing boiler 90% AFUE efficiency or above.) 
4.  Confirmation will be at final inspection. 
h.  3.08 Evaporative cooling only or no mechanical air conditioning. 
1.  Benefit: Evaporative cooling works efficiently in arid dry climates in Colorado and is considered more energy efficient than air conditioning. 
2.  Qualification: HVAC design must specify evaporative cooling. Evaporative cooling is defined as cooling which relies only on evaporation of water for its cooling needs. 
3.  Points: 2 for evaporative cooling; 4 for other less energy consumptive alternatives such as passive cooling or ceiling fans. 
4.  Confirmation will be at final inspection. 
i.  3.09 HVAC Economizer System. 
1.  Benefit: Saves energy by using unconditioned outside air for cooling. Use of outside air also improves indoor air quality. 
2.  Qualification: Specify and install an economizer system for over 50% of heated area of the structure. 
3.  Points: 1 for 50% of heated area, 2 for 100% of heated area. 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review and final inspection. 
j.  3.10 Radiant in-floor heat. 
1.  Benefit: Radiant heat warms building occupants rather than the air, which allows boiler to operate at lower temperatures, thus saving energy. 
2.  Qualification: Hydronic in-floor heating in over 50% of the heated area of the structure 
3.  Points: 2. 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review and final inspection. 
k.  3.11 Air-to-air heat exchanger. 
1.  Benefit: An air-to-air heat exchanger (also referred to as a Heat Recovery Ventilator (HRV) or Energy Recovery Ventilator (ERV)) pre-warms or cools outside air by providing a heat exchange with exhaust air. 
2.  Qualification: Majority of total mechanical ventilation must go through a heat exchanger for points. 
3.  Points: 2. 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review and final inspection. 
l.  3.12 Roof/ceiling insulation. 
1.  Benefit: Reduces heat loss. 
2.  Qualification: One point awarded for each manufacturer-rated R-value of insulation, above IECC minimum, installed in the roof assembly. For structures/roof assemblies with multiple different R-values, a weighted average is used. 
3.  Points: 1 to 8. 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review and insulation inspection. 
m.  3.13 Wall insulation. 
1.  Benefit: Reduces heat loss. 
2.  Qualification: One point awarded for each manufacturer-rated R-value of insulation, above IECC minimum, installed in the exterior wall assembly. For multiple wall types with different R-values, a weighted average is used. 
3.  Points: 1 to 8. 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review and insulation inspection. 
n.  3.14 Under-slab insulation. 

1.  Benefit: Reduces heat loss. Most of the heat loss occurs at the slab perimeter. For commercial buildings the IECC requires perimeter insulation of R-10 for 24", unheated; and R-15 for 36", heated. For residential it is R-15 for 24", unheated; and R-20 for 48", heated. Increasing R-value beyond R-15 has little effect on heat loss, but increasing perimeter coverage or providing full coverage has significant Benefits. 
Slab on Grade

2.  Qualification: insulate the outer 48" of the slab perimeter (commercial only); or full continuous with a minimum of R-10 for unheated slabs and a minimum of R-15 for heated slabs. Isolate slab. 
3.  Points: 48" perimeter: 2; full, continuous: 4. 
4.  Confirmation: Field inspected prior to pouring slab. 
o.  3.15 Crawl Space/Basement Foundation Wall Insulation. 

1.  Benefit: Reduces heat loss. Most of the heat loss occurs at the upper walls. Placing the insulation on the exterior is preferred for better thermal performance and moisture control. 
2.  Qualification: Insulate crawl space or basement foundation walls (either inside or outside) beyond applicable code minimums. 
3.  Points: 0.5 for each manufacturer-rated R-value of insulation, above IECC minimum; 1 additional point for exterior applied insulation 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review and insulation inspection. 
p.  3.16 Blown or sprayed insulation. 
1.  Benefit: The higher density of these types of insulation reduces airflow (infiltration and exfiltration). 
2.  Qualification: Blown-in, or minimum 2.0 pcf density foam, insulation specified and installed in attics/ceilings, walls, and basements/crawlspaces qualifies. 
3.  Points: 1-4 (1 per Quantity Level). For example, if 80% of the insulated area of a structure is blown-in, then quantity level 4 (76-100%) or 4 points would be given. 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review and insulation inspection. 
q.  3.17 High performance windows. 
1.  Benefit: Reduce heat loss and solar gain. 
2.  Qualification: Specify U-values for all glazing designed and installed. 
3.  Points: 1-8 (1 point for each U-.01 below IECC minimum). 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review and framing inspection. 
r.  3.18 Insulating window shades. 
1.  Benefit: Reduce window heat loss. 
2.  Qualification: 75% or more of total windows must have insulating window coverings installed. 
3.  Points: 2. 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review and final inspection. 
(4)  Renewable Energy. 
a.  4.1 Onsite renewable energy. 
1.  Benefit: This is the epitome of sustainability. 
2.  Qualification: Provide calculations demonstrating any onsite renewable energy systems as a function of total energy use offset for that energy source (total electricity or total gas). 
3.  Points: Required 2% of energy budget or 25% of common load for core and shell buildings. 
Over 2%-5% offset: 3 points 
Over 5%-10% offset: 5 points 
Over 10%-25% offset: 10 points 
Over 25%-50% offset: 15 points 
Over 50%-75% offset: 20 points 
Over 75% offset 25 points 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review and final inspection. 
b.  4.02 Future solar. 
1.  Benefit: Eases future installation of a solar system. 
2.  Qualification: Provide a chase from the mechanical room to the roof. Space must be provided on the roof and in the mechanical room. 
3.  Points: Required. 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review and final inspection. 
(5)  Indoor quality. 
a.  5.01 Radon mitigation system. 
1.  Benefit: High concentrations of radon gas are considered to be a health risk by the EPA, ranking high as a carcinogen. 
2.  Qualification: Install a passive radon mitigation system that eliminates potential for radon or other soil gases from entering habitable areas of the structure. Must ventilate below floor or slab vapor barrier to exterior. Mechanical ventilation of radon system is not necessary unless otherwise specified. 
3.  Points: Required. 
4.  Confirmation will be at framing and final inspection. 
b.  5.02 HEPA filter in HVAC. 
1.  Benefit: Improves indoor-air quality. 
2.  Qualification: Specify and install a High Efficiency Particulate Air (HEPA) or MERV 13 (0.1 micron) or higher filter that effectively filters 100% of HVAC system. 
3.  Points: 1. 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review and final inspection. 
c.  5.03 Low- or non-toxic floor coverings. 
1.  Benefit: Improves indoor-air quality. 
2.  Qualification: Materials are either listed on www.greenguard.org; or otherwise demonstrated to be below EPA thresholds for low toxicity. In general, most tile, wood, and natural carpets meet low-toxic standards. For other coverings, provide documentation demonstrating compliance. 
3.  Points: 1-4 (1 point per Quantity Level) Quantity Level is determined by the percentage of total floor area meeting the above criteria. For example, if 80% of the total flooring was non-toxic, then quantity level 4 (76-100%) would apply, so 4 points would be given. 
4.  Confirmation will be at final inspection. 
d.  5.04 Construction IAQ plan. 
1.  Benefit: Protects construction workers as well as eventual occupants of the building. 
2.  Qualification: Provide and implement plan (need to elaborate on what's to be included on plan.) 
3.  Points: 1. 
4.  Confirmation: From LEED: It is important to remember that IAQ management is not a one-time compliance event that can be checked off a list-it must be an ongoing effort for the duration of the construction process. 
e.  5.05 Indoor chemical and pollutant control. 
1.  Benefit: Prevents contamination of indoor air. 
2.  Qualification: Any onsite hazardous material storage must be air-tight; provided with an exhaust fan; and must provide spill/leakage containment. Also, install a minimum 4x4' grated area with void below for all major entryways that reduces potential for dirt and other pollutants from entering the structure. 
3.  Points: 2. 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review and final inspection. 
f.  5.06 Mechanical ventilation beyond Code. 
1.  Benefit: Improves indoor air quality by removing contaminates. 
2.  Qualification: Provide mechanical ventilation at least 20% over ASHRAE Standard 62.1-2013 that operates on occupancy controls (motion activated or CO2 activated). An air-to-air heat exchanger (ERV or HRV) that pre-heats or cools fresh intake air is required with this option. 
3.  Points: 2. 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review and final inspection. 
g.  5.07 Daylighting. 
1.  Benefit: Provides building occupants with a daylight connection to outdoors. 
2.  Qualification: Bring daylight to occupied areas of the building without hindering tasks. 
3.  Points: 4 maximum, 1 per each 25% of occupied area to which daylight is provided 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review and final inspection. 
h.  5.08 Quality views. 
1.  Benefit: Provides building occupants with a visual connection to outdoors. 
2.  Qualification: 75% of occupied spaces have a direct line of sight to the outdoor environment. 
3.  Points: 1. 
4.  Confirmation will be at plan review and final inspections. 
(6)  Innovation points. Innovative product use and/or design points will be given points on a case by case basis. The item must specifically meet the intent of the SBR guidelines as stated at the beginning, and points will be scaled as the item would apply to similar comparable items in this code section. Possibilities include additional daylighting and views above 5.08 above to LEED standards. 
( Ord. 21 § 5(Exh. B), 2015 
Secs. 18-27-18-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III - Energy Code 

Sec. 18-41. - Adoption of IECC by reference. 
(a)  Pursuant to Title 31, Article 16, Part 2, C.R.S., The International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, Illinois 60478-5795 is hereby adopted, by reference thereto subject to the following deletions, amendments, additions and modifications: 
(1)  Section C101.1, Title, is amended by the insertion of "Town of Basalt" as the name of jurisdiction. 
(2)  Section R101.1, Title, is amended by the insertion of "Town of Basalt" as the name of jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 13 §1, 2007; Ord. 27 §1, 2016) 
Secs. 18-42-18-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV - Air Quality 

Sec. 18-61. - Air quality and declaration of policy. 
(a)  The Town Council hereby finds and declares air quality to be an important part of the health, safety and welfare of the community, and that the Town Council has a duty to protect the air quality in the Town. 
(b)  Emissions from wood stoves, fireplaces and coal burning have been determined by numerous studies and reports to be a major factor in air quality problems and may constitute a threat to the health of the citizens of the Town, a public nuisance and a threat to the economic well-being of the Town; therefore, it is the intent of the Town Council to enact a system to regulate the construction and installation of these devices. 
(Ord. 13 §1, 2007) 
Sec. 18-62. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Approved solid fuel-burning device is one which has been approved and certified by the Air Quality Control Commission pursuant to its authority under Section 25-7-401, et seq., C.R.S., or which complies with all of the following: 
a.  An air-to-fuel ratio in the combustion chamber averaging less than 35-to-1 as determined by EPA method 28A as set forth in the Federal Regulations 40 CFR Part 60 Subpart AAA, Appendix A. 
b.  A usable firebox volume of less than twenty (20) cubic feet. 
c.  A minimum burn rate of less than five (5) kilograms per hour. 
d.  A maximum weight of eight hundred (800) kilograms. 
    Dwelling units . For the purposes of this Article, the definitions of dwelling unit, single-family dwelling unit, two-family dwelling unit and multiple-family dwelling unit shall be interpreted in accordance with Section 16-4 of this Code. 
    Fireplace means a structure designed for the burning of wood which is an integral part of the construction of a building, which would commonly be considered a fireplace and which does not meet the definition of a wood stove. 
    Natural gas fireplace means a fireplace that operates on natural gas and is installed per Building Official approval, including a properly installed fire box, flues and gas log apparatus. 
    Solid fuel-burning device means any fireplace, stove, firebox or device intended and/or used for the purpose of burning wood, coal, pulp, paper or other nonliquid or nongaseous fuel. 
    Wood-burning stove means an appliance designed for or capable of burning wood, including a fireplace insert, capable of and intended for domestic space heating or domestic water heating. These stoves come with an airtight firebox and controlled air flow features for more precise burning. 
(Ord. 13 §1, 2007) 
Sec. 18-63. - Regulation of wood stoves. 
(a)  No wood stove shall be installed within any dwelling unit or commercial building within the Town unless such device is an approved wood stove. 
(b)  The number of approved wood stoves installed in any new residential or commercial building, for which a building permit is issued after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Article, shall not exceed the following: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings, and two-family dwellings with a minimum of one thousand (1,000) square feet per dwelling unit: one (1) approved wood stove per dwelling unit. 
(2)  Multi-family dwellings: one (1) approved wood stove per building to be located in a common area and not in an individual unit. 
(3)  Commercial building: one (1) approved wood stove per building or commercial enterprise, whichever is more restrictive. This category, for the purposes of this Article, shall include commercial hotels, motels and lodges. 
(c)  In dwelling units or commercial buildings in existence on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Article, installation of additional wood stoves is prohibited if the resulting number of preexisting and new wood stoves exceeds the limitations on the number of woodstoves per dwelling unit contained in Subsection (b) above. 
(Ord. 13 §1, 2007) 
Sec. 18-64. - Regulation of fireplaces. 
    In areas where natural gas service is currently available or where natural gas lines are located within three hundred (300) feet of a building, it shall be unlawful to install or construct a fireplace, unless it is a natural gas fireplace or an approved solid fuel-burning device. 
(Ord. 13 §1, 2007) 
Sec. 18-65. - Regulation of coal-fired devices. 
    No solid fuel-burning device shall be allowed to burn coal except for those devices already being used to burn coal on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Article. It shall be unlawful for any person to install or have installed any solid fuel-burning decorative appliance that does not comply with Section 25-7-407, C.R.S. Installation of appliances purchased out of state or purchased used shall be unlawful unless said appliance bears an emissions performance label showing compliance with Colorado Emissions Standards for the control of pollution caused by wood smoke. 
(Ord. 13 §1, 2007) 
Sec. 18-66. - Nonconforming devices. 
    Any solid fuel-burning device which has been installed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Article and is not in compliance with this Article shall be considered a legal nonconforming device and may continue in existence subject to the condition that it shall not be changed to or replaced by any device except an approved device or other lawful heating system in accordance with this Code. 
(Ord. 13 §1, 2007) 
Sec. 18-67. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The provisions of this Article shall be enforced at the time of building permit application or when the Town has reasonable grounds based upon its investigation or written complaints which sufficiently demonstrate reasonable grounds that a person has violated the provisions of this Article. 
(b)  The Town shall enforce the provisions of this Article in accordance with Section 1-82 of this Code. 
(Ord. 13 §1, 2007) 
Secs. 18-68-18-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V - Fire Prevention Code 

Sec. 18-81. - Adoption of International Fire Code by reference. 
(a)  Pursuant to Title 31, Article 16, Part 2, C.R.S., the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, Illinois 60478-5795, and Appendix Chapters B (Fire-Flow Requirements), C (Fire Hydrant Locations) and D (Fire Apparatus Access Roads) are hereby adopted and amended herein as the fire code of the Town. Appendix Chapters E, F, G and H shall be utilized as guidelines to the extent such appendices are applicable. 
(b)  The International Fire Code 2015 Edition, hereinabove adopted by reference is to govern the maintenance of buildings and premises; and to safeguard life, health, property and public welfare by regulating the storage, use and handling of dangerous and hazardous materials, substances and processes and by regulating the maintenance of adequate egress facilities. 
(Ord. 13 §1, 2007; Ord. 19 §A.10, 2017) 
Sec. 18-82. - Amendments to International Fire Code. 
(a)  Adoption of the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, is subject to the following deletions, amendments, additions and modifications: 
(1)  Section 101.1 is hereby amended to provide that "Town of Basalt" shall be the name of the jurisdiction inserted. 
(2)  Sections 102.7 and 102.8 are hereby amended by the addition of the following language: 
    "The most current NFPA code cycle shall be utilized. 
    Exception: When the current cycle is less than a year from the previous cycle, the previous cycle may be used with the approval of the fire code official ." 
(3)  Section 103.2 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    "The fire code official shall be appointed by the fire chief, and the fire code official shall not be removed from office except for cause and after full opportunity to be heard on specific and relevant charges by and before the appointing authority. Unless the fire chief shall otherwise appoint an alternative fire code official , the District Fire Marshal shall be deemed the designated fire code official upon adoption of this Code." 
(4)  The following sentence shall be added to the end of Section 104.6.3: 
    "Copies of all such records shall be forwarded to the fire code official ." 
(5)  Section 104.10 is hereby amended as follows: 
    The phrase "fire department" shall be replaced by the phrase " fire chief ". 
(6)  Section 108.1 is hereby amended to read: 
    " [A] 108.1 Board of appeals established. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the Fire Chief and/or fire code official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and hereby is created a board of appeals consisting of the existing Basalt and Rural Fire District Board of Directors. The fire chief shall be an ex officio member, but shall have no vote on any matter before the board. The board shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the fire chief and/or fire code official ." 
(7)  The definition of "guest" shall be added (alphabetically) to Section 202 as follows: 
    " GUEST. Any person hiring or occupying a room or bed for living or sleeping purposes." 
(8)  Section 307.1.1 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    " 307.1.1 Prohibited open burning. Open burning shall be prohibited from May 31 to October 1 of each calendar year or, otherwise, when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fire hazardous. 
    Exceptions: 
1. Prescribed burning for the purpose of reducing the impact of wildland fire when authorized by the fire code official . 
2. Open burning may be permitted or prohibited at any time when, in the opinion of the fire code official, the atmospheric conditions are conducive for safe burning. Such modifications shall be made by the fire code official in writing and posted in the District fire stations." 
(9)  The following sentence shall be added to the end of Section 508.5.2: 
    "Snow removal operations shall not prevent a fire hydrant from being immediately discernible or hinder immediate access to any such hydrant." 
(10)  A second paragraph is hereby added to Section 903.2, before the Exception, to read as follows: 
    "Additionally, any building in excess of 5,000 square feet or any new building regardless of size to be constructed in a location that is difficult to access, as determined by the fire code official , shall be equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system including the installation of a fire department connection. A minimum of a three sprinkler head hydraulic calculation shall be submitted for approval by the fire code official , and the official may require a larger number of sprinkler heads, depending upon the structural design submitted. Fire separations shall not constitute separate buildings for this purpose, including all R-3 occupancies." 
(11)  Section 903.3.1.3, NFPA 13D sprinkler systems, is revised to read as follows: 
    " 903.3.1.3, NFPA 13D sprinkler systems. Automatic sprinkler systems installed in one- and two-family dwellings ; Group R-3; Group R-4 Condition 1 and townhouses shall be permitted to be installed throughout in accordance to the most current edition of NFPA 13D, as amended herein. 
903.3.1.3.1 Fire department connection . Add to NFPA 13D Section 6.1.1: 
'A fire department connection (FDC) will be required on all sprinkler systems and located within 6 feet of the Knox box or in an approved location by the jurisdiction having authority. A 1-1/2 inch hose connection is required.' 
903.3.1.3.2 Water Supply Sources. Add to NFPA 13D Section 6.1.1: 
'(6) Water supply systems that require a fire pump shall be provided with a fire department connection (FDC) in a location approved by the jurisdiction having authority.' 
903.3.1.3.3 Number of Design Sprinklers. Add Section 8.1.3.1.3 to NFPA 13D Residential Sprinklers, Sprinkler Coverage: 
' 8.1.3.1.3 The number of design sprinklers shall include all sprinklers within a compartment, up to a maximum of two sprinklers, under a flat, smooth, horizontal ceiling. In occupancies with sloped, beamed, or pitched ceilings over 10' the system shall be calculated with three or more heads operating per manufactures specs m1d (note-appendix A.8.1.1.2.2, A.8.l.2, A.8.2.5 NFPA 13D) Structures greater than 3,500 square feet shall be calculated with a minimum of three heads operating.' 
903.3.1.3.4 Location of sprinklers. Amend NFPA 13D Section 8.3.4 to read as follows: 
' 8.3.4* Residential sprinklers shall be installed in residential garages. Sprinklers are not required in open attached porches, carports and similar structures.' 
903.3.1.3.5 Location of sprinklers. Delete NFPA 13D Sections 8.3.5, 8.3.5.1, 8.3.5.1.1 and 8.3.5.1.2 and replace with: 
' 8.3.5 Crawl spaces or attics with fuel-burning appliances shall be protected with residential sprinklers; and ceilings shall be protected with drywall within a 3-foot arc of the perimeter of the appliance. Attics with pull-down ladders/stairs will be protected with residential sprinklers.' " 
(12)  Add Exception 3 to Section 903.4.3 Monitoring as follows: 
"3. Automatic sprinkler systems protecting one- and two- family dwellings that are not monitored shall operate in the following manner: 
1. All water flow activations shall be capable of sounding an interior audible alarm notifying all occupants simultaneously; 
2. All water flow activations shall be capable of activating an exterior audible/visual alarm. This alarm shall be located so as to be visible nearest the street side fire department connection." 
(13)  Amend Section 903.4.3, Floor control valves, to read as follows: 
    " 903.4.3 Floor control valves. Approved supervised indicating control valves shall be provided at the point of connection to the riser on each floor in buildings of three stories or more. 
(14)  Section 907.1.4 is hereby added to read as follows: 
    " 907.1.4 Minimum design qualifications. All plans for fire alarm systems submitted for approval shall have affixed the signature of a person possessing NICET Level 3 or higher level certification in fire alarm design. In the alternative, such signature may be provided by a fire alarm system designer possessing the equivalent of NICET Level 3 training, if all certificates and documentation of such training is presented and approved by the fire code official. The aforementioned requirement shall require compliance within six (6) months following adoption of the Code." 
(15)  Section 907.1.5 is hereby added to read as follows: 
    " 907.1.4 Minimum installation qualifications. All fire alarm system installations shall be supervised by a person possessing NICET Level 2 or higher level certification in fire alarm installation. In the alternative, such supervision may be completed by a person possessing the equivalent of NICET Level2 training, if all certificates and documentation of such training is presented and approved by the fire code official. The aforementioned requirement shall require compliance within six (6) months following adoption of the Code." 
(16)  Section 907.2.1 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    "A manual and automatic fire alarm system shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 72 in Group A occupancies having an occupant load of 100 or more. Portions of Group E occupancies occupied for assembly purposes shall be provided with a fire alarm system as required for the Group E occupancy." 
(17)  Delete method 3 in Section 913.4, Valve supervision, and renumber method 4 as method 3. 
(18)  Section 2304.3 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    " 2304.3 Unattended self-service motor fuel-dispensing facilities. Unattended private dispensing shall be by permit only. A safety plan and safety equipment technical data shall be submitted for review prior to approval. Unattended self-service motor fuel-dispensing facilities shall comply with Sections 2304.3.1 through 2304.3.7." 
(19)  Exception 5 shall be added to the end of Section 5601.1.3, Fireworks, as follows: 
    "5. The storage, sale, use and handling of toy caps, sparklers and smoke snakes shall be permitted." 
(20)  Section 5607.1 is amended to read as follows: 
    " 5607.1 General. Blasting operations shall be conducted only by approved, competent operators possessing a valid explosives certificate issued by the State of Colorado who are familiar with the required safety precautions and the hazards involved; and in accordance with the provisions of NFPA 495." 
(21)  Add Section 5704.2.1.2 to read as follows: 
    " 5704.2.1.2 General limitation. No tank for the storage of flammable fluid in excess of ten (10) gallons shall be erected, repaired, renewed or replaced either wholly or partially above ground. Where in the opinion of the fire code official an existing tank constitutes a fire hazard through neglect or disrepair, he shall order such tank removed. Tanks or other facilities for the storage of Class 6 fuel oil may be installed above ground if approved by the fire code official and done in accordance with existing codes and regulations pertaining to above ground storage. 
(22)  Section 5706.2.4 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    " 5706.2.4 Permanent and temporary tanks. The capacity of permanent above-ground tanks containing Class I or II liquids shall not exceed 1,100 gallons (4164 L). The capacity of temporary above-ground tanks containing Class I or II liquids shall not exceed 500 gallons (1892 L). Tanks shall be of the single compartment design. A permit shall be obtained from the fire code official for the storage or keeping of Class I or II liquids in excess of five (5) gallons in any building and of ten (10) gallons on any premises. The fire code official is further authorized to issue temporary permits for the above-ground storage of such liquids in tanks which shall not exceed a five hundred (500) gallon capacity for the purpose of providing fuel for heavy equipment used in building construction, earth moving, earth grading or similar operations and such permits may be issued only for sites without proximate hazards. Such temporary permits shall be issued with the time limits set which shall conform to the reasonably necessary time for completion of the individual job for which the permit is issued." 
(Ord. 13 §1, 2007; Ord. 05 §H, 2012; Ord. 19 §A.10, 2017) 
Secs. 18-83-18-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI - Supplemental Building Regulations 

Sec. 18-101. - Restriction on the use of reflective building materials. 
    No structure shall produce glare from building materials, other than glare from windows. Solar reflectance values for finish materials on the exterior of all structures, including but not limited to siding and roofing materials, shall not exceed thirty-five percent (35%). 
    Solar energy facilities shall be exempt from this provision. Reflective flashing shall also be exempt from this provision, provided the flashing is kept to the minimum needed to comply with the Building Code. 
( Ord. 05 §I, 2012) 
APPENDIX 
APPENDIX A 
INTERSECTION TRIANGLE

APPENDIX B 
BASALT TOWN ROAD SPECIFICATIONS 
TOWN ROAD SPECIFICATIONS 
The Board of Trustees, having discussed this subject matter and having made a motion to adopt and approve this document, the Town Road Specifications, the policy of the Board of Trustees is set forth herein under the heading of Town Road Specifications and can be found in the Appendix of the Basalt Municipal Code. 
TOWN ROAD REGULATIONS 
1.  GENERAL; PURPOSE 
    The following regulations are the criteria which shall govern the application for construction, design and construction of roadways to be dedicated to the Town of Basalt and construction within any right-of-way for existing and proposed city roads. 
2.  DEFINITIONS 
A.  Administration : The Town of Basalt through the Town Administrator, or his qualified agent, administers the Town road system including, but not limited to, maintenance, layout, alterations, deletions, additions, property acquisition and traffic regulation. Town jurisdiction extends to all roads other than state or federal highways within incorporated lands of the Town of Basalt. 
B.  Planning Commission : In regard to the Town road system, the Basalt Planning Commission acts as an advisory board to the Board of Trustees in matters of route and circulation planning and development standards and shall conduct public hearings on the same. 
C.  Town Transportation Plan : At such time that a Town Transportation Plan is adopted by the Board of Trustees, it shall be the Plan's purpose to protect rights-of-way for future road development and anticipate expansion, additions and alterations to the Town road system. 
D.  Town Road Types : All Town roads are divided into the following 5 types for planning purposes: 
1)  Type 1 - Freeways and Expressways - A freeway is a divided, multi-lane arterial for through traffic with full control of access and all grade crossings eliminated. An expressway is a divided, multi-lane arterial for through traffic with controlled access and with some crossings at grade. 
2)  Type 2 - Arterials - An arterial is a continuous access controlled road for through traffic with crossings at grade. Points of access are limited, some existing crossings may not be at grade. 
3)  Type 3 - Collectors - A collector is a vicinity-wide continuous access road connecting local access roads to arterials. 
4)  Type 4 - Local Access Roads - A local access road provides direct access from abutting properties to other roads. 
5)  Type 5 - Frontage Roads - A frontage road serves as a collector or local access road used contiguous to higher type roads to control access. 
3.  TOWN ROAD DEVELOPMENT 
    New roads are added to the Town roads system by resolutions passed by the Board of Trustees. Sources of new roads are: Annexations, realignments, abandoned state or county highways, subdivisions and other developments. The addition of roads to the Town road system involving "special cases" may be considered on an individual basis. Ordinarily, before a new road becomes a part of the Town road system, it passes through six steps: planning, design, right-of-way acquisition or dedication, construction, inspection and acceptance. 
A.  Planning Criteria : Prior to the design of a new road, the road type, the terrain classification and the design speed must be determined. The road types are defined in Section I. The road type must be selected to conform to the standards of the Town Planning Commission and is subject to the approval of the Town Administrator. 
1)  Terrain Classification - For the purpose of this regulation, the terrain in Basalt is divided into three categories: 
a)  Flat or Rolling ; Average cross slope less than 15% and the ridges and draws are not well-defined. 
b)  Mountainous ; Average cross slope greater than 15% and the ridges and draws are steep and well-defined. 
c)  Residual Areas : Conforms to current Planning Commission requirements. 
2)  Design Speed- Design speed is a speed selected to correlate design of those physical elements of road that influence vehicle operation. The choice of design speed is influenced primarily by the terrain classification, road type, construction and cost of the road. 
Terrain Road Type Classification 1 2 3 4 - 5 Flat or Rolling 55-65 50-55 40-50 30-40 Mountainous 55-65 50-55 30-40 20-30 Residential 25-35 15-25  
B.  Design Standards : 
1)  Road Patterns and Horizontal Alignment - The streets and roads shall bear a logical relationship to topography and location of existing or probable future roads in adjacent tracts of land. 
In mountainous terrain, it may be preferable to provide wider standard alignment for the right-of-way than for the road itself. The roadbed will then be permitted to wind around within the right-of-way to reduce cuts and unnecessary scarring, provided that minimum standards are met. The wider standard right-of-way will permit improvement of the alignment as traffic warrants. 
Roads should not be located too close when parallel to streams and rivers subject to flooding. There should be a vegetated strip to trap soil carried by runoff between the toe of the fill and the thread line of the water channel. 
Where developable but unplatted land is separated from an existing public right-of-way by a proposed subdivision, the proposed subdivision shall provide roads extending to the boundary common to both tracts to prevent land locking of the unplatted tract. These access roads shall be coordinated with and provided at no cost to the unplatted land owner. These points of access shall also conform to the latest "circulation plan" prepared by the Basalt Planning Staff. 
Dead end roads, permanent or temporary, shall not be more than 500 feet in length unless specific approval is given by the Planning Commission and the Town Board of Trustees. These dead end roads shall be provided with cul-de-sacs with a minimum diameter of 90 feet, measured from outside shoulder of the road bed. The minimum paved diameter is 60 feet. Adequate snow storage areas shall be provided at the cul-de-sac. For local access roads, a T-shaped or Y-shaped terminus may be provided on steep terrain as an alternative to a cul-de-sac. All details must be approved by the Planning Commission and snow storage areas shall be provided. 
Roads should intersect at right angles. A maximum of 10° from a right angle may be permitted if approved by the Town Board. 
Opposing intersections or access openings shall be directly opposite each other or offset at least 150 feet from each other. 
2)  Vertical Alignment - the grade line is controlled mainly by topography, the factors of horizontal alignment, safety, sight distance, design speed, drainage and construction costs. The grade line shall be positioned with relation to the cross section as follows: 
a)  It should coincide with the road centerline on two lane and multi-lane undivided roads. 
b)  Separate grade lines may be required on divided multi-lane roads. 
c)  Minimum Road Grade - to allow for drainage these minimum grades should be maintained: 
Surface Type Terrain Classification Flat or Rolling Mountainous Asphalt or Concrete .2% .5% Gravel .5% 1.0%  
d)  Maximum Road Grade - this shall be as follows: 
Terrain Road Type Classification 1 2 3 4 - 5 Mountainous 5% 5% 5% 7% Flat or Rolling 4% 5% 5% 7%  
Steeper grades will be considered only for special cases. Road grades shall not exceed 4% within 100 feet of the center of an intersection or point of curvature on a switchback. 
e)  Vertical Curves - Grade changes shall be accomplished by vertical curves of sufficient length to maintain safe sight distances. Minimum lengths for vertical curves shall be 400 feet for design speeds above 30 mph and 200 feet for design speeds 30 mph and below. Special cases may be considered by the Town Administrator. 
3)  Horizontal and Vertical Alignment must provide at least the minimum stopping sight distance for the design speed at all points. This includes visibility at intersections as well as around curves and roadside encroachments. 
The required stopping sight distance for a given design speed on dry pavement is as follows: 
Design Speed MPH Stopping Sight Distance (feet) 15 100 20 150 25 175 30 200 35 250 40 275 50 350 55 400  
The required passing sight distance for a given design speed is as follows: 
Design Speed MPH Passing Sight Distance (feet) 20 700 25 900 30 1100 35 1300 40 1500 50 1800 55 2000  
Following is a table which gives the minimum radius of curvature for specific design speeds. This table is based upon speed alone; it ignores the sight distance factor and superelevation. 
Design Speed MPH Minimum Curve Radius 
Minimum Curve Radius (feet) 15 60 20 100 25 175 30 250 35 375 40 550 50 850  
Sight distance and minimum radii for speeds over 50 MPH shall use Colorado State Highway design criteria. 
In locations where switchbacks may be required, the circular curve radius of the roadbed may be a minimum of 50 feet. 
Every effort should be made to exceed the minimum values. 
Sudden reductions in designed radii introduce the element of surprise to the driver and should be avoided. Where physical restrictions cannot be overcome and it becomes necessary to introduce curvature of lower standard than the design speed for the project, the design speed between successive curves shall not change by more than 20 miles per hour increments. Under no conditions shall a curve for a design speed lower than the design speed of the project be introduced at the end of a long tangent or at other locations where high approach speeds may be anticipated. 
Reversing curves without an intervening tangent will not be permitted. Where reverse curves are needed the following minimum tangent lengths shall be provided for Road Types 3, 4 and 5. 
Design Speed Tangent 15 50 20 75 25 100 30 150 35 200 40 and above 250  
For Road Types 1 and 2 minimum tangent lengths between curves shall be 400 feet. 
Broken-back curves are to be avoided. Ending a curve on a bridge is to be avoided. 
Additional right-of-way shall be required to provide a minimum clear distance of 10 feet between the curb or pavement edge and the right-of-way for type 4 roads and 15 feet for Types 1, 2, and 3 roads. Curb returns on pavement rounding radius at intersections are to be selected from the following table. 
Terrain Road Type Classification 1 2 3 4 - 5 Flat or Rolling 50 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 20 ft. Mountainous 40 ft. 25 ft. 25 ft. 10 ft.  
4)  Alignment Coordination - Wherever possible, vertical curves should be superimposed on horizontal curves to reduce the number of sight distance restrictions. For safety reasons, the horizontal curve should overlap the vertical curve. 
A sharp horizontal curve should not be introduced at or near a pronounced summit or grade sag. This is particularly hazardous at night. 
Horizontal and vertical curvature at intersections should be as flat as physical conditions permit. 
In mountainous terrain, undulating grades are preferable to long sustained grades in order to reduce cuts and fills, reduce scarring of vegetative cover and avoid accumulation of erosive drainage in long sustained roadside ditches. 
5)  Geometric Cross Section 
a)  Typical Sections : The Town Planning Commission and the Board of Trustees must approve the developers' street classifications prior to final road design. In areas of steep slopes, the right-of-way width may of necessity be wider than that shown below in order that the minimum road bed width may be maintained. Street widths and pavements shall not be less than those shown in the following table: 
Road 
Type Min. Dedicated 
ROW Width Min. Roadbed 
Width Min. Pavement 
Width 2-Arterial 80' - 120' Roadbed and pavement widths of arterial roads will be determined on an individual basis 3-Collector 60' - 80' 40' 36' 4-Local Access 50' 30' 26' 5-Frontage Road 35' 26' 6-Cul-de-sac 40' - 50' 30' 26'  
The basic minimum is sufficient only to accommodate the specified geometric cross sectional elements and Additional right-of-way must be provided for curb returns, cuts and fills, drainage improvements, interchanges and other appurtenances. 
The minimum clearance from the right-of-way line to the point of cut or fill slope should be five feet. When feasible, at least 10 feet should be provided. 
The minimum right-of-way clearance for cuts higher than 15 feet shall be 1 /3 the cut height but not to exceed 50 feet in width. 
b)  Crown Slope : On undivided roads in tangent alignment, the high point of the crown shall be centered on the pavement and the pavement sloped toward the edges on a uniform grade. In mountainous terrain, unpaved Type 4 roads may be sloped toward the cut side of the road on a 3% slope to alleviate surface erosion, provided that safe speed requirements are met. 
Type of Surface Crown Slope % Portland Cement Concrete 1.5 Bituminous Mix 2.0 Penetration Treated Earth or Gravel 3.0 Unsurfaced Graded Section 3.0  
c)  Superelevation : Curves need not be superelevated on Type 3 and Type 4 roads provided that safe speeds are equal to or greater than the design speed. Superelevation is to be provided on Types 1 and 2 roads. Rate of superelevation, axis of rotation and superelevation transition shall be considered where superelevation is required. 
d)  Side Slopes : Side slopes should be designed for functional effectiveness, ease of maintenance and pleasing appearance. Flatter slopes shall be required in unstable sections. 
In areas of heavy snowfall, consideration should be given to snow removal problems and snow storage in slope design. It is considered advisable to use flatter slopes in cuts on the southerly side of the roadway where this will provide additional exposure of the pavement to the sun. 
Slopes shall be revegetated to reduce erosion and to present a more pleasing appearance. 
e)  Slope Benches : The necessity for benches, their width and vertical spacing shall be established only after an adequate materials investigation. Benching should be used sparingly and only where they are justified by sound engineering reasons including: 
1)  In unstable material where it is recommended by a qualified soils engineer in lieu of flattening the side slope. 
2)  To intercept and store loose material resulting from minor slides or erosion. 
3)  For snow storage in special cases as in long through cuts. 
f)  Clearance : The minimum horizontal clearance to major structures from the edge of the traveled way shall be 10 feet. The minimum vertical clearance to major overhead structures shall be 15 feet above the roadbed. For minor overhead structures, such as signs, cables, etc. the minimum vertical clearance shall be 18 feet. 
g)  Sidewalks : Sidewalks are required: 
1)  In areas where densities have been planned on the basis of public water and sewers being available and designated to be served by sidewalks in the current zoning and subdivision regulations. 
2)  Along roads where significant pedestrian usage is anticipated. 
h)  Curbs and Gutters : Curbs and gutters are required as follows: 
1)  In areas where densities have been planned on the basis of public water and sewers being available and designated to be served by sidewalks in the current zoning and subdivision regulations. 
2)  Where required due to drainage, traffic or public safety. 
3)  To replace existing curbs and gutters. 
C.  Drainage : The primary objective of drainage design shall be the protection of Town roads and property while minimizing the possible flood damage to surrounding properties and structures. Good drainage is one of the most important factors in road design. 
Culverts under all roads are to be designed to accommodate a 25-year frequency storm runoff on Road Types 3 and 4 and 100-year frequency storm runoff on Road Types 1 and 2, utilizing the maximum available head. A comparative analysis for snowmelt runoff shall also be made; the greater flow figure shall be used. The maximum available head shall be determined by the uppermost ponding elevation, so chosen as to not cause flood damage to upstream properties. Inlets and other facilities draining the road surface shall be designed to accommodate the 25-year frequency runoff or snowmelt runoff, whichever is greater. No culvert shall be less than 18 inches in diameter. 
All drainage installations shall also be designed to permit free unobstructed passage of debris and silt. Settlement basins are to be provided when the Town Administrator determines a silting problem may exist downstream. Modification of natural channels or transferring runoff from one basin to another is not to be permitted without approval by the Town Administrator. 
1)  Side Ditches - Shall be designed such that water flow velocities will not cause erosion of the ditch lining. The allowable velocity will depend on the nature of the soils through which the ditch is excavated, but shall in no case exceed 5 feet per second at peak design flow in unlined ditches. 
During peak design flow, the water level inside ditches shall be no higher than the bottom of the sub-base. 
Side slopes of ditches shall be no steeper than 2 horizontal to 1 vertical. Channels and ditches are to be designed so as to not create roadside safety hazards. 
The minimum flow line shall be .2% if the channel is paved and .3% for unpaved channels of other materials. 
Maximum slopes shall be controlled by the maximum permissible velocities, being 5 feet per second in unlined ditches and 6 feet per second in other cases. Mannings equation (V=1.486/Nr 2/3 S1/2) shall be used to estimate flow velocities. 
2)  Culverts - Shall be located as required to allow complete drainage of rainfall and snowmelt runoff and where drainages intersect the road bed. 
Alignment of the culvert should generally conform to the alignment and grade of the intersecting drainage channel. 
Velocities of flow in culverts shall be calculated using acceptable design charts and formulas. Culverts should be designed to be self-cleaning where possible. 
The outlet should be designed so as not to discharge on unprotected fills or unstable material. Where design discharge velocity at the culvert discharge exceed 10 feet per second, rip rap with a minimum dimension of 10 inches shall be placed for distance of 20 feet beyond the culvert outlet and velocities reduced in that area to no more than the maximum stated above. 
At design flow, the water elevation at the culvert entrance shall be no higher than the bottom of the roadbed sub-base. Culverts shall be designed and constructed such that the design flood may be carried without flooding the upstream side of the culvert. 
Culverts shall be designed structurally for an H-20 live load in accordance with the American Association of State Highway Officials (AASHO) recommendations. Corrugated steel pipe, reinforced concrete pipe or reinforced concrete boxes shall be used. In the case of metal pipe culverts, the material shall be galvanized and have a minimum diameter of 18 inches. 
The top of the metal pipe or arch culverts shall be no closer than 12 inches to the top of the roadbed surface but no higher than the roadbed sub-base. 
Manholes or clean-out access shall be provided at each angle point and at each change in grade. In straight sections clean-out access shall be provided at least every 200 feet for pipes 24 inches and smaller and at least every 400 feet for larger pipes. 
3)  Guard Rails and Retaining Walls - Shall be installed where hazardous conditions exist, as determined by the Town Administrator at the owner's expense. Retaining walls and like structures shall be designed and inspected during construction by a registered soils and structural engineering firm at the owner's expense. Guard rails shall conform to Colorado State Highway Department requirement. 
4)  Signs and Road Stripping - Shall be provided as part of the general roadwork where required by the Town Administrator. 
5)  Bridges - Plans and specifications for bridges shall conform to the Colorado Department of Highways requirements and be approved by the Town Administrator before construction. 
6)  Subsurface Drainage - Subgrades subject to poor drainage, underground seepage or a high water table must be adequately drained for roadbed stabilization. Drains must be installed to control or prevent the high ground water level from coming to within 4 feet of the roadway pavement surface. 
7)  Inlet Structures - Designs for inlet structures must be approved by the Town Administrator. Curb openings with protection bars are preferred. Grates are not permitted where pedestrians, bicycles or debris-laden flows are anticipated. 
D.  Structural Requirements : Materials and quality of work shall conform to the current edition of the Colorado Department of Transportation specifications and standard drawings, except that the Town Administrator shall decide all options. 
4.  REQUIRED INFORMATION AND PROCEDURE 
    Prior to beginning the road design, the applicant shall meet with the Basalt Planning Commission (or its official representative) and the Town Administrator to discuss the general concepts of level or road service, type, construction and any special conditions involved in that particular project. If the road is to be a part of a subdivision, these matters shall be taken up at the time of the preapplication conference for the subdivision. 
Plans and specifications are to be prepared based on appropriate planning criteria and applicable standards and requirements. All design work is to be prepared and signed by a registered professional engineer. 
Plans are to be completed in sufficient detail to facilitate review and are to be submitted to both the Town Administrator and the Town Planning Commission (or its official representative) at least 35 days prior to the regular Planning Commission meeting at which the road plans will be considered. If the roads are to be part of a subdivision, they will be reviewed at the time the Preliminary Plan is reviewed. 
If the road is not to be a part of a subdivision, the road plans shall be reviewed by the Town Administrator and the Planning Commission prior to presentation to the Board of Trustees for its approval or disapproval. 
Approval of plans shall be good for one year. After one year, the procedure must be repeated and revisions in standards made in the interim shall apply. 
Ten (10) copies of plans and specifications shall be supplied at the time of the first review. 
Plans shall include: 
A.  General Location Map drawn at a scale of approximately 1" = 500'. It should show locations of streets, roads, and highways within a distance of approximately 1/2 mile of the proposed development and shall include natural drainage courses and tributary area. 
B.  Topographic Map (for subdivision roads). If roads are to be a part of a proposed subdivision, the topographic map which will be used in the preliminary filing of the subdivision shall accompany the application for a road construction permit. 
C.  Plans and Profiles of the proposed road shall be prepared from field survey data. Information shall include but not be limited to: 
1)  Profile of existing ground surface along proposed centerline of roadbed. 
2)  Profile of proposed final grade showing; grades, length of vertical curves, stationing and elevations of BVC's, EVC's and PIVC's. The vertical scale is to be distorted 10 to 1. Ditch grade shall also be shown. 
3)  Plan of road showing length of tangents and curves, widths of right-of-way, slope lines to prove that the right-of-way is of sufficient width, stationing of PT's, PC's, PI's, curve radii, delta angles, bearings, distances, centerline stationing at 100-foot intervals, dimensions of all road elements, curbs, gutters, utilities, easements and other structures. Location and size of culverts, designating the type and gauge or strength classification and the estimated flow along with data assumed in estimating the flow. 
4)  Cross sections of the entire right-of-way for each variance in roadbed design and at all drainage crossings shall be submitted. Information shall included engineers classifications of subgrade, thickness of sub-base and base course. Asphalt mat shall also be shown if applicable. Size, slope, inlet and outlet conditions and depth of cover of culverts shall also be shown. 
5)  Plan shall also included north arrow, scale, street names, drainage patterns, typical cross sections, section corners and lines and usable bench marks in the area. 
D.  Construction Plans for all structures, bridges, box culverts, retaining walls, guard rails, etc. 
E.  Plans for Revegetation and Sodding of cut and fill slopes. 
F.  A Letter of Intent stating the scope and estimated time limit of each stage of construction. Statement indicating party or parties responsible for the construction. 
G.  Letters from ditch companies or other interested parties or agencies involved stating their approval of any structure constructed within their right-of-way or which may influence their rights or interests. 
H.  A Detailed Cost Estimate of the Project shall also be provided to facilitate the estimate of the amount of bonding required for the road improvements. 
I.  A Drainage Study of areas affecting the proposed road system should include the expected runoff, at road crossing and other critical locations which would result from a 25 year frequency storm or snow runoff conditions whichever is greater. This study should be related and refer to the plan and profile, the general location map and cross sections of the roadway at culvert locations. 
J.  Materials and Soils Testing - A report shall be submitted covering the suitability of materials which are proposed for use in the sub-base and base course. The Project Engineer shall keep a record of soils tests including comments, test results and soil logs from each location. Such information shall be made available at the Town Administrator's request. 
5.  INSPECTIONS AND TEST 
A.  Inspections - Adequate inspections assure compliance to Town standards; they are the basis for the Town Administrator's recommendation to the Board of Trustees for releases of bonds and final acceptance of roadways. 
It is the responsibility of the contractor or the developer to contact the Town Administrator one day in advance of the required inspection. "In progress" inspections of all stages of roadwork will eliminate the need for extensive testing after completion of roadbed. 
Any work or material which does not conform to Town standards will be brought to the attention of the contractor or developer, and if immediate corrections are not made, construction may be stopped. 
The general types of inspections required are as follows: 
Culverts : Trenching, grade, bedding, installations of pipe, backfill and compaction. Inspection to be required when backfill is completed to 1/2 depth of the culvert. 
Structures : Finished excavation, grade, forming, reinforcing steel, concrete pour, finish and test cylinders. Inspections required: 
1)  Prior to placing steel; and 
2)  prior to the concrete pour. 
Roadbed : Subgrade, sub-base, base course, prime, paving and during concrete pours to be called for at each completed stage. Locations of required field tests will be determined by the Town Administrator or Project Engineer. 
Final : A request for the final inspection and acceptance for maintenance or release from bond must be made in writing to the Town Administrator after all other inspections have been passed. 
B.  Testing - When required by the Town Administrator, a recognized testing firm shall certify to the quality of materials and construction. All testing shall be by recognized methods and shall be at the contractor's, developer's or owner's expense. 
Until such time as a segment of road is officially accepted for maintenance by the Town, the developer or owner shall be fully responsible for the maintenance, snowplowing and correction of any faulty construction, including unsuitable road cuts and chuckholes. 
6.  FEES 
    All applicants will be assessed a fee to cover the costs of application review. This fee must be paid prior to review of the road plan. Fees will be determined for each individual application, by the Town Administrator in accordance with the Basalt Municipal Code. 
7.  ACCEPTANCE OF ROADS FOR MAINTENANCE 
A.  Subdivision Roads - Acceptance of platted subdivision by the Town does not constitute acceptance of the roads and right-of-ways for maintenance. Until each road is specifically accepted by the Board of Trustees for maintenance, the maintenance, any additional construction and work are the sole responsibility of the owners of the land embraced within the subdivision. 
B.  Rights-of-Way - On occasion, individuals, organizations or other agencies may wish to dedicate land to the Town for future roads. The procedure shall be as follows: 
1)  Submit a written request 15 days prior to the next regularly scheduled Basalt Planning Commission meeting to the planning office stating reasons for wanting the right-of-way accepted including a map showing the topography and land parcels involved along with the legal descriptions. 
2)  The Basalt Planning Commission shall review the request, make a recommendation and submit it to the Board of Trustees for consideration. 
3)  If the Board of Trustees approves the request, the applicant must submit a deed acceptable to the Town Attorney to the property in question for execution by the Board of Trustees. 
8.  EXISTING TOWN ROADS 
A.  Encroachment Permits - Contractors, developers, owners or governmental agencies in accordance with the Basalt Code must obtain a road cut permit from the Town Administrator for any work performed within the Town road right-of-way. Upon completion of work in the Town road right-of-way, the condition of structures and land shall be returned to the same or better conditions than existed before the encroachment was permitted. In situations where there are subsurface utilities in the area of encroachment, the party doing the work shall be responsible for locating all such utilities and coordinating such work with the Town Administrator and take steps to insure these utilities will not be damaged. The agency encroaching upon the right-of-way shall post bond for possible damage as provided in the Basalt Municipal Code, Section 11-53. 
B.  Overload and Oversize Permit - Before vehicles or other equipment that do not conform to the limitation set by the Model Traffic Code are used upon any Town road, the operator must obtain specific permission from the Town Administrator. The Town Administrator will require any provisions such as hours of operation, protection devices, etc., as he or she may deem necessary to protect the road affected by the use of such nonconforming equipment. 
C.  Road and Easement Vacations - On occasion, vacation of Town roads or various easements may become warranted due to peculiar circumstances or changes in the overall development patterns. 
The Board of Trustees may vacate any Town road or any portion thereof. No road or part shall be vacated that will leave a parcel of land without access to a public road. 
9.  BONDING REQUIREMENTS 
    The term "bond" shall be uncancelable surety secured unto the Town and acceptable to the Town Attorney. Bond shall be in the amount of the estimated construction cost as approved by the Town Administrator. 
If work has not commenced or has not been completed in a satisfactory manner within the prescribed time as contained in the Bonding Agreement, the Town Administrator, as provided in the Basalt Municipal Code, shall cause the bond to instrumented. As logical units of work are completed and approved by the Town Administrator, application may be made for a partial release of the bond. 
(Ord. 19, § 2, 1994) 
CODE COMPARISON TABLE 
Prior Code New Code 1-1 1-31 1-2 1-33 1-3 1-85 1-4 1-3 1-5 1-82 1-6 1-1 1-7 1-8 1-8 1-10 1-9 1-5 1-10 1-6 1-11 1-7 1-12 Deleted 1-13 1-9 1-14 1-51 1-15 Deleted 1-16 1-59 1-17 1-60 1-18 1-58 1-19 1-61 1-20 1-62 1-21 1-57 1-22 Deleted 1-23 1-63 1-24 Deleted 1-25 Deleted 1-26 Deleted 1-27 Deleted 2-1 2-21 2-2 2-26 2-3 2-27 2-4 2-28 2-5 2-23 2-6 2-29 2-7 2-30 2-8 2-31 2-9 2-32 2-10 2-51 2-11 2-52 2-12 2-53 2-13 2-54 2-14 2-55 2-15 2-56 2-16 2-57 2-17 2-58 2-18 2-111 2-19 2-112 2-20 2-113 2-21 2-114 2-22 Deleted 2-23 Deleted 2-24 2-115 2-25 10-3 2-26 2-116 2-27 2-161 2-28 2-162 2-29 2-69 2-30 2-70 2-31 2-71 2-31.3 2-72 2-31.4 2-73 2-31.5 2-74 2-31.6 2-75 2-31.7 2-76 2-32 2-91 2-33 2-92 2-34 2-93 2-35 2-94 2-36 2-95 2-37 1-121 3-1 2-59 3-2 2-60 3-3 2-61 3-4 2-62 3-5 2-63 6-1 2-131 6-2 Deleted 6-3 2-135 6-4 2-136 6-5 2-137 6-6 2-138 6-7 Deleted 6-8 2-132 6-9 2-133 6-10 2-139 6-11 2-140 6-12 2-141 6-13 2-142 7-1 11-151 7-2 11-152 7-3 11-153 7-4 11-154 7-5 11-155 7-6 11-156 7-7 11-157 7-8 11-158 7-9 11-159 8-1 Deleted 8-2 Deleted 8-3 Deleted 10-1 2-64 10-2 2-65 10-3 2-66 10-4 1-101 14-1 Deleted 14-2 Deleted 14-3 Deleted 14-4 Deleted 14-5 Deleted 14-6 Deleted 15-1 4-81 15-2 4-82 16-1 2-22 16-2 2-25 16-3 2-24 16-4 2-1 16-5 2-2 18-1 10-41 18-2 10-42 18-3 10-43 18-4 Deleted 18-5 10-44 18-6 10-45 18-7 10-46 18-10 6-31 18-11 6-32 18-12 6-33 18-13 Deleted 20-1 10-61 20-2 10-62 20-3 Deleted 23-1 18-1 23-2 18-2 23-3 18-3 23-4 18-4 23-5 18-5 23-7 18-6 23-8 18-7 23-9 18-8 23-10 Deleted 24-1 10-21 24-2 10-22 24-3 10-1,10-2 24-4 Deleted 24-5 Deleted 26-5.1 7-111 26-21 7-112 31-1 16-241 31-2 16-242 31-3 16-243 32-1 18-61 32-2 18-62 32-3 18-63 32-4 18-64 32-5 18-65 32-6 Deleted 33-1 16-352 33-2 16-353 33-3 16-354 33-4 16-351 33-5 16-355 33-6 16-356 33-7 16-357 33-8 16-358 33-9 Deleted 33-10 16-359 33-11 16-360 33-12 16-361 33-13 16-362 33-14 16-363 33-15 16-364 33-16 16-365 33-17 16-366 33-18 16-367 33-19 16-368 33-20 16-369 33-21 16-370 38-1 10-23 38-2 10-23 45-1 7-1 45-2 7-2 45-3 7-3 45-4 7-31 45-5 7-4 45-6 7-5 45-7 7-6 45-8 7-32 45-9 7-33 45-10 7-34 45-11 7-35 45-12 7-7 45-13 7-8 45-14 Deleted 45-15 7-9 45-16 7-10 45-17 7-51 45-18 7-52 45-19 7-1 45-20 7-11 45-21 7-12 45-22 7-13 45-23 7-14 45-24 7-15 45-25 7-16 45-26 7-17 45-27 7-18 50-1 13-1 50-2 13-2 51-1 18-21 51-2 18-22 51-3 18-23 51-4 18-24 51-5 18-25 51-6 18-26 51-7 18-27 51-8 Deleted 51-9 Deleted 55-1 11-1 55-2 11-2 55-3 Deleted 55-3.5 11-3 55-4 11-21 55-5 11-22 55-6 11-23 55-7 11-24 55-8 11-25 55-9 11-26 55-10 11-27 55-11 11-28 55-12 11-29 55-13 11-30 55-14 11-31 55-15 11-32 55-16 Deleted 55-17 11-33 55-18 11-34 55-19 11-35 55-20 11-51 55-21 11-52 55-22 11-53 55-23 11-54 55-24 11-55 55-25 11-56 55-26 11-57 55-27 11-58 55-28 11-59 55-29 11-60 55-30 11-61 55-31 11-62 55-32 11-63 55-33 11-64 55-34 11-65 55-35 11-66 55-36 11-67 55-37 11-68 55-38 11-69 55-39 11-70 55-40 11-71 55-41 11-72 55-42 11-73 55-43 11-74 55-44 11-75 55-45 11-91 55-46 11-92 55-47 11-93 55-48 11-94 55-49 11-95 55-50 11-111 55-51 11-112 55-52 11-113 55-53 11-114 55-54 11-131 55-55 11-132 55-56 11-133 55-57 11-134 55-58 11-135 57-1 17-1 57-2 17-2 57-3 17-3 57-4 17-4 57-5 17-5 57-6 17-6 57-7 17-7 57-8 17-8 57-9 17-9 57-10 17-10 57-11 17-11 57-12 17-12 57-13 17-13 57-14 17-14 57-15 17-15 57-16 17-16 57-20 17-31 57-21 17-32 57-22 17-33 57-23 17-34 57-24 17-35 57-25 17-36 57-26 17-37 57-27 17-38 57-28 17-39 57-29 17-40 57-30 17-41 57-31 17-42 57-32 17-43 57-36 17-62 57-37 17-63 57-38 17-64 57-39 17-65 57-45 17-81 57-46 17-82 57-47 17-83 57-48 17-84 57-49 17-85 57-50 17-86 57-51 17-87 57-55 17-101 57-56 17-102 57-57 17-103 57-58 17-104 57-59 17-105 57-65 17-151 57-66 17-152 58-1 17-121 58-2 17-122 58-3 17-123 58-4 17-124 58-5 17-125 58-6 17-126 58-7 17-127 58-8 17-128 58-9 17-129 58-10 17-130 58-11 17-131 60-1 4-61 60-2 4-62 60-3 4-63 60-4 4-64 60-5 4-65 60-6 4-66 60-7 4-67 60-8 4-68 60-9a 6-1 60-9b 6-2 60-9c 6-3 60-9d 6-4 60-9e 6-5 60-9f 6-6 60-9g 6-7 60-9h 6-8 60-9i 6-9 60-9j 6-10 60-9k 6-11 60-9l 6-12 60-9m Deleted 60-16 5-101 60-17 5-102 60-18 5-103 60-19 5-104 60-20 5-105 60-21 5-106 60-22 5-107 60-23 5-108 62-1 16-331 62-2 16-332 62-3 6-51 62-4 6-52 62-5 6-53 62-6 16-333 63-1 7-91 63-2 7-92 63-3 7-93 64-1 8-1 64-2 8-2 64-3 8-6 64-4 8-3 64-5 Deleted 64-6 Deleted 64-7 8-4 64-8 8-5 68-1 13-21 68-2 13-22 68-3 13-23 68-4 13-24 68-5 13-25 68-6 13-26 68-7 13-27 68-7.5 13-28 68-8 13-29 68-9 13-30 68-10 13-31 68-11 13-32 68-12 13-33 68-13 13-34 68-14 13-35 68-15 13-36 68-16 13-37 68-17 13-38 68-18 13-39 68-19 13-40 68-20 13-41 68-21 13-42 68-22 13-43 68-23 13-44 68-24 13-45 68-25 13-46 68-26 13-47 68-27 13-61 68-28 13-81 68-29 13-82 68-30 13-83 68-31 13-84 68-32 13-85 68-33 13-86 68-34 13-87 68-35 13-88 70-1 16-1 70-2 16-2 70-3 16-3 70-4 16-4 70-5 16-5 70-6 16-6 70-7 16-7 70-8 16-21 70-9 16-22 70-10 16-23 70-11 16-24 70-12 16-25 70-13 16-26 70-15 16-41 70-16 16-42 70-17 16-43 70-18 16-44 70-19 16-45 70-20 16-46 70-21 16-47 70-22 16-61 70-23 16-62 70-25 16-64 70-26 16-65 70-27 16-66 70-28 16-67 70-29 16-68 70-30 16-69 70-31 16-70 70-32 16-71 70-33 16-72 70-34 16-73 70-35 16-91 70-36 16-92 70-37 16-93 70-38 16-94 70-39 16-95 70-40 16-96 70-44 16-111 70-45 16-112 70-46 16-113 70-47 16-131 70-48 16-132 70-49 16-133 70-50 16-134 70-51 16-135 70-52 16-136 70-53 16-137 70-54 16-138 70-56 16-139 70-57 16-140 70-58 16-141 70-59 16-142 70-59.5 16-143 70-60 16-161 70-61 16-162 70-62 16-163 70-63 16-164 70-64 16-165 70-65 16-166 70-66 16-167 70-67 16-168 70-68 16-169 70-75 16-181 70-76 16-182 70-78 16-184 70-79 16-185 70-80 16-186 70-81 16-187 70-85 16-201 70-86 16-202 70-88 16-204 70-89 16-205 70-90 16-206 70-95 16-221 70-96 16-222 70-97 16-223 70-98 16-224 70-99 16-225 70-100 16-226 70-101 16-227 70-105 16-261 70-106 16-262 70-107 16-263 70-108 16-264 70-109 16-265 70-110 16-266 70-111 16-267 70-112 16-268 70-113 16-269 70-114 16-270 70-115 16-291 70-116 Deleted 70-117 16-292 70-118 16-293 70-119 16-294 70-120 16-295 70-125 16-311 70-126 16-312 70-127 Deleted A75-1 5-31 A75-2 5-32 A75-3 5-33 A75-4 5-34 A75-4a 5-35 A75-5 5-36 A75-6 5-37 A75-7 5-38 A75-8 5-39 A75-9 5-40 A75-10 5-41 A75-11 5-42 A75-12 5-43 A75-13 5-44 A75-14 5-45 A75-15 5-46 A75-16 5-47 A75-17 5-48 A75-18 5-49 A75-19 5-50 A75-20 5-51 A75-21 Deleted A75-22 5-52  
DISPOSITION OF ORDINANCES TABLE 
Ordinance 
Number Ord. § Year Code Section Number 27 I, 1 1987 Deleted I, 2 5-71 II, 1, 2 5-72 II, 3 5-73 II, 4 5-74 III, 1 5-75 III, 2 5-76 III, 3 5-77 III, 4 5-78 III, 5 5-79 III, 6 5-80 III, 7 5-81 III, 8 5-82 III, 9 5-83 IV, 1, 2, 3 5-84 V, 1 5-85 V, 2 5-86 V, 3 5-87 V, 4 5-88 V, 5 5-89 13 3 1988 5-1 4 5-2 5 5-3 6 5-4 7 5-5 8 5-6 9 5-7 10 5-8 11 5-9 12 5-10 13 5-11 14 5-12 15 5-13 16 5-14 17 5-15 18 5-16 19 5-17 20 Deleted 21 Deleted 23 1 1990 16-267 2, 3 16-265 25 1 1990 7-112 28 1 1990 17-10 2 17-61 3 16-292 4 16-265 29 1 1990 16-63 2 16-94 3, 4, 5 16-95 6, 7 16-184 8 16-203 1 3 1991 7-131, 7-132, 7-133, 7-134, 7-135, 7-136, 7-137, 7-138, 7-139, 7-140, 7-141, 7-142, 7-143, 7-144, 7-145, 7-146, 7-147, 7-148, 7-149, 7-150, 7-151, 7-152, 7-153, 7-154, 7-155, 7-156, 7-157, 7-158, 7-159, 7-160, 7-161, 7-162, 2 1 1991 13-47 3 1 1991 8-5 5 1 1991 2-53 2 2-56 3 2-113 4 2-67 5 2-68 6 1 1991 4-61 2 4-62 3, 4, 5 4-63 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 4-64 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 4-65 17, 18 4-66 10 1 1991 16-4 2 16-65 3 16-111 4 16-134 5 16-182 6 16-183 7 16-204 8 16-222 10 9 16-223 10 16-265 11 16-267 12 16-269 13, 14, 15 16-22 11 1 1991 2-56 2 2-61 12 1 1991 8-5 13 1 1991 18-4 2 17-61 3 16-292 16 1 1991 6-34 18 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 1991 8-2 6 8-6 22 1 1991 1-1, 1-2, 1-4, 1-31, 1-32, 1-52, 1-53, 1-54, 1-55, 1-56, 1-81, 1-83, 1-84, 1-102, 2-70, 2-131, 2-134, 2-136, 4-1, 4-21, 4-41, 4-42, 5-52, 6-10, 6-51, 7-10, 7-71, 7-149, 8-5, 11-21, 11-53, 11-71, 11-134, 13-24, 13-31, 15-1, 15-2, 15-3, 15-4, 15-5, 15-6, 16-4, 16-268, 17-36, 18-4, 18-7, 18-8, 18-63 2 1 1992 2-1 2 2-2 4 1 1992 16-94 10 1 1992 2-139 11 1, 2 1992 2-161 12 1, 2 1992 16-22 13 1 1992 16-188 14 1 1992 16-202 15 1 1992 13-26 16 1 1992 13-28 17 1, 2 1992 10-23 3 10-24 18 1 1992 16-91 19 1 1992 4-101, 4-102, 4-103, 4-104, 4-105 Reso. 12 1992 Appendix C 22 1 1992 2-161 27 1992 7-131, 7-132, 7-133, 7-134, 7-135, 7-136, 7-137, 7-138, 7-139, 7-140, 7-141, 7-142, 7-143, 7-144, 7-145, 7-146, 7-147, 7-148, 7-149, 7-150, 7-151, 7-152, 7-153, 7-154, 7-155, 7-156, 7-157, 7-158, 7-159, 7-160, 7-161, 7-162, 7-163, 7-164 7 1 1993 16-391, 16-392, 16-393, 16-394, 16-395 8 1 1993 16-4 9 1 1993 18-9 10 1 1993 6-33 13 1 1993 16-4 2 16-22 1 1 1994 18-8 8 1 1994 13-26 10 1 1994 6-33 13 1 1994 2-161 19 1 1994 17-36 2 Appendix B, 3B5)a) 1 1 1995 18-9 4 1-4 1995 18-4  
Ord. No Year Subject Ord. § Disposition 6 1995 Board of Trustee's meetings 1 2-29 Agenda for Board meetings 2 2-32 14 1995 Zoning, schedule of uses 1 16-22 16 1995 Zoning, schedule of uses 1 16-22 2 16-21 3 16-27 22 1995 Fee schedule Appx. C 24 1995 Planning and Zoning Commission 1-4 2-161 2 1996 Subdivisions, definitions 1 17-3 2 17-4 20 1996 Zoning, definitions 3 16-4 Zoning, schedule of uses 4 16-22 Zoning, Developing Resource District 5 16-23 Zoning, adult entertainment uses 6       Added 16-189 Business licenses, adult entertainment establishments 7       Added 6-71-6-105 Alcoholic beverages 8       Added 6-35 22 1996 Model Traffic Code, 1995 edition Ch. 8 23 1996 Municipal Court costs 1, 2 2-139 24 1996 Adoption of construction codes I 18-1, 18-3, 18-61 Uniform Building Code amendments II, III 18-4 Uniform Fire Code amendments IV 18-62 National Electrical Code amendments 18-5 Uniform Mechanical Code amendments V 18-6 Uniform Plumbing Code amendments VI 18-7 Contractor licensing VII 18-8 26 1996 Agenda for Board of Trustee meetings 2 2-32 29 1996 Subdivisions, final plat 1 17-64 Zoning, final development plan 2 16-65 32 1996 Subdivisions, fees 1 17-10 Subdivisions, payment of costs 2 17-61 Zoning, payment of fees and costs 3-5 16-292 36 1996 Surcharge on certain water line taps 1 13-28 1 1997 Zoning, definitions 1 16-4 5 1997 Zoning, development review 1       Added 16-8 Subdivisions, development review 2       Added 17-17 Zoning, definitions 3, 4 16-4 Zoning, permitted buildings & uses 5 16-201 Zoning, renting of rooms 6, 7 16-203 7 1997 Water tap charges 2 13-26 Water rates 3 13-47 Water fees 4 Appx. C 10 1997 Zoning, definitions 1 16-4 Zoning, schedule of uses 2 16-22 14 1997 Planning and Zoning Commission 2 2-161 18 1997 Municipal Court, failure to appear 1 2-141 1 1998 Zoning, planned unit developments 16-61-16-67       Deleted 16-68 16-71 2 1998 Tree preservation 1       Added 18-10 6 1998 Subdivisions, definitions 1 17-4 Minor subdivision procedure 2 17-83 Condominium review procedures 3 17-85 7 1998 Town code of ethics 1       Added 2-200-2-350 8 1998 Planning and Zoning Commission 1 2-161 9 1998 Zoning, off-site parking 4 16-94 11 1998 Excreting in public       Added 10-26 12 1998 Disorderly conduct 10-21 Harassment 10-22 Obstructing highway or passageway       Added 10-25 13 1998 Unlawful possession of alcoholic beverages by minor 1       Added 10-48 14 1998 Marihuana possession 1       Added 10-27 Drug paraphernalia possession       Added 10-28 15 1998 Curfew 1       Added 10-29 21 1998 Building code amendments 18-4 22 1998 Municipal Court, failure to appear 1 2-141 27 1998 Zoning, housing mitigation 1       Added 16-400, 16-401 29 1998 Zoning, exterior lighting 2       Added 16-431-16-440 30 1998 Zoning, R-3TN District 2-7 16-27 8 16-22 1 1999 Annexation B       Added 15-7 2 1999 Uniform Building Code amendment B 18-4 3 1999 Land dedication B 17-15, 17-16 6 1999 Zoning, housing mitigation B       Rpld 16-401, 16-402 C       Added 16-411-16-419 7 1999 Zoning, schedule of requirements B 16-22 River setback       Deleted 16-188 16-356 Rivers, wetlands and environmentally sensitive areas C       Added 16-461-16-468 10 1999 Optional premises licenses 1, 2       Added 6-36, 6-37 3 6-31 11 1999 Building codes adopted A 18-1 Uniform Building Code amendments B 18-4 Uniform Fire Code amendments C 18-62 Uniform Mechanical Code amendments D 18-6 International Plumbing Code amendments E 18-7 Contractor licensing F 18-8 Fire code purpose, copy on file G       Rpld 18-64, 18-65 17 1999 Annexation 1 15-7 Zoning, compliance with Master Plan 2       Added 16-9 Subdivision compliance 3 17-9 2 2000 Board of Trustees and Mayor's compensation 2-21 5 2000 Zoning, schedule of requirements 1 16-22 13 2000 Town Code of Ethics 2-240 16 2000 Model Traffic Code 1 8-2 19 2000 Planning and Zoning Commission 1 2-161 23 2000 Zoning, definitions 1 16-4 Zoning, maximum size for residential units 2       Added 16-22.5 25 2000 Zoning, floodplain regulations B1 16-356 B2 16-461 B3-5 16-463 B6 16-464 B7 16-465 30 2000 Uniform Fire Code amendments 1 18-62 31 2000 Planning and Zoning Commission 2, 3 2-161 Affordable housing 4 15-7 Vested property rights, definitions 5 17-122 32 2000 Zoning, building height 2 16-4 Zoning, schedule of uses 3 16-22 Zoning, accessory dwelling units 4 16-224 2 2001 Zoning, lighting standards 2, 3 16-435 4 2001 Permit for fences 3       Added 16-240 8 2001 Wildlife protection B       Added Ch. 7, Art. VIII, 7-165-7-173 10 2001 Water fees and water tap charges 2 13-26 3 13-47 4 Appx C 17 2001 Victims and Witnesses Assistance and Law 1       Added Ch. 2, Art. IX, Enforcement Board 2-361, 2-362 2 2-139 20 2001 Historic preservation 1 16-391-16-398 26 2001 Zoning, affordable housing 2 16-411 3 16-412 4 16-413 5 16-414 33 2001 Public Zone District 1 16-4 2 16-21 6       Added 16-28 6 2002 Energy Code 1       Added Ch. 18, Art. IV, 18-81-18-85 9 2002 Amending various sections B1 16-4 B2-B4 16-22 B5       Deltd/rplcd 16-182 11 2002 Skateboard Park 2       Added Ch. 11, Art. VIII 11-171-11-176 13 2002 Zoning, schedule of uses and requirements B1 16-22 14 2002 Building regulations, special improvement fee B1 18-4 16 2002 Zoning, PUD procedures B1-3 16-65 1 2003 Engine idling B1 8-2 4 2003 Town-owned property B1       Added 15-8 12 2003 Fees B1 Appendix C B2       Added Chap. 2, Art. X B3 1-62 B4 1-82 B5 1-83 B6-B9 2-139 B10 2-362 B11 4-63 B12 6-4 B13 6-6 B14 6-10 B15 6-31 B16 6-34 B17 6-51 B18 6-71 B19 6-83 B20 6-103 B21 6-105 B22 7-34 B23 7-134 B24 7-141 B25 7-143 B26 7-149 B27 7-150 B28 8-2 B29 8-21 B30 10-23 B31 10-24 B32 10-27 B33 11-53 B34 15-3 B35 16-44 B36 16-137 B37 16-203 B38 16-262 B39 16-268 B40 16-292 B41 16-463 B42       Rpld 17-10 B43       Rpld/rnctd 17-61 B44 18-2 B45 18-3 B46-B48 18-4 B49-B53 18-8 B54 18-10 13 2003 Fines, penalties and fees Appendix C 16 2003 Off-street parking and loading B1-B6 16-91-16-96 28 2003 R-3 Traditional Neighborhood District B1 Ch. 16, Art. II 29 2003 Special Review Application B1 Ch. 16, Art. III 30 2003 Historic Preservation B1 16-394 33 2003 Amending Code to conform with Charter B1 1-5, 1-8, 1-9, 1-31, 2-53, 2-55, 2-56, 2-58, 2-60, 2-61, 2-65, 2-67, 2-68, 2-71, 2-72, 2-74, 2-91, 2-93, 2-112, 2-113, 2-115, 2-136, 2-137, 2-161, 2-162, 2-230, 2-240, 2-270-2-310, 2-330, 2-361, 2-362, 4-42, 4-67, 4-81, 4-82, 4-103-4-105, 5-104, 6-32, 6-52, 6-71, 6-75, 6-77, 6-80, 7-5, 7-8, 7-9, 7-11-7-13, 7-16, 7-35, 7-112, 7-154, 7-155, 7-162, 7-165, 7-172, 10-42, 10-43, 11-2, 11-22, 11-23, 11-25-11-29, 11-31-11-33, 11-54-11-59, 11-61, 11-63, 11-67-11-69, 11-71, 11-74, 11-75, 11-91, 11-92, 11-94, 11-114, 11-133-11-135, 11-151, 11-152, 11-155-11-157, 11-173, 13-22, 13-23, 13-25-13-30, 13-32-13-34, 13-36, 13-39, 13-42, 13-47, 13-84, 13-85, 13-87, 13-88, 15-3, 15-5-15-7, 16-4, 16-8, 16-25, 16-26, 16-28, 16-43, 16-47, 16-63, 16-65-16-67, 16-70-16-73, 16-111, 16-112, 16-134, 16-164, 16-167, 16-169, 16-181, 16-182, 16-224, 16-226, 16-265, 16-267, 16-332, 16-333, 16-351, 16-359-16-362, 16-367-16-369, 16-392-16-398, 16-411, 16-412, 16-414, 16-415, 16-418, 16-419, 16-434, 16-438, 16-462, 16-463, 16-465-16-468, 17-12-17-17, 17-31, 17-33, 17-35, 17-36, 17-39, 17-40, 17-62-17-64, 17-81-17-84, 17-86, 17-101-17-103, 17-123, 17-151, 17-152, 18-9, 18-10, 18-21, 18-62, 18-83 B2(1) 1-31 B2(2) 1-56 B2(3) 2-21 B2(4)       Rpld Ch. 2, Arts. I, II B2(5)       Rpld 2-51, 2-54, 2-57, 2-59, 2-62, 2-63, 2-66, 2-69, 2-75 B2(6) 2-52, 2-53, 2-55, 2-56, 2-58, 2-61, 2-65 B2(7) 2-61 B2(8) 2-64 B2(9) 2-67 B2(10) 2-68 B2(11) 2-76 B2(12) 2-113 B2(13) 4-21 B2(14) 4-61 B2(15)       Rpld 5-1-5-89 B2(17)       Added 16-10 B2(18)       Added 17-18 34 2003 Industrial Zone District B1 16-22 01 2004 Lodging tax 1       Added Ch. 4, Art. VII 03 2004 Lodging tax violations Appx. C Res. 05 2004 Charter amendments 1 Charter 2.2 2 Charter 4.2 3-5 Charter 4.3 04 2004 Water rates 1 13-47 2 Appx. C 05 2004 Town Clerk duties 1 2-53 Chief of Police as Disaster Coordinator 2 2-113 06 2004 Water rate EQR 1 13-26 07 2004 Temporary vendors B1       Added 6-13 B2       Added 6-14 13 2004 Town Council meetings B Deleted 14 2004 Vehicle weight limits B 8-2 15 2004 Alcoholic beverages B1       Added 6-38 B2       Added 6-39 25 2004 Cross-connection manual 2       Added 13-48 28 2004 Public works manual 2       Added 11-4 03 2005 Town Council meetings B1       Added 2-22 06 2005 Model Traffic Code B2A, B 8-1 B2C, D 8-4 07 2005 Vehicles and traffic B1 8-2 08 2005 Watering restrictions 1 13-36 09 2005 Water rates 1 13-47 12 2005 Minor subdivisions (Rep. by Ord. 21, 2005) B1 17-4, 17-83 21 2005 Minor subdivisions B2 17-4, 17-83 27 2005 Maximum height requirement exceptions B1 16-182 09 2006 Sales tax 1 4-65 2 4-66 01 2007 Abandoned vehicles 1 7-1 2 7-35 3 8-2 13 2007 Building regulations 1       Rpld/Rnctd Ch. 18 23 2007 Flood damage prevention B1, 2 16-351 B3 16-356 B4 16-359 B5-9 16-361 B10, 11 16-362 B12-14 16-363 B15 16-366 07 2008 Vehicles and traffic B1 8-2 Res. 11 2008 Charter amendments 1 Charter 2.2 2 Charter 3.3 3 Charter 3.6 13 2008 Zoning, building code and definitions 1 16-4 2 16-27 3 16-206 4 16-4 5 16-4 6 Ch. 16 18 2008 Water surcharge 1 13-28 05 2009 Community housing B Ch. 16, Art. XIX C 16-394 06 2009 Community Priorities Scoring System B       Added Ch. 16, Art. XXII 07 2009 C-2 Downtown Business District B1 16-4 B2 16-21 B3 16-22 B4, B5       Added 16-29 B6 16-63 B7 16-417 B8 16-111 B9 16-394 11 2009 Sustainable Building Regulations 1       Added 18-23-18-25 12 2009 Medical marijuana facilities, zoning 1, 2 16-4 3       Added 16-190 4 16-23 5 16-22 6 16-29 7 16-202 13 2009 Medical marijuana facilities, licenses B1       Added Ch. 6, Art. V 16 2009 Subdivision application requirements 1 17-64 2, 3 17-65 17 2009 Unlawful possession of marijuana 10-27, 10-28 11 2011 Administration and abatement of nuisances 1 7-1 2       Rpld 7-11-7-17 Noxious weeds 3 Ch. 7, Art. III Sidewalk construction and repair 4       Added 11-36 Encroachments 5 11-91 Special review application requirements 6 16-43 Planned unit developments 7 16-73 Application requirements 8 17-63 9 17-64 Contractor licensing 10, 11 18-1 12, 13 18-2 14 18-3 Construction codes 15-17 18-13 15 2011 Housing mitigation B 16-418 19 2011 Recycling and waste reduction B       Added Ch. 7, Art. IX 24 2011 Housing mitigation 1 16-417 21 2011 Chickens and livestock 1 7-111 2       Added 7-113 31 2011 Special event liquor permit 1       Added 6-40 33 2011 Supplemental requirements 1 16-27 01 2012 Recycling and waste reduction 1       Rpld Ch. 7, Art. IX 05 2012 Hillside and steep slope regulations B(Exh. A) 16-187 Zoning definitions C(Exh. B) 16-4 Special review application approval procedures D       Rpld 16-44(e)(1)g       Rnbd 16-44(e)(1)h       as 16-44(e)(1)g Uses permitted; allowed variances; residential density; findings E 16-63(b) Approval standards criteria F 16-72(2) Natural hazards G 17-32 International Fire Code H       Added 18-82(39) Supplemental building regulations I       Added 18-101 07 2012 Lodging tax definitions 2(Exh. B) 4-122 Zoning definitions 3(Exh. C) 16-4 Schedules of uses and requirements 4(Exh. D) 16-22 Renting of rooms 5(Exh. E) 16-203(tit.) 16-203(a) 6(Exh. F)       Added 16-203(c) 10 2012 Zoning definitions B.1(Exh. A) 16-4 Intent of individual districts B.2       Added 16-21(11) CSC Zone District B.3(Exh. B)       Added 16-30 Purposes and intent B.4(Exh. C.1) 16-481 Applicability of scoring system B.4(Exh. C.2) 16-482 Exemptions form scoring system B.4(Exh. C.3)       Added 16-483(8) Word usage and definitions B.5(Exh. D) 17-4 Communitiy serving subdivisions and development site subdivisions       Added 17-84.5 14 2012 Exterior lighting 1(Exh. A) 16-431-16-440 Sign lighting       Added 16-144 Automatic teller machines       Added 16-441 04 2013 Zoning definitions B.1 16-4 Intent of individual districts B.2       Added 16-21(12) Schedules of uses and requirements B.3(Exh. A) 16-22 Supplemental requirements for R-4 Mixed Density Residential District B.4(Exh. B)       Added 16-31 09 2013 Town Manager - Powers and duties 2 2-61(5) 11 2013 Charter amendment 1       Rpld Charter 14.8 12 2013 Schedule of tax 1 4-65(a) Collection, administration and enforcement 2       Added 4-66(d) 14 2013 Replacement housing requirements B(Exh. A) 16-418 21 2013 Flood damage prevention B(Exh. A) 16-351-16-353 16-355 16-356 16-359-16-364       Added 16-365-16-368       Rnbd 16-365-16-370       as 16-369-16-374       Added 16-375 23 2013 Imposition of court costs 1 2-139 24 2013 Adoption of Model Traffic Code 1 8-1 30 2013 Zoning definitions 1(Exh. A) 16-4 Schedules of uses and requirements 16-22 Developing Resource District 16-23(c), (e) Medical marijuana facilities 16-190 Home occupations 16-202(11) 31 2013 Medical marijuana facilities B(Exh. A)       Rpld 6-121-6-142       Added 6-119-6-138 05 2014 Mitigation methods 1(Exh. A) 16-415 Certificates of community housing credits       Added 14-420 06 2014 Procedures for code interpretations and appeals 1(Exh. A)       Added 16-11 Board of Zoning Adjustment 16-265(c), (d) Setback requirement exceptions       Added 16-183(5), (6) Heating and air conditioning devices and equipment       Added 16-207 Accessory buildings and uses       Added 16-184(g) Minor subdivision procedure 2(Exh. B) 17-83(a)(1)       Added 17-83(a)(3) 07 2014 Petty theft 1 10-24 08 2014 Unlawful use and possession of marijuana and related offenses 1 10-27 09 2014 Possession of drug paraphernalia 1 10-28 10 2014 Camping or lodging on property without consent 1       Added 11-115, Unlawful use of vehicles as residence 11-116 12 2014 Temporary vendor use of public property and rights-of-way 1(Exh. A) 6-14(b) 14 2014 Zoning definitions 1(Exh. A) 16-4 Schedules of uses and requirements 16-22 C-2 Downtown Business District 16-29 Medical marijuana facilities and retail marijuana establishments 16-190 Home occupations 16-202(11) 15 2014 Hillside and steep slope regulations 1(Exh. A) 16-187(e)(4)c 17 2014 Medical marijuana centers and retail marijuana stores B(Exh. A)       Rpld 6-119-6-138       Added 6-119-6-137 22 2014 Qualifications of Municipal Electors 1 Chart. § 2.2 2014 Term limits       Added Chart. § 3.12 24 2014 Imposition of sales tax on retail marijuana sales and products Exh. A       Added 4-141 30 2014 Purposes and intent 1(Exh. A) 16-481 Applicability of scoring system 16-482 Exemptions from scoring system 16-483 31(Res.) 2014 Imposition of lodging tax Exh. A 4-123 04 2015 R-4 Mixed Density Residential District 1(Exh. A) 16-31(a)(1)a., tbl. 1       Added 16-31(a)(3)e.2. 12 2015 Marijuana and alcohol buffer measurement methodology and sale of medical and retail marijuana 2 6-125(c) 3 6-128(2) 4       Added 6-33(f) 19 2015 Housing mitigation and subdivision: improvement agreements B(Exh. A) 16-394(e)(1) 16-412(c) 16-416-16-418 16-419(d) 16-420 C(Exh. B) 16-419 17-102(a) 21 2015 Building Regulations 1(Exh. A) 18-14(d) 2-4 18-23-18-25(titles) 5(Exh. B)       Added 18-26 03 2016 Public arts program 1       Added 4-131-4-135       Rnbd Ch. 4, Art. VIII       as Ch. 4, Art. IX 21 2016 CSC Zone District B.1(Exh. A) 16-30 Zoning definitions  2(Exh. B) 16-4 Intent on individual districts  3 16-21(11) 22 2016 Sales tax 7(1) 4-65(a)  (2) 4-66(d) 24 2016 Schedule of Uses in C-1 and C-3 1(Exh. A) 16-22 Schedule of Uses in the C-2 Zone District 16-29 Medical marijuana facilities and retail marijuana establishments 16-190(1)b. 25 2016 Medical marijuana centers and retail marijuana stores B(Exh. 
A.1)       Rpld   
6-123  (Exh. A.2) 6-124(c)  (Exh. A.3) 6-128(9)  (Exh. A.4) 
      Added   
6-128(10)  (Exh. A.5) 
      Added   
6-131(8) 27 2016 Adoption of IECC by reference 1 18-41 28 2016 Recycling and waste reduction B(Exh. A) 
      Added   
7-185-7-192 30 2016 Business licenses and regulations B(Exh. A) 6-125(c)(1) 33 2016 Floodplain regulations in Reach II of the Roaring Fork River B(Exh. A) 14-461(c)       Added 14-461(d)       Added 14-463(b)(1.75), (c)(8), (9), (e)(4), (5) 14-463(e)(3)       Added 14-464(e)       Added 14-465(b)(9) 19 2017 Building regulations A.2-9 18-15-18-22 A.10 18-81, 18-82 22 2017 Including medical marijuana center as a community vitality use A(Exh. A) 16-29 tbl. 1 24 2017 R-4 Mixed Density Residential District A(Exh. A) 16-31(a)(3)a.  
