BURLINGTON, COLORADO 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances of 
the City of Burlington, Colorado 
____________ 
Beginning with Supp. No. 4, 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 

> 
PREFACE 
    The Burlington, Colorado Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company in 1986, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., its successor in interest. 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 4, Municipal Code Corporation will be keeping this code current by regular supplementation. 
    During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company under the direction of Mr. Curt Penny, city attorney. 
    The code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the Title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.040 is Section .040, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
    In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement No. 4, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
    A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
    This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ordinance 940A , passed January 28, 2019. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
    This code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this code. 
Numbering System. 
    The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this Code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title, then chapter, and ending with section. Each part is represented in the code section number. For example, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. 
Title. 
    A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, code adoption and definitions. The titles in this code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are Reserved for later use. 
Chapter. 
    Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. For example, Chapter 2.06, City Manager, can be added between 2.04, City Council, and Chapter 2.08, City Attorney. 
Section. 
    Each section of the code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
    There are many tables of contents in this code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
    At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).) 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 4, a secondary ordinance history note will be appended to affected sections. Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the end. These history notes can be cross-referenced to the code comparative table and disposition list appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Statutory References. 
    The statutory references direct the code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Cross-Reference Table. 
    When a code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help users find older or "prior" code references in the new code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the prior code section in the column labeled "Prior Code Section" and the new code section in the column labeled "Herein." 
    As of Supplement No. 4, this table will no longer be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
    To find a specific ordinance in the code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 4, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 4, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
    If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
    The index will be updated as necessary when the code text is amended. 
Instruction Sheet. 
    Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. The Instruction Sheet will tell the code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
    When originally published, the pages of this code were consecutively numbered. As of Supplement No. 4, when new pages are inserted with amendments, the pages will follow a "Point Numbering System". (Example: 32, 32.1, 32.2, 32.2.1, 32.2.2., 33). Backs of pages that are blank (in codes that are printed double-sided) will be left unnumbered but the number will be "reserved" for later use. 
Electronic Submission. 
    In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your code more quickly but also ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com . For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
    If you have any questions about this code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Include/Omit Supp. No. 5 573-A 11-11-2010 Include 787-A 11-12-2010 Include 865 12-14-2009 Omit 866-A 12-14-2009 Omit 866-B 12-14-2009 Omit 866-C 12-14-2009 Omit 866-D 12-14-2009 Omit 867  1-20-2010 Include 867-A  1-25-2010 Include 868  2- 8-2010 Omit 869  3- 8-2010 Omit 870-A  5-24-2010 Include 871 11-11-2010 Include 872 12-30-2010 Omit 873 12-30-2010 Omit 874  7-11-2011 Include 875 11-14-2011 Omit Supp. No. 6 876 12-12-2011 Omit 877 12-12-2011 Omit 878  1- 9-2012 Include 879  3-26-2012 Omit 880  4-30-2012 Omit Supp. No. 7 881 10-29-2012 Omit 882 12-10-2012 Omit 883 12-10-2012 Omit 884  3-11-2013 Include 885  3-11-2013 Include 886  5-28-2013 Include 887  5-28-2013 Include 888  6-24-2013 Include 889  9-30-2013 Include 890  9-30-2013 Include Supp. No. 8 891 10-28-2013 Omit 892 10-14-2013 Omit 893  5-27-2014 Omit 894 12- 9-2013 Omit 895 12- 9-2013 Omit 896  3-17-2014 Omit 897  5-12-2014 Omit 898  9-29-2014 Include Supp. No. 9 899 10-27-2014 Include 900 11-10-2014 Omit 901 12- 8-2014 Omit 902 12- 8-2014 Omit 903 12- 8-2014 Omit 904  3-30-2015 Omit 905  3-30-2015 Omit 906  5-26-2015 Omit Supp. No. 10 907 10-12-2015 Include 908 11- 9-15 Include 909 11-30-2015 Omit 910 11-30-2015 Omit 911 11-30-2015 Omit 912 12-14-2015 Omit 913  6-13-2016 Omit 914  5-31-2016 Omit 915  6-13-2016 Include 916  6-13-2016 Include 917  8- 8-2016 Omit 918  8-29-2016 Include 919 11- 1-2016 Omit 920 12-12-2016 Omit 921 12-12-2016 Omit 922 12-12-2016 Omit 923 12-12-2016 Omit 924  1- 9-2017 Include 925  1- 9-2017 Include 925 A  2- 2-2017 Omit 926  3-13-2017 Omit 927  5-30-2017 Include 928  6-12-2017 Omit 929  1-29-2018 Omit 930 12-11-2017 Omit 931 12-11-2017 Omit 932 12-11-2017 Omit 933 12-11-2017 Omit Supp. No. 12 934  7- 9-2018 Omit 935 11-26-2018 Include 936 11-26-2018 Include 937 12-10-2018 Omit 938 12-10-2018 Omit 939 12-10-2018 Omit 940 12-10-2018 Omit 940A  1-28-2019 Omit 941 12-10-2018 Omit  
CHARTER 
For the city of Burlington, Colorado 
PREAMBLE 
We, the people of Burlington, Colorado, under the authority of the Constitution of the State of Colorado, and the Municipal Home Rule Act, do ordain, establish and adopt this Home Rule Charter for the City of Burlington. 
PREFATORY SYNOPSIS 
    Pursuant to the adoption of the Charter Commission by the citizens of the Town of Burlington, Colorado, on January 16, 1973, the Charter Commissioners were elected at a special election on January 16, 1973, under the authority and method provided in Article XX of the Constitution of the State of Colorado, as amended, and pursuant to the Municipal Home Rule Act of 1971. In accordance with the responsibility placed upon them, the Commissioners respectfully submitted this Charter to the Board of Trustees of the City of Burlington, who respectfully present this Charter to the registered electors of the City of Burlington for their consideration at a special election to be held on the 12th day of June, 1973. 
    The Charter Commissioners have viewed their task as one of great responsibility. They have not limited their goals for the City government of Burlington to a consideration of the present, but have extensively considered the future needs of the City and envision continued growth and progress for the City. 
    In their effort to submit the best possible Charter to the people of Burlington, the Charter Commissioners have studied the Charters of several other Colorado cities, have invited suggestions and advice from the citizens of Burlington, and have employed legal counsel in evolving the final draft of this Charter. 
    Two objectives of the Charter Commissioners have been most predominant throughout the Convention: 
1.  That the Charter must reserve to the people of Burlington absolute right and power of self-government under the Home Rule provisions of the Constitution of the State of Colorado, and the Municipal Home Rule Act of 1971. 
2.  That the Charter must insure the orderly and economical management of the City government, guided and controlled by the people through their elected representatives. 
    To accomplish these objectives, this Charter authorizes the City to have great latitude and freedom in exercising its governmental functions. 
    The organization of the City government has been drawn to assure maximum flexibility in organizational arrangements so that it will be possible for the government of the City to readily adjust to new demands and changing circumstances as our City grows and prospers. 
    In keeping with this principle of government the Charter provides for the Mayor-Council form of City government. 
    The policy-making and legislative powers are vested in a City Council composed of six (6) members, plus the Mayor. The Mayor shall be elected from the City at large every four (4) years. Six (6) Councilmen shall be elected from the City at large. Their terms shall be for four (4) years and shall be staggered so as to permit a continuity of government. In addition to its other powers, the Council shall appoint the City Clerk, City Treasurer, City Attorney, Municipal Judge and members of boards and commissions. 
    The democratic techniques of initiative and referendum and recall have been included in the Charter. 
    The Charter Commissioners sincerely feel that the City of Burlington will, under this Charter, have a sound and progressive government and, therefor, it is unanimously recommended that this Charter be approved by the registered electors of the City of Burlington at the election on June 12, 1973. 
ARTICLE I - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 1.1 - Name and Boundaries: 
    The municipal corporation heretofore existing as the Town of Burlington in Kit Carson County, State of Colorado, shall remain and continue a body politic and corporate and under this Charter be known as the City of Burlington with boundaries the same as presently established, until changed in a manner authorized by law. 
Section 1.2 - Powers: 
    The City shall have all the power of local self-government and home rule and all power possible for a city to have under the Constitution and laws of the State of Colorado. The enumeration of particular powers in this Charter is not exclusive of others. 
Section 1.3 - Rights and Liabilities: 
    By the name of the City of Burlington, the municipal corporation shall have perpetual succession; shall own, possess and hold all property, real and personal, heretofore owned, possessed and held by the town, and does assume and shall manage and dispose of all trusts in any way connected therewith; shall succeed to all rights and liabilities of the town; shall acquire all benefits and does assume and shall pay all bonds, obligations, and indebtedness of the town; may sue and defend, purchase, lease, receive, hold and enjoy, or sell and dispose of real and personal property; may continue to own, and establish municipal electric generation and distribution systems, municipal water systems, municipal sewage disposal systems; shall have a common seal and alter the same at pleasure. 
Section 1.4 - Present Ordinances in Force: 
    All ordinances of the town in force at the time this Charter becomes effective shall continue in force except insofar as they conflict with the provisions of this Charter, or shall be amended or repealed by ordinance enacted under authority of this Charter. 
ARTICLE II - ELECTIONS 

Section 2.1 - Colorado Municipal Election Laws Adopted: 
    City elections shall be governed by the Colorado Municipal Election Laws as now existing or hereafter amended or modified, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, or by ordinance hereafter enacted. 
Section 2.2 - Registration, Judges, Clerks and Election Commission: 
    The Council may by ordinance establish the method for the registration of electors, the qualifications and compensation of election judges and clerks, and the boundaries of election precincts. The council may by ordinance establish an election commission consisting of the Clerk, as chairman, and two additional members to be appointed by the Council, with such powers, duties, terms and qualifications as provided by such ordinance. 
Section 2.3 - Election Day: 
    A regular City election shall be held on the Tuesday following the first Monday in April commencing in the year 1974 and in each even numbered year thereafter. 
Section 2.4 - Hours of Voting: 
    Polling places for all City elections shall be open from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. on election day. 
Section 2.5 - Elective Officers: 
    The elective officers shall be a Mayor and six Councilmen, each of whom shall be qualified electors residing within the limits of the corporation. 
Section 2.6 - Mayor and City Councilmen's Terms of Office: 
    At the April, 1976, election, and at the regular election every four years thereafter, a Mayor shall be elected to serve a four-year term. Commencing at the first regular election after the adoption of the Charter and at each regular election thereafter, three Councilmen shall be elected to serve for a term of four years. 
Section 2.7 - Nominating Petitions - Required Signatures: 
    The nominating petition for each candidate for Mayor and Councilman shall be signed by not fewer than 25 electors. Petitions shall be filed not earlier than 60 days and not later than 25 days before the regular City election. 
Section 2.8 - Vacancies: 
    The Mayor's office and a Councilman's office shall become vacant whenever he resigns, dies, or becomes a nonresident of the City. A vacancy which occurs shall be filed by a majority vote of the membership of the entire Council within 30 days after such vacancy occurs for the full then unexpired term of the office which has become vacant. 
Section 2.9 - Special Elections: 
    Any special City election may be called by resolution of the Council at least 30 days in advance of such election. The resolution calling a special City election shall set forth the purpose or purposes of such election. 
Section 2.10 - Compensation for Election Judge: 
    Compensation for each election judge shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for services rendered during each municipal election. 
(Ord. 837 §1, 2006) 
ARTICLE III - CITY COUNCIL 

Section 3.1 - City Council: 
    All powers of the City not otherwise limited or conferred upon others by this Charter shall be vested in a Council consisting of six members. It shall have the power to enact and provide for the enforcement of all ordinances necessary to protect life, health and property; to declare, prevent and summarily abate and remove nuisances; to preserve and enforce good government, general welfare, order and security of the City and the inhabitants thereof; to enforce ordinances and regulations by ordaining fine and/or imprisonment nor exceeding the limitations imposed by the State of Colorado for each and every offense; to provide for the granting of probation and the conditional suspension of sentences by the Municipal Court; and to delegate to boards and commissions, within limitations of the Constitution and this Charter, such functions, powers, and authority of the City as it deems proper and advisable. 
    No enumeration of particular powers granted to the Council shall be construed to impair any general grant of power herein contained or granted by the State Constitution, nor to limit any such grant to powers of the same class or classes as those so enumerated. 
Section 3.2 - Qualifications of Councilmen: 
    Each Councilman when nominated and elected shall be a qualified elector of the City and shall be a resident of the City at the date of nomination and during the tenure of his office. The Council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its own members, subject to judicial review. 
Section 3.3 - Mayor Pro Tem: 
    A Mayor Pro Tem shall be elected by the Council from its own membership at the first meeting following each biennial election or an adjournment thereof. The Mayor Pro Tem shall serve until the council meeting following the next regular City election, and shall act as Mayor during the absence or disability of the Mayor. In the event of absence or disability of both the Mayor and the Mayor Pro Tem, the Council shall designate another of its members to serve as Acting Mayor during such absence or disability. Any Mayor Pro Tem or Acting Mayor, while serving as such, shall retain all powers granted herein to Councilmen. 
Section 3.4 - Oath of Office: 
    The Mayor and each Councilman shall take an oath or affirmation before entering upon the duties of his office, that he will support the Constitution of the United States and of the State of Colorado, and the Charter and ordinances of the City of Burlington, and faithfully perform the duties of his office. 
Section 3.5 - Council Meetings: 
    The Council shall meet regularly at least once each month at a day and hour and place to be fixed by the rules and proceedings of each Council. The Council shall prescribe the rules of procedure governing meetings. All regular and special meetings of the Council shall be open to the public, and citizens and employees shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard. An organizational meeting shall be held on the Monday following each regular City election. Four members of the Council shall constitute a quorum. Written minutes of the proceedings of each meeting shall be kept by the Clerk and signed by the Mayor. 
Section 3.6 - Special Meetings: 
    Special meetings of the Council shall be called by the Clerk on the oral request of the Mayor, or of any two members of the Council, on at least 24 hours notice to each member of the Council; but a special meeting may be held on shorter notice if all members of the Council are present or those absent waive notice thereof. 
Section 3.7 - Audit of Accounts: 
    An independent audit shall be made annually of all financial affairs of the City, and more frequent audits may be made if deemed necessary by the Council. Such audits shall be made by a certified public accountant, experienced in municipal accounting, selected by the Council. 
Section 3.8 - Parks and Recreation Programs: 
    The Council may provide by ordinance for the planning, financing and supervision of community parks and recreation programs. The Council may provide for equipping, financing and maintaining City-owned or controlled parks, recreation areas, and facilities, by ordinance, both in and outside the corporate limits of the City. The City may cooperate with other public authorities, special districts, organizations or individuals in or outside the City to implement the operation of these programs. 
Section 3.9 - Municipal Utilities: 
    The Council shall forever have the power to establish and administer municipal electric generation and distribution systems; municipal water systems; and municipal sewage disposal systems; and shall regulate the rates for such municipal services and utilities. 
ARTICLE IV - ORDINANCES 

Section 4.1 - Ordinances, Resolutions and Motions: 
    The Council shall act only by ordinance, resolution or motion. All legislative enactments shall be in the form of ordinances; all other actions except as herein provided, may be in the form of resolutions or motions. 
Section 4.2 - Voting: 
    A roll call vote by "Yes" and "No" shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances, resolutions and motions, and entered upon the minutes of the Council proceedings. Every ordinance shall require the affirmative vote of the majority of the members present. Every member, when present, shall vote upon ordinances, resolutions and motions unless he shall have a personal interest therein. 
Section 4.3 - Action by Ordinance Required: 
    In addition to such acts of the Council as are required by other provisions of this Charter to be by ordinance, every act making an appropriation, creating an indebtedness, authorizing borrowing of money, levying a tax, establishing any rule or regulation for the violation of which a penalty is imposed, or placing any burden upon or limiting the use of private property without the consent of the owner, shall be by ordinance. 
Section 4.4 - Form of Ordinance: 
    The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be: "THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BURLINGTON, COLORADO, ORDAINS". 
Section 4.5 - Procedure of Passage: 
    Only one reading of an ordinance by the Council shall be required and an ordinance may be passed and adopted on the date it is introduced. Codes may be adopted by reference as provided by state law. 
Section 4.6 - (As amended at election April 2, 2002) Record and publication of Ordinances: 
    All ordinances, as soon as may be after their passage, shall be recorded in a book kept for that purpose, and authenticated by the signature of the Mayor and Clerk. All ordinances of a general or permanent nature, and those imposing any fine, penalty or forfeiture, shall be published in a newspaper published within the City of Burlington. Such ordinances shall not take effect until thirty days after such publication, except for ordinances calling for special elections or necessary to the immediate preservation of the public health or safety. The excepted ordinances shall take effect in five days, provided that they shall have been passed by an affirmative vote of two-thirds of the members of the City Council. 
Section 4.7 - Severability of Ordinances: 
    Unless an ordinance shall expressly provide to the contrary, if any portion of an ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be found to be invalid by a court, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining portions or applications of the ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid portion or application, provided such remaining portions or applications are not determined by the court to be inoperable, and to this end ordinances are declared to be severable. 
ARTICLE V - CITY ADMINISTRATION 

Section 5.1 - Mayor: 
    The Mayor shall be the presiding officer of the Council and the recognized head of the City Government for all legal and ceremonial purposes. He shall have no vote upon any question except in the case of a tie-vote, when he shall be allowed to vote. All contracts in writing binding the City, all conveyances of interests in land by the City, and any other documents requiring his signature shall be signed by the Mayor (or person acting as Mayor as provided in Section 3.3) and attested by the Clerk under the seal of the City. 
Section 5.2 - Mayor as Chief Executive Officer: 
    The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the City and as such shall have the powers and duties prescribed in Section 5.3. 
Section 5.3 - Powers and Duties of Mayor: 
    The Mayor shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all affairs of the City placed in his charge, and to that end shall have the power and duty to: 
a.  Enforce the laws and ordinances of the City. 
b.  Appoint, suspend, transfer and remove all employees of the City, except as otherwise provided herein, subject to the personal regulation of the City, if any, adopted by the Council. 
c.  Make appointments on the basis of executive and administrative ability, and of the training and experience of such appointees in the work which they are to perform. 
d.  Prepare a proposed budget annually and submit it to the Council, and be responsible for the administration of the budget after its adoption. 
e.  Prepare and submit to the Council as of the end of the fiscal year a complete report on finances and administrative activities of the City for the preceding year, and upon request of the Council make written or verbal reports at any time concerning the affairs of the City under his supervision. 
f.  Keep the Council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the City, and make such recommendations to the Council as he may deem necessary or expedient. 
g.  Exercise supervision and control over all executive and administrative departments, and recommend to the Council any proposal he thinks advisable to establish, consolidate or abolish administrative departments. 
h.  Enforce all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the City or its inhabitants in any contract or public utility franchise, and upon knowledge of any violation thereof, report same to the Council for such action and proceedings as may be necessary to enforce the same. 
i.  Attend and preside at Council meetings and participate in discussions with the Council. 
j.  Establish a system of accounting and auditing for the City. 
k.  Act as a purchasing agent for the City. 
l.  Obtain engineering, architectural, maintenance, construction and work equipment services required by the City. 
m.  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter, by ordinance, or by the Council. 
Section 5.4 - Delegation of Duties: 
    The Mayor, with the consent of the Council, may delegate to various members of the Council any of the powers and duties enumerated in Section 5.3. 
Section 5.5 - Departments Created: 
    The administrative functions of the City may be performed by the following departments: Electrical Distribution and Generation; Water and Sanitation; Streets; Police; Parks and Recreation; Finance; Executive; and such other departments as are or may be established by this Charter or by ordinances of the City. Upon recommendation of the Mayor, the Council may by ordinance consolidate or merge any of the said departments whether set forth in the Charter or created by ordinance in order to achieve more efficient operation or administration. All departments of the City, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, shall be under the supervision and control of the Mayor. 
ARTICLE VI - APPOINTED OFFICIALS 

Section 6.1 - Time of Appointment: 
    At its first meeting after each regular City election, the Council shall appoint the officials hereinafter enumerated in this Article with the powers and duties herein specified. Such appointments shall be at the pleasure of the Council, at such compensation as the Council may by resolution from time to time establish. 
Section 6.2 - City Administrator - Functions and Duties: 
    The City Administrator shall devote his entire time to the discharge of his official duties. He shall be the chief administrative office of the City and shall be responsible to the Mayor for the proper administration of all affairs of the City, and shall perform such duties as may be delegated to him by the Mayor. 
Section 6.3 - City Clerk - Functions and Duties: 
a.  Before entering upon the duties of the office, the Clerk shall take an oath of office and furnish a surety bond in an amount as required by the City Council, conditioned upon the faithful discharge of his duties as City Clerk. 
b.  The Clerk shall be the Clerk of the Council and shall attend all meetings of the Council and shall keep a permanent journal of its proceedings. 
c.  The Clerk shall be the custodian of the City seal and shall affix it to all documents and instruments requiring the seal and shall attest the same. He shall also be custodian of all papers, documents and records pertaining to the City, the custody of which is not otherwise provided for. 
d.  The Clerk shall certify by his signature all ordinances and resolutions enacted or passed by the Council. 
e.  The Clerk shall provide and maintain in his office a supply of forms for all petitions required to be filed for any purpose by the provisions of this Charter or by ordinances enacted hereunder. 
f.  The Clerk shall have power to administer oaths of office. 
g.  The Clerk shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by this Charter, by the Council or by the Mayor. 
Section 6.4 - City Treasurer - Functions and Duties: 
a.  Before entering upon the duties of the office, the Treasurer shall take an oath of office and furnish a surety bond in an amount as required by the City Council, to be approved by the City Council, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties as City Treasurer and that when he shall vacate such office he will turn over and deliver to his successor all monies, books, papers, property or thing belonging to the City of Burlington and remaining in his charge as such Treasurer. 
b.  The Treasurer shall have the custody of all monies of the City, all bonds pertaining to officials or employees, and all evidences of indebtedness belonging to the City or held in trust by the City. 
c.  The Treasurer shall collect all monies for the City, the collection of which is not provided for elsewhere by Charter or ordinance. He shall receive from other officers and employees of the City all monies belonging to and receivable by the City and collected by such officers and employees, including fines, license fees, taxes, assessments, and all other charges. All monies shall be turned over to the Treasurer after collection or receipt. 
d.  The Treasurer shall keep and deposit all monies or funds in such manner and only in such places as the Council may determine. 
e.  The Treasurer shall disburse all City funds in accordance with the provisions of statute, this Charter and procedures established by the Council or by the Mayor. 
f.  The Treasurer shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by this Charter or by the Council. 
Section 6.5 - City Attorney - Functions and Duties: 
    It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to attend Council meetings, to render such legal advice as may be required, and to draw all ordinances, contracts, and other instruments when requested so to do. He shall also defend all suits brought against the City, prosecute all suits brought by the City and perform other services when requested by the Council, and in addition to his salary, he shall receive other and further compensation from time to time for special services as the Council may determine and allow. 
ARTICLE VII - ENFORCEMENT OF LAWS AND ORDINANCES 

Section 7.1 - Municipal Court: 
a.  There shall be a Municipal Court which shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine all cases arising under this Charter or the ordinances of the City. The powers of and the procedure in such Municipal Court and the manner of enforcement of its orders and judgments shall be such as is provided for under the Statutes of the State of Colorado, and the present ordinances of the City with respect to police magistrates, except as may be otherwise provided in this Charter or by ordinance hereafter enacted. The Council shall have the power to provide for juries for service in the Municipal Court. The Council shall provide a suitable place and all supplies and personnel necessary for the proper functioning of the Court. 
b.  The Municipal Court shall be presided over and its functions exercised by one or more Municipal Judges, appointed by the Council for a term to be at the pleasure of the Council. A Municipal Judge shall receive a fixed salary or compensation, not dependent upon the outcome of the matters to be decided by him and to be fixed by the Council from time to time. If a Municipal Judge is absent or unable to act in any manner or case, the Mayor shall call any eligible person to act and serve temporarily, and if he fails to, or cannot call in a substitute, the Council shall appoint a substitute. Qualifications for Municipal Judges shall be established by ordinance. 
c.  The Council shall provide for the enforcement of its ordinances by fine, or imprisonment, or both; but for any one offense no fine or imprisonment shall exceed the limitations established by the Statutes of the State of Colorado. 
Section 7.2 - Department of Police: 
a.  There is hereby created a Department of Police, the director of which shall be the Chief of Police who shall be appointed by the Council for a term to be at the pleasure of the Council. 
b.  The Chief of Police shall be in direct command of the Department of Police. He shall assign all members of the Department to their respective posts, shifts, details and duties. He shall make rules and regulations affecting his Department in conformity with the ordinances and resolutions of the City, concerning the operation of the Department and conduct of all employees. He shall be responsible for the efficiency, discipline and good conduct of the Department and for the care and custody of all property used by the Department. 
c.  The Department of Police shall be responsible for the preservation of public peace, prevention of crime, apprehension of criminals, protection of the rights of persons and property, the enforcement of the laws of the State and of the ordinances of the City as provided by this Charter and all rules and regulations made in accordance therewith, and such other functions as the Mayor and Council may pre-scribe for public safety. All members of the Department shall have all powers with respect to the service of criminal process and the enforcement of criminal laws as are vested in police officers. 
ARTICLE VIII - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 

Section 8.1 - (As amended at election April 2, 2002) General Provisions for Boards and Commissions: 
    Unless otherwise provided by this Charter, all boards and commissions shall be appointed by the Council and shall have such powers and perform such duties as are provided by this Charter or by ordinance; and members of such boards and commissions shall be appointed to serve without compensation, but shall be paid their authorized expenses actually incurred in the discharge of their official duties. Initial appointments by the Council shall specify the term of office of each individual in order to achieve overlapping tenure, and thereafter all appointments shall be for the full term specified. All members shall be subject to removal by a two-thirds majority vote of the entire Council. The Council shall make appointments to fill vacancies for the unexpired terms. Each board and commission shall choose its own chairman and vice-chairman, and shall adopt its own rules of procedure for the proper conduct of its business. 
Section 8.2 - Board of Adjustment and Appeals: 
    There is hereby created and established a Board of Adjustment and Appeals consisting of the number of members from time to time specified by the Council. Such members shall be appointed by the Council for overlapping terms of three years. Each member shall be a taxpaying elector and in addition shall reside in the area comprising the City at the time of his appointment. 
    The board shall have power to hear and determine appeals from refusals of building permits in violation of the zoning ordinance; to make exceptions to the terms of the zoning regulations in harmony with their general purpose and intent; and to authorize variances from the strict application of the zoning regulations in such situations, subject to such limitations as may be set by ordinance. The findings and decisions of the board shall be final, subject only to judicial review. 
    The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, show the vote taken, keep records of its examinations and other official actions. Every order, requirement, decision or determination of the board shall be filed in the office of the Clerk. 
    The board shall exercise the functions and powers and perform the duties assigned to it by this Charter and the ordinances of the City; and where not otherwise provided by ordinance or Charter, the board shall have the powers, perform the functions, and follow the procedures set forth in the Statutes of the State of Colorado. 
Section 8.3 - Planning and Zoning Commission: 
    There is hereby created and established a Planning and Zoning Commission consisting of the number of members from time to time specified by the Council. Such members shall be appointed by the Council for overlapping terms of three years. Each member shall be a taxpaying elector and in addition shall reside in the area comprising the City at the time of the appointment. 
    The Planning and Zoning Commission shall exercise the functions and powers and perform the duties assigned to it by this Charter and the ordinances of the City. It may prepare and submit to the Council for its approval a master plan for the physical development of the City and areas adjacent thereto. All plats of proposed subdivisions shall be submitted to it for its recommendations and approval before being presented to the Council for its approval; it may hold hearings relative to zoning and changes in the zoning ordinance, and may make recommendations thereon to the Council. Where not otherwise provided by Charter or ordinance, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the powers, perform the functions, and follow the procedures set forth in the Statutes of the State of Colorado. 
ARTICLE IX - CITY FINANCES 

Section 9.1 - Fiscal Year: 
    The fiscal year of the City and of all its agencies shall be established by Ordinance of the City Council. 
Section 9.2 - Annual Budget: 
    A proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year shall be presented to the Council at least 60 days prior to the end of the fiscal year. 
Section 9.3 - Budget Hearing: 
    The Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed budget at least 30 days prior to the end of the fiscal year. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published at least once prior to such hearing, and copies of the proposed budget shall be made available to the public by depositing them in the office of the Clerk. 
    The Council may, at any time before final adoption, increase, decrease, add or strike out any item in the budget. 
Section 9.4 - Scope of Annual Budget: 
    The City Council shall adopt an annual budget for each fiscal year in accordance with the procedure set forth in The Local Government Budget Law of Colorado. 
Section 9.5 - Adoption of Budget and Appropriation: 
    The City Council shall pass an ordinance within the last quarter of each fiscal year, to be termed the annual appropriation ordinance for the next fiscal year. In such ordinance the Council shall appropriate such sums of money as are necessary to cover the items in its budget and to defray all necessary expenses and liabilities of the town, specifying the objects and purposes for which such appropriations are made and the amount appropriated for each object or purpose. The total amount appropriated shall not exceed the probable amount of revenue that will be collected during the fiscal year. 
Section 9.6 - Certification of Tax Levy: 
    Not later than the first day of November of each year, or such other date as may be required by law, the Council shall fix the amount of tax levy which shall be assessed upon each dollar of assessed valuation of all taxable property within the corporate limits of the City, and shall cause the same to be certified to the County as required by law. If the Council should fail in any year to make such levy as above provided, the rate last fixed shall be the rate for the ensuing fiscal year, which rate shall be levied as by law provided. 
Section 9.7 - General Fund: 
    There is hereby established a fund to be known as the general fund. All revenues not specifically allocated to any other fund shall be placed in the general fund. All general functions of the City shall be financed by expenditures from the general fund. 
Section 9.8 - Contingencies: 
    The general fund may contain an item for contingencies. 
Section 9.9 - Special Funds: 
    Additional funds which shall be known as special funds may be created by ordinance to provide for monies to be held or used for special purposes, such as: depreciation and obsolescence, debt service, equipment and building replacement, special services, local improvements, City-owned utilities, trust funds and endowments, and such other purposes as the Council may determine. 
Section 9.10 - Transfer of Funds: 
    The Council may by resolution transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof from one department, office or agency to another. 
Section 9.11 - Additional Appropriations: 
    The Council may make additional appropriations by ordinance during the fiscal year for unanticipated expenditures required of the City, but such additional appropriations shall not exceed the amount by which actual and anticipated revenues of the year are exceeding the revenues as estimated in the budget, unless the appropriations are necessary to relieve an emergency endangering the public peace, health or safety. 
Section 9.12 - Departmental Appropriations Revert: 
    Any annual departmental appropriation, or any portion thereof, remaining unexpended and unencumbered at the close of the fiscal year, shall revert to the general fund. 
Section 9.13 - Publication of Expenditures: 
    A statement of financial expenditures of the City shall be published in the designated legal newspaper of the City of Burlington. 
ARTICLE X - MUNICIPAL SECURITIES 

Section 10.1 - Forms of Borrowing: 
    The City may borrow money for any municipal purpose as provided herein and issue the following securities to evidence such indebtedness: 
a.  Short term notes 
b.  General obligation bonds and other like securities 
c.  Revenue bonds and other like securities 
d.  Special or local improvement bonds and other like securities 
Section 10.2 - Short-term Notes: 
    The City, upon the affirmative vote of the majority of the entire Council in office at the time the vote is taken, is hereby authorized to borrow money without an election in anticipation of the collection of taxes or other revenues and to issue short-term notes to evidence the amount so borrowed. Any such short-term notes shall mature before the close of the fiscal year in which the money is so borrowed except as is permitted in Section 9.11. 
Section 10.3 - General Obligation Securities: 
    No bonds or other evidences of borrowing by the City, payable in whole or in part from the proceeds of ad valorem taxes or to which the full faith and credit of the City are pledged, shall be issued until the question of their issuance shall, at a special or regular election, be submitted to a vote of the electors of the City and approved by a majority of those voting on the question, except as otherwise provided in this Chapter. The aggregate amount of such bonds or other evidences of borrowing, as are described above in this Section, shall not exceed ten per cent (10%) of the assessed valuation of the taxable property within the City as shown by the last preceding assessment for City purposes, but bonds issued for water, sewer or drainage purposes may be issued without an election and are excepted from the limitations of this Section. 
Section 10.4 - Revenue Securities: 
    The City, pursuant to ordinance, and without an election, may borrow money, issue bonds, or otherwise extend its credit, if such bonds or other obligations are made payable from revenues other than the proceeds of ad valorem taxes, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, revenues derived from the operation of the project or capital improvement acquired with the bond proceeds, from the available proceeds of a City sales and use tax which may be imposed pursuant to Section 13.2 or from any part or combination of such sources. 
Section 10.5 - Refunding Securities: 
    Subject to contractual obligations, the Council may authorize, by ordinance, without an election, issuance of refunding bonds or other like securities for the purpose of refunding and providing for the payment of the outstanding bonds or other like securities of the City as the same mature, or in advance of maturity by means of an escrow or otherwise. Any refunding bonds or other like securities issued for the purpose of refunding revenue bonds or other revenue securities, if issued without an election, shall be payable from substantially the same sources as the bonds refunded. 
Section 10.6 - Terms and Disposal of Securities: 
a.  The terms and maximum interest rate of general obligation or revenue bonds or other like securities shall be fixed by the authorizing ordinance and such securities shall be sold to the best advantage of the City. 
b.  Any refunding bond may be exchanged dollar for dollar for a bond refunded. 
c.  All bonds may contain provisions for calling the same at designated periods prior to the final due date, with or without the payment of a prior redemption premium. 
Section 10.7 - Assumption of Indebtedness: 
    Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the power of the City, by ordinance and without an election, to assume the indebtedness of special taxing districts if the boundaries thereof lie wholly within the City and if such indebtedness was incurred prior to the adoption of this Charter. 
Section 10.8 - No Additional Limitations: 
    Except as provided by this Charter, there shall be no limitations on the authority of the City to incur indebtedness or to issue bonds. 
ARTICLE XI - IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS 

Section 11.1 - Power to Create Special or Local Improvement Districts: 
a.  The City shall have the power to create Special or Local Improvement Districts within designated districts in the City, to contract for, construct or install special or local improvements of every character within the said designated districts, to assess the cost thereof, wholly or in part upon the property benefited in such district, and to issue special improvement bonds therefor. 
b.  The Council shall, by ordinance, prescribe the method and manner of creating such improvements, of letting contracts therefor, issuing and paying bonds for construction or installation of such improvements, including the cost incidental thereto, for assessing the costs thereof and for all things in relation to the authority herein created. 
c.  Except as otherwise provided by Charter or by ordinance, the Statutes of the State of Colorado shall govern the creation and organization of Special or Local Improvement Districts, the assessment of costs, the issuance of bonds therefor and all things in relation thereto. 
Section 11.2 - Creation of Special or Local Improvement Districts: 
    Special or Local Improvement Districts created pursuant to this Chapter may be so created by: 
a.  Ordinance; or, 
b.  On a petition by the owners of not less than fifty per cent (50%) of the area of the proposed district, provided that such majority shall include not less than fifty per cent (50%) of the assessed valuation of the real property in the proposed district. 
Section 11.3 - Improvement District Bonds; Levy for General Benefit to Special Fund; Pledge of Credit: 
a.  In consideration of general benefits conferred on the City at large from the construction or installation of improvements in Special or Local Improvement Districts, the City Council may contract by ordinance prior to the issuance of any bonds of any Special or Local Improvement District, that the payment of such bonds, both as the principal interest and costs appertaining thereto become due, as additionally secured by a Special Fund herein created, and pursuant thereto may levy annual taxes on all taxable property within the City at a rate not exceeding two mills in any one year, to be disbursed as determined by the Council, for the purpose of paying for such improvements, pursuant to Section 11.5, for the payment of any assessment, levied against the City itself in connection with said bonds issued for Special or Local Improvement Districts, for the purpose of advancing money to maintain current payments of interest and equal annual payments of the principal amount of said bonds or for any prior redemption premium appertaining to such bonds. 
b.  The proceeds of such taxes shall be placed in a Special Fund and shall be disbursed only for the purposes specified in this Section, provided, however, that in lieu of such tax levies, the Council may annually transfer to such Special Fund any available money of the City, but in no event shall the amount transferred in any one year exceed the amount which would result from a tax levied in such year as herein limited. 
1.  As long as any bonds issued for Special or Local Improvement hereafter organized, remain outstanding, the tax levy or equivalent transfer of money to the Special Fund created for the payment of said bonds shall not be diminished in any succeeding year until all of said bonds and the interest thereon shall be paid in full, unless other available funds are on hand therefor, or such bonds and interest are paid by the City as provided in Section 11.5 of this Article. 
c.  After the bonds have been retired in full, any monies remaining in such Special Funds shall be transferred as provided in Section 11.4. 
d.  Bonds of any Special or Local Improvement District payable from special assessments, which payment may be additionally secured as provided in this Section, shall not be subject to any debt limitation nor affect the City's debt incurring power, nor shall such bonds be required to be authorized at any election; and such bonds shall not be held to constitute a prohibited lending of credit or donation, nor to contravene any constitutional, statutory or Charter limitation or restriction. 
Section 11.4 - Transfers from Unencumbered Special or Local Improvement District Funds: 
    Where all outstanding bonds of a Special or Local Improvement District have been paid and money remains to the credit of the district or in a Special Fund created pursuant to Section 11.3 for the said bond issue, it may be transferred, in whole or in part, by ordinance, to a Surplus or Deficiency Fund, and whenever there is a deficiency in any Special or Local Improvement District Fund to meet the payment of outstanding bonds and interest due thereon, the deficiency shall be paid out of the said fund; or in the alternative, Council may by ordinance, transfer all or part of any unencumbered balance from a Special or Local Improvement District Fund or a Special Fund created pursuant to Section 11.3 for the said bond issued to any other City fund. 
Section 11.5 - Payment of Bonds by City: 
    Whenever a Special or Local Improvement District has paid and cancelled three-fourths (3/4) of its bonds issued and for any reason the remaining assessments are not paid in time to redeem the final bonds of the district, the City shall pay the bonds when due from funds created pursuant to this Chapter and reimburse itself by collecting the unpaid assessments due the district. 
Section 11.6 - Review of Improvement District Proceedings: 
    No action or proceeding, at law or in equity, to review any acts of proceedings, or to question the validity of, or enjoin the performance of the issue or collection of any bonds, or the levy or collection of any assessments authorized by this Chapter, or for any other relief against any acts or proceedings of the City done or under this Chapter, shall be maintained against the City, unless commenced within thirty days after the performance of the act or the effective date of the resolution or ordinance complained of, or else be thereafter perpetually barred. 
ARTICLE XII - UTILITIES AND FRANCHISES 

Section 12.1 - City Powers, Functions and Authority: 
a.  The Council shall have, with regard to all public utilities and cable television, all Home Rule municipal powers, functions, and authority now existing and which may be hereafter provided by the Constitution and the Statutes of the State of Colorado. 
b.  Subject to the laws of the State of Colorado applicable to Home Rule Cities and the Constitution of the State of Colorado, the Council, upon obtaining a majority vote of the registered taxpaying electors of the City, subject to Section 12.1, subsection c., shall have the power and authority within or without the territorial limits of the City, to construct, condemn, purchase, acquire, and lease public utilities and cable television assets, equipment and everything in relation to or in connection therewith, in whole or in part, for the use of the City and its inhabitants. 
1.  The term "public utility" or "public utility corporation" when used in this Charter shall mean any person, firm or corporation operating a heat, power, gas or light system, a communication system, or a water, sewer or scheduled transportation system, and serving or supplying the public. It shall not include any person, firm or corporation owning or operating sidetracks or switches for the accommodation of manufacturing plants and business houses, or private telephone lines, and shall not include City owned utilities. 
c.  In the event that it is established by law applicable to Home Rule Cities, that the qualifications for voting on any issue provided for in this Article are otherwise than as prescribed in this Article, then such law shall govern said qualifications. 
d.  The Council shall further have the power to buy, sell, exchange, lease, own, control, and otherwise deal in water rights. 
e.  Any exercise of authority pursuant to this Article, subsequent to acquisition of facilities hereunder, shall be administered through a regular department of the City government under the management and supervision of the Council. 
f.  Council, by ordinance, may authorize the extension of any City service or City owned facilities, provided under authority of this Chapter, to consumers outside the corporate limits of the City, under such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon, subject to laws applicable to Home Rule Cities. 
Section 12.2 - Use of Public Places by Utilities: 
a.  Every public utility, whether it has a franchise or not, may use the City streets, alleys, bridges, and other public places upon such terms, conditions or requirements as are provided by Council, and such public utility shall pay that part of the cost of improvement or maintenance of City streets, alleys, bridges, and other public places as shall arise from its use thereof and shall protect and save the City harmless from all damages arising from said use. 
b.  Every such public utility may be required by the City to permit joint use by the City and other public utilities of its property and appurtenances located in the City streets, alleys or other public places insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of reasonable rental therefor. 
c.  In the absence of agreement and upon application by any public utility or by the City, the Council shall provide for arbitration of the terms and conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid therefor, and the arbitration award shall be final. 
Section 12.3 - Utility Rates: 
    The Council shall, by ordinance, establish rates, rules and regulations and extension policies for services provided by City owned utilities, both within and outside the corporate limits of the City. 
Section 12.4 - Present Franchises: 
    All franchise ordinances and agreements of the City in effect at the time this Charter is effective shall remain in full force and effect in accordance with their respective terms and conditions unless modified by another franchise. 
Section 12.5 - Grant to Public Utility Franchises: 
a.  Grants of public utility franchises and all extensions, and amendments shall be granted only by ordinance, and no public utility franchise shall be granted except upon the majority vote of the registered taxpaying electors of the City, subject, however, to Section 12.1, subsection c. 
1.  No such franchise ordinance shall be approved by the Council for referral to the electorate in less than thirty days after application therefor has been filed with Council nor until the grantee named therein has filed with the Clerk his unconditional acceptance of all terms of such franchise. 
2.  With respect to any franchise, after mutual agreement with the holder of the franchise, the Council may, by ordinance, extend the area served by the franchise including streets, alleys, public places and property not originally embraced in such franchise, when public convenience and necessity required, subject to the terms and conditions of such original franchise, and co-extensive with the terms thereof, without a vote of the registered taxpaying electors of the City, or without a vote of any other electors of the City, if the provisions of Section 12.1, subsection c. should apply. Provided, however that if provision is made for such extension of facilities in the original franchise agreement, Council need not act by ordinance to permit such extension, and the holder of the franchise may proceed to extend facilities in accordance with the terms and conditions of the original franchise. 
3.  For the purposes of this Charter, cable television and garbage, trash or rubbish disposal shall not be deemed to be public utilities and permits or licenses for cable television or garbage, trash or rubbish disposal may be granted to one or more companies without a vote of the registered taxpaying electors of the City, or without a vote of any other electors of the City if the provisions of Section 12.1, subsection c. should apply. 
b.  No franchise election shall be held until the applicant deposits the cost thereof with the City Treasurer in an amount determined by the City Treasurer as approved by the Council. 
c.  No franchise shall be granted without reserving to the City such fair fee arising from the use thereof as shall be fixed in the grant of such franchise. 
Section 12.6 - Compensation for Franchises: 
    Every grant of a franchise shall fix the amount and manner of payment of the compensation to be paid by the grantee for the use of the franchise and no other compensation shall be exacted for such use during the life of the franchise. This provision shall not exempt the grantee from any lawful taxation upon his or its property, nor from any license, charge, or other impositions levied by the Council, not levied on account of the use granted by the franchise. 
Section 12.7 - Conditions of Franchises: 
    All public utility franchises granted after the effective date of this Charter, whether it be so provided in the granting ordinance or not, shall be subject to the following rights of the City, except as otherwise provided by the Statutes of Colorado applicable to Home Rule Cities and the Constitution of the State of Colorado; but this enumeration shall not be exclusive or impair the right of the Council to insert in such franchise any provision within the power of the City to impose or require: 
a.  To repeal the same for inadequate service, for misuse, nonuse or failure to comply with the provisions thereof. 
b.  To require proper and adequate extension of plant facilities and service and maintenance thereof at the highest practicable standard of efficiency. 
c.  To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates. 
d.  To require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period thereof. 
e.  To use, control, and regulate the use of its streets, alleys, bridges, and other public places and the space above and beneath them. 
f.  To permit the City as provided in Section 12.1, subsection b., upon the payment thereof of fair valuation, to purchase and take over the property and plant of the grantee in whole or in part. Such valuation shall be made as provided in the franchise grant or otherwise as provided by law. 
g.  To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the Council to be conducive to the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
Section 12.8 - Assignment and Leasing of Franchises: 
a.  No franchise granted by the City shall be leased, assigned, or otherwise alienated without the approval of Council given by ordinance and no negotiation with the lessee or assignee on the part of the City to require the performance of any act or the payment of any compensation by the lessee or assignee shall be deemed to operate as such consent. Any assignment, lease or sale of such franchise without the consent of the City shall, at the option of the Council, operate as a forfeiture of such franchise. 
b.  The right of Council to deny any assignment, lease or sale of a franchise is reserved. 
c.  Council, upon approving any such assignment, lease or sale of franchise, may impose such reasonable conditions and terms deemed necessary. 
Section 12.9 - Revocable Permits: 
    The Council may grant a permit at any time for the temporary use or occupation of any street, alley, or City owned place, provided such permit shall be revocable by the Council at its pleasure, regardless of whether or not such right to revoke be expressly reserved in such permit. 
Section 12.10 - Franchise Records: 
a.  The Council shall cause to be kept in the office of the City Clerk an indexed franchise record which shall contain copies of all public utility franchises granted by the City. 
b.  The index shall give the name of the grantee and any assignees. The record shall be a complete history of all such franchises, shall include a convenient reference to all actions at law affecting the same, copies of all annual reports, and such other information as the Council may require. 
ARTICLE XIII - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Section 13.1 - Disconnection: 
    Anything to the contrary notwithstanding under the Statutes of the State of Colorado now existing or as they may hereafter be amended, no territory may be disconnected from the City without first submitting the question of any such disconnection for approval of the taxpaying electors. 
Section 13.2 - Taxes for Municipal Purposes: 
    The Council shall have the power by ordinance to levy all forms of taxation for municipal purposes as are now or may hereafter be permitted to home rule cities under the Constitution of the State of Colorado, except that no use or sales tax shall be imposed by the Council without having first been approved by a vote of the taxpaying electors of the City at a general or special election. 
Section 13.3 - Fidelity Bonds: 
    Before any officer or employee of the City who handles City funds shall be permitted to enter upon the duties of his office or employment, he shall obtain and file with the Clerk a fidelity bond from a bonding company authorized to do business in the State of Colorado, in any amount to be fixed by the Council. The cost of such bonds shall be borne by the City. 
Section 13.4 - Right of Eminent Domain: 
    The City shall have the right of eminent domain for all municipal purposes whatever either within or without the limits of the City as may be permitted to towns or cities by the Constitution and the Statutes of the State of Colorado. 
Section 13.5 - Contracts with Other Governmental Units: 
    The Council may, by resolution or by ordinance, enter into contracts or agreements with other governmental units or special districts for the use of buildings, equipment or facilities, and for furnishing or receiving commodities or services. 
Section 13.6 - Bequests, Gifts and Donations: 
    The Council, on behalf of the City, may receive bequests, gifts, and donations of all kinds of property in fee simple, or in trust, for public, charitable or other purposes, and do all things and acts necessary to carry out the purposes of such bequests, gifts, and donations, with the power to manage, sell, lease or otherwise dispose of the same in accordance with the terms of the bequest, gift or trust. 
Section 13.7 - Contracts for Purchases, Leases and Construction of Public Works: 
    The Council may establish by ordinance procedure for entering into contracts for purchases, contracts for leases, and contracts for construction of public works. 
Section 13.8 - Initiative and Referendum: 
    The power of initiative and referendum is reserved to the voters of the City in accordance with the provisions of Article V, Section 1 of the Constitution of the State of Colorado insofar as such provisions are applicable. 
Section 13.9 - Recall: 
    The power of recall is reserved to the voters of the City in accordance with the provisions of Article XXI, Section 1 of the Constitution of the State of Colorado insofar as such provisions are applicable. 
Section 13.10 - Amendment: 
    This Charter may be amended at any general election or special election called for such purpose upon questions which may be submitted to the electors by a majority of the Council, or upon questions which may be submitted by the electors by initiative as provided for in Article V, Section 1 of the Constitution of the State of Colorado. 
Section 13.11 - Retirement Plans: 
    This Charter shall not affect any contractual relationships existing on the effective date of this Charter between the City and any officer or employee by reason of any retirement and pension plans in effect. 
Section 13.12 - Effect of State Statutes: 
    Unless otherwise provided by this Charter or by ordinances adopted by the Council hereunder, the Statutes of the State of Colorado governing municipalities now classified as cities shall remain in effect. 
Section 13.13 - Severability: 
    If any provision, article, section, sentence, clause or part of this Charter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such adjudication shall not affect, impair or invalidate the Charter as a whole or any part hereof other than the part so adjudged to be invalid, and to this end the provisions of this Charter are declared to be severable. 
ARTICLE XIV - TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 

Section 14.1 - Purpose of Transitional Provisions: 
    The purpose of this Article is to provide for an orderly transition from the present Town government of Burlington to a government under provisions of this Charter. The provisions of this Chapter shall constitute a part of this Charter only to the extent necessary to accomplish that purpose. 
Section 14.2 - Continuation of Appointed Officers, Employees, City Clerk, and City Treasurer: 
a.  After the effective date of this Charter, all appointive officers and all employees of the City shall continue in that office or employment which corresponds to the City office or employment which they held prior to the effective date of this Charter as though they had been appointed or employed in the manner provided in this Charter, except that an officer or employee who holds a position which this Charter provides be held at the pleasure of the Council or appointing officer shall hold such position only at such pleasure regardless of his original term of office, subject however, to provisions of Section 14.2, subsection b. 
b.  The City Clerk and City Treasurer in office on the effective date of this Charter are excepted from the provisions of Section 14.2, subsection a, so far as the same relate to holding office at the pleasure of the appointing Council in that these said officers shall hold their respective offices with those functions and duties as provided in Article VI until the expiration of their present terms, and in the event either or both of the said respective offices become vacant prior to the expiration of their terms appointment shall be made as is provided in Article VI. 
Section 14.3 - Prior City Legislation: 
a.  All by-laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the City which are not inconsistent with this Charter and which are in force and effect on the effective date of this Charter shall continue in full force and effect after the effective date of this Charter until repealed or amended. 
b.  If any such by-law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation provides for the appointment of any officers or any members of any board or commission by the Mayor or Council, such officers or members of any board or commission shall after the effective date of this Charter, be appointed as provided in this Charter. 
c.  Those provisions of any effective valid by-law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation which are inconsistent with this Charter are hereby repealed. 
Section 14.4 - Present Council and Mayor to Continue in Office: 
    The City Council and the Mayor in office on the effective date of this Charter shall continue in office and shall perform the functions, powers and duties of their offices pursuant to this Charter until their terms expire, or until their offices become vacant, in which event, a successor shall be appointed as provided in this Charter. 
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapters: 
Chapter 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION 
Sections: 

1.01.010 - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 31-16-201 through 31-16-208 of the Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended, there is adopted the "Burlington Municipal Code" as published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington. 
(Ord. 624 §1, 1987) 
1.01.020 - Title-Citation-Reference. 
    This code shall be known as the "Burlington Municipal Code" and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the "Burlington Municipal Code" in any prosecution of the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the "Burlington Municipal Code." Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, section and subsections of the "Burlington Municipal Code" and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. 
(Ord. 624 §2, 1987) 
1.01.030 - Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code. 
    The last ordinance included in the original code is Ordinance 601, passed May 14, 1984. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance 601, but prior to the code, are hereby adopted and made a part of this code: Ordinances 602 through 618. 
(Ord. 624 §3, 1987) 
1.01.040 - Codification authority. 
    This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the city of Burlington, Colorado, codified pursuant to the provisions of Sections 31-16-201 through 31-16-208 of the Colorado Revised Statutes. 
(Ord. 624 §4, 1987) 
1.01.050 - Reference applies to all amendments. 
    Whenever a reference is made to this code as the "Burlington Municipal Code" or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of Burlington, Colorado, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. 
(Ord. 624 §5, 1987) 
1.01.060 - Title, chapter and section headings. 
    Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. 
(Ord. 624 §6, 1987) 
1.01.070 - Reference to specific ordinances. 
    The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within the code. 
(Ord. 624 §7, 1987) 
1.01.080 - Effect of code on past actions and obligations. 
    Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendments or any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the city of Burlington, Colorado,shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee, or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 624 §8, 1987) 
Chapter 1.02 - CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS 
Sections: 

1.02.010 - City council meetings and records of meetings. 
    All meetings of the city council shall be held and all records of meetings of the city council shall be kept in accordance with Sections 3.5 and 3.6 of the city's charter. 
(Ord. 794 §1 (part), 2001) 
1.02.020 - Executive sessions. 
    Executive sessions held by the city council shall conform to the procedures set forth in the Open Meetings Law, C.R.S. §24-6-401 et seq., including, but not limited to, the following: 
A.  During Open Meeting. During any city council meeting when the city council wishes to convene an executive session, the topic for discussion and the citation to the particular provision of the Colorado Revised Statutes that permits the topic to be discussed in executive session will be announced. Such announcement will identify in as much detail as possible the particular matter to be discussed without compromising the purpose for which the executive session is authorized. Following the announcement, an affirmative vote of two-thirds the quorum present shall be required before convening the executive session. 
B.  During Executive Session. During any executive session held by the city council, an electronic recording or other record of actual contents of discussions held in the executive session shall be made. Such record shall include the citation to the particular provision of the Colorado Revised Statutes that permits the topic to be discussed in executive session. If written minutes are made of the executive session, such minutes must include the following statement signed by the chair of the executive session: 
"These minutes substantially reflect the substance of the discussions held during the executive session." 
    If minutes are kept by electronic recording, the chair of the executive session shall make the following statement at the end of the executive session on the electronic recording device: 
"This recording substantially reflects the substance of the discussions held during the executive session." 
    Notwithstanding the foregoing, if an attorney representing the city is present at an executive session where all or a portion of the discussion constitutes attorney-client privileged communications, in the opinion of said attorney, then no record need be kept of this part of the discussion. Where electronic record is made of said executive session, the attorney representing the city with regard to the topic of discussion shall state on the record that as to the unrecorded portions of the executive session, no record was kept because, in his/her opinion, such discussion constituted privileged attorney-client communication. If written minutes are kept, the minutes shall contain a signed statement from said attorney as follows: 
"I hereby attest that the unrecorded portion of the executive session constituted, in my opinion, privileged attorney-client communications." 
    The minutes must also include a signed statement from the chair of the executive session as follows: 
"I hereby attest that the discussion in the unrecorded portion of the executive session was confined to the topic(s) for which the executive session is authorized." 
C.  After Executive Session. Following an executive session (but before reconvening the open meeting), the city council may review, amend and approve executive session minutes, whether such minutes are from a previous executive session or the executive session immediately preceding such consideration. If minutes of an executive session are in written form, such minutes shall be distributed to all members of city council present during such meeting for such consideration. Electronic recordings can be similarly approved by listening to such recorded material. 
(Ord. 794 § 1(part), 2001) 
1.02.030 - Records of executive sessions. 
    All records of executive sessions, whether written or electronic, shall be retained by the city clerk in a secure location. If no request relating to the record is received by the city clerk during the ninety-day period immediately following the date of the executive session for which the record is made, then the record shall be immediately destroyed by the city clerk. Records of executive sessions may only be released in accordance with the Open Meetings Law, C.R.S. §24-6-401 et seq. 
(Ord. 794 § 1(part), 2001) 
Chapter 1.08 - CITY SEAL 
Sections: 

1.08.010 - Corporate seal. 
    The corporate seal shall consist of a circular disc and plate bearing the following inscription: "Incorporated City of Burlington, Colorado" in circular form, and the word "Seal" across the center of the plate and within the circular inscription. 
(Prior code §2.2) 
Chapter 1.12 - CITY BOUNDARIES 
Sections: 

1.12.010 - Corporate limits designated. 
    The present corporate limits of the City of Burlington are described as follows: 
    THE POINT OF BEGINNING is at the northwest corner of the Southeast Quarter (SE/4) of Section Thirty-five (35), Township Eight (8) South, Range Forty-four (44), West of the Sixth Principal Meridian which is the northwest corner of the subdivision known as First Addition to Burlington ("First Addition to Burlington") recorded in Plat Book 1 at Page 17 of the records of Kit Carson County, Colorado; 
    thence North along the west boundary line of the Northeast Quarter (NE 1/4) of Section Thirty-five (35), Township Eight (8) South, Range Forty-four (44), West of the Sixth Principal Meridian to the northwest corner of said Quarter Section; 
    thence East along the north boundary line of said Quarter Section to the northeast corner of said Quarter Section; 
    thence South along the east boundary line of said Quarter Section to the southeast corner of said Quarter Section which is on the north boundary of "First Addition to Burlington"; 
    thence East along the north boundary line of "First Addition to Burlington" to the northeast corner of "First Addition to Burlington"; 
    thence South along the east boundary line of "First Addition to Burlington" to the northwest corner of the subdivision known as New Burlington ("New Burlington") as recorded in Plat Book 1 at Page 8 of the records of Kit Carson County, Colorado; 
    thence East along the north boundary line of "New Burlington" to the east boundary line of Fifteenth Street as platted; 
    thence North to the southwest corner of that tract annexed by Ordinance No. 402 ("Tract 402"), recorded in Book 474 at Page 509 of the records of Kit Carson County, Colorado; 
    thence North along the west boundary line of "Tract 402"; 
    thence North along the west boundary line of the subdivision known as Fairsite Park, Amended Filing ("Fairsite Park, Amended Filing") recorded in Plat Book 2 at Page 53 of the records of Kit Carson County, Colorado; 
    thence North along the west boundary line of the subdivision known as Fairview Cemetery ("Fairview Cemetery"), recorded in Plat Book 1 at Page 21 of the records of Kit Carson County, Colorado; 
    thence East along the north boundary of "Fairview Cemetery" to the northeast corner of "Fairview Cemetery"; 
    thence South along the east boundary line of "Fairview Cemetery" to the southeast corner of "Fairview Cemetery"; 
    thence West along the south boundary line of "Fairview Cemetery" to the northeast corner of the subdivision known as Fairsite Park, Second Addition ("Fairsite Park, Second Addition") as recorded in Plat Book 2 at Page 67 of the records of Kit Carson County, Colorado; 
    thence south along the east boundary line of "Fairsite Park, Second Addition" to the southeast corner of "Fairsite Park, Second Addition"; 
    thence East along the north boundary line of "New Burlington" to the northeast corner of "New Burlington"; 
    thence East along the north boundary line of the subdivision known as Cleveland's Addition ("Cleveland's Addition") as recorded in Plat Book 1 at Page 15 of the records of Kit Carson County, Colorado to the northeast corner of "Cleveland's Addition"; 
    thence South along the east boundary line of "Cleveland's Addition" to the northwest corner of a tract identified as "Tract 2" annexed by Ordinance No. 510 ("Tract 510-2"); 
    thence easterly along the north boundary line of "Tract 510-2" to the east corner of Tract 510-2"; 
    thence Southwesterly along the south boundary line of "Tract 510-2" to the east boundary line of the subdivision known as Burlington and sometimes referred to as Old Burlington ("Burlington") recorded in Plat Book 1 at Page 2 of the records of Kit Carson County, Colorado; 
    thence South along the east boundary line of "Burlington" to the southeast corner of "Burlington"; 
    thence West along the south boundary line of "Burlington" to the southwest corner of "Burlington"; 
    thence southwesterly to the northeast corner of that tract annexed by Ordinance No. 590 ("Tract 590"), recorded in Book 578 at Page 419 of the records of Kit Carson County, Colorado; 
    thence South along the east boundary line of "Tract 590" to the southeast corner of "Tract 590"; 
    thence West along the south boundary line of "Tract 590" to the southwest corner of "Tract 590"; 
    thence North along the west boundary line of "Tract 590" to the northwest corner of "Tract 590"; 
    thence West along the south boundary line of U.S. Highway No. 24 a distance of 222 feet; 
    thence South along the east boundary line of the tract annexed by Ordinance No. 524 ("Tract 524"), recorded in Book 554 at Page 96 of the records of Kit Carson County, Colorado to the southeast corner of "Tract 524"; 
    thence West along the south boundary line of "Tract 524" to the southwest corner of "Tract 524"; 
    thence South along the east boundary line of the subdivision known as Paradise, 2nd Addition ("Paradise, 2nd Addition") recorded in Plat Book 2 at Page 66 of the records of Kit Carson County, Colorado to the southeast corner of "Paradise, 2nd Addition"; 
    thence West along the south boundary line of "Paradise, 2nd Addition" to the southwest corner of "Paradise, 2nd Addition"; 
    thence West along the south boundary line of the subdivision known as Paradise Village, First Addition ("Paradise Village, First Addition") recorded in Plat Book 2 at Page 60 of the records of Kit Carson County, Colorado to the southwest corner of "Paradise Village, First Addition"; 
    thence West along the south boundary line of the subdivision known as Burlington Annex ("Burlington Annex") recorded in Plat Book 2 at Page 40 of the records of Kit Carson County, Colorado to the east line of Bonny Drive Street as platted; 
    thence South along the east boundary line of the subdivision known as Yersin Addition ("Yersin Addition") recorded in Plat Book 2 at Page 65 of the records of Kit Carson County, Colorado to the southeast corner of "Yersin Addition"; 
    thence West along the south boundary line of "Yersin Addition" to the east boundary line of the subdivision known as Parmer Addition ("Parmer Addition") recorded in Plat Book 2 at Page 61 of the records of Kit Carson County, Colorado; 
    thence South along the east boundary line of "Parmer Addition" to the southeast corner of "Parmer Addition"; 
    thence West along the south boundary line of "Parmer Addition" to the southwest corner of "Parmer Addition"; 
    thence North along the west boundary line of "Parmer Addition" to the southeast corner of the subdivision known as Parmer Second Addition ("Parmer Second Addition") recorded in Book 487 at Page 557 of the records of Kit Carson County, Colorado; 
    thence West along the south boundary line of "Parmer Second Addition" to the southwest corner of "Parmer Second Addition"; 
    thence North along the west boundary line of "Parmer Second Addition" a distance of 13.0 feet; 
    thence South 89°49' West a distance of 167.5 feet; 
    thence South 0°33" East a distance of 41.0 feet; 
    thence North 89°27' East a distance of 167.4 feet; 
    thence South along the east boundary line of that tract annexed by Ordinance No. 425 ("Tract 425"), recorded in Book 488 at Page 916 of the records of Kit Carson County, Colorado; 
    thence South along the east boundary line of that tract annexed by Ordinance No. 428 ("Tract 428"), recorded in Book 489 at Page 568 of the records of Kit Carson County, Colorado; 
    thence West along the south boundary line of "Tract 428" to the southwest corner of "Tract 428"; 
    thence South to the northeast corner of that tract annexed by Ordinance No. 445 ("Tract 445"), recorded in Book 495 at Page 274 of the records of Kit Carson County, Colorado; 
    thence South along the east boundary line of "Tract 445"; 
    thence South along the east boundary line of that tract annexed by Ordinance No. 446 ("Tract 446"), recorded in Book 495 at Page 353 of the records of Kit Carson County, Colorado; 
    thence South along the east boundary line of that tract annexed by Ordinance No. 447 ("Tract 447"), recorded in Book 495 at Page 39 of the records of Kit Carson County, Colorado; 
    thence West along the south boundary line of "Tract 447"; 
    thence North along the west boundary line of "Tract 447"; 
    thence North along the west boundary line of "Tract 446"; 
    thence North along the west boundary line of "Tract 445 to the northwest corner of "Tract 445"; 
    thence North to the southwest corner of that tract annexed by Ordinance No. 429 ("Tract 429"), recorded in Book 491 at Page 540 of the records of Kit Carson County, Colorado; 
    thence North along the west boundary of "Tract 429" to the southeast corner of that tract annexed by Ordinance No. 468 ("Tract 468"), recorded in Book 502 at Page 267 of the records of Kit Carson County, Colorado; 
    thence West along the south boundary line of "Tract 468" to the southwest corner of "Tract 468"; 
    thence North along the west boundary line of "Tract 468" to the northwest corner of "Tract 468"; 
    thence East along the north boundary line of "Tract 468" to a point marked by a post which is three hundred (300) feet west of the intersection of the north boundary of U.S. Highway No. 24 and the east line of the Southwest Quarter (SW/4) of Section Thirty-five (35); 
    thence North to the southwest corner of the subdivision known as Block One (1), Industrial Tract, First Addition to Burlington ("Block One (1), Industrial Tract, First Addition to Burlington") recorded in Plat Book 2 at Page 79 of the records of Kit Carson County, Colorado; 
    thence North along the west boundary line of "Block One (1), Industrial Tract, First Addition to Burlington" to the northwest corner of "Block One (1), Industrial Tract, First Addition to Burlington"; 
    thence East along the north boundary line of "Block One (1), Industrial Tract, First Addition to Burlington" to the northeast corner of "Block One (1), Industrial Tract, First Addition to Burlington"; 
    thence North along the west boundary line of "First Addition to Burlington" to the northwest corner of "First Addition to Burlington" which is the POINT OF BEGINNING. 
(Undated amendment: prior code §2.3) 
Chapter 1.16 - GENERAL PENALTY 
Sections: 

1.16.010 - Required obedience to code. 
    It shall be a violation of this code for any person to do any act which is forbidden or declared to be unlawful, or to fail to do or perform any act required, in this code. 
(Ord. 624 §9(part), 1987: prior code §19.1) 
1.16.020 - Fines and penalties. 
    Any person who is convicted of a violation of this code shall be fined in a sum of not less than one dollar nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00), or imprisoned for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days, or ordered to pay or perform restitution, or any combination thereof, for each offense. Where any violation is a continuing offense, each day that the violation continues shall be considered and held to be a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. 831 §1, 2005: Ord. 624 §9(part), 1987: prior code §19.2) 
1.16.030 - Satisfaction of fine by imprisonment. 
    Any person imprisoned for the nonpayment of a fine shall be credited for time served at the rate of two dollars per day of twenty-four (24) hours, exclusive of board. 
(Prior code §19.4) 
1.16.040 - Credit on jail sentence for good behavior. 
    The chief of police shall have the power to reduce the sentence of a person confined under a jail sentence imposed upon him or her, where the person so confined does all work assigned to him or her, abides by the rules of the jail and all instructions given him or her, and otherwise conducts himself or herself in a proper manner. Such reduction of sentence because of good conduct shall be computed one day for each two days served so that each three days of his or her sentence may thus be served in two days. 
(Prior code §19.5) 
1.16.050 - Jail record book. 
    The chief of police, as keeper of the city jail, shall maintain a jail book in which shall be entered the following information relative to each person received, detained or ordered confined in the city jail; the jail serial number assigned, the name, age, sex, residence, charge, sentence, date and time received, date and time released, and the credits allowed for work assigned or good behavior. 
(Prior code §19.8) 
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL 
Chapters: 
Chapter 2.04 - FIRE DEPARTMENT 
Sections: 

2.04.010 - Created. 
    The city shall have a volunteer fire department and the city council shall furnish the funds for providing, housing, maintaining and operating such fire fighting equipment as it deems necessary. 
(Prior code §5.7) 
2.04.020 - Fire department officers. 
    The fire chief and other officers elected by the volunteer fire department shall constitute the fire chief and other officers of the city. 
(Prior code §5.8) 
2.04.030 - False fire alarms. 
    It is unlawful for any person to make or give a false alarm of fire. 
(Prior code §5.9) 
2.04.040 - Destruction of property. 
    When a fire is in progress the chief of the fire department, or in his absence the officer in charge, may order any building or buildings, fences or other structures that are in close proximity to such fire to be torn down, blown up or otherwise disposed of, if he deems it necessary for the purpose of checking the progress of any fire. 
(Prior code §5.10) 
Chapter 2.08 - WATER AND SANITATION DEPARTMENT 
Sections: 

2.08.010 - Created. 
    There is created and established a water and sanitation department of the city for the purpose of management, maintenance, care and operation of the waterworks of the city. 
(Ord. 496 §6.1, 1973) 
2.08.020 - Administrator-Powers. 
    The city administrator shall have the immediate control and management of all things pertaining to the city waterworks system, and he shall perform all acts that may be necessary for the prudent, efficient and economical management and protection of such waterworks, subject to the approval and confirmation of the city council. The council shall have the power to prescribe such other and further rates, rules and regulations as it may deem necessary. 
(Ord. 496 §6.2, 1973) 
2.08.030 - Receipts and deposits. 
    The city clerk shall keep a correct account of all receipts, make out all bills for water rents and materials furnished to consumers, collect the same, and deposit the proceeds so collected with the city treasurer in accordance with the direction of the council. 
(Ord. 496 §6.3, 1973) 
2.08.040 - Inspections. 
    Whenever in the judgment of the city administrator he deems it necessary, he may inspect the premises or buildings of any water consumer for the purpose of examining the condition of all pipes, motors, meters and water fixtures, or the manner in which the water is used. He shall be vigilant to protect and remedy all abuses, whether from waste or other improper use of water. 
(Ord. 496 §6.4, 1973) 
Chapter 2.12 - ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION AND GENERATION DEPARTMENT 
Sections: 

2.12.010 - Created. 
    There is created and established an electrical distribution and generation department of the city, which shall have control of the operation and maintenance of the electric plant and works for the manufacture, generation, transmission and distribution of electricity, and also the distribution and sale of electrical energy. 
(Ord. 588 §7.1, 1982) 
2.12.020 - City administrator-Powers. 
    The city administrator shall have the immediate control and management of all things pertaining to the electrical distribution and generation department, subject to the approval and confirmation of the city council. The council shall have the power to prescribe such other and further rates, rules and regulations as it may deem necessary. 
(Ord. 588 §7.2, 1982) 
Chapter 2.16 - POLICE COURT 
Sections: 

2.16.010 - Municipal judge-Appointment. 
    At its first regular meeting following each biennial election the city council shall appoint a justice of the peace or some other person who is an elector of the city as municipal judge. He shall give bond in an amount to be fixed by the council, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties, and his compensation shall be fixed by the city council. 
(Prior code §9.1) 
2.16.020 - Powers and jurisdiction. 
    The municipal judge shall have the same powers and his method of procedure shall be the same as justices of the peace in like cases. He shall have jurisdiction within the territorial limits of the city over all cases arising under this code and the ordinances of the city. 
(Prior code §9.2) 
2.16.030 - Actions-How commenced. 
    All actions brought to recover any fine or to enforce any penalty under this code or any ordinance of the city shall be commenced by summons; provided, that a warrant for the arrest of the offender may issue at the first instance upon the sworn complaint of any person that any such ordinance or code provision, specifying the section, title and date of passage of the code or ordinance violated, has been violated and that the person making the complaint has reasonable grounds to believe the party charged is guilty thereof. 
(Prior code §9.3) 
2.16.040 - Procedure after arrest. 
    Any person arrested upon a warrant issued by the municipal judge or for an offense committed in the presence of the arresting officer shall be kept in custody and taken before the municipal judge to be tried for the alleged offense without unnecessary delay; provided, however, that where the arrest is for an offense committed within the presence of the arresting officer and it is for a traffic violation, or where it appears to the arresting officer that the violator will appear pursuant to a written notice, the arresting officer may issue a citation or notice on a form provided for that purpose notifying the alleged violator to appear and answer charges at a place and time specified. The person arrested, in order to secure release as provided herein, must give his written promise to appear in court by signing the notice. 
(Prior code §9.4) 
2.16.050 - Warrant issued upon failure to appear. 
    In the event any person fails to appear or comply with a notice given to such person or attached to a vehicle, or fails to make appearance pursuant to a summons directing an appearance in the municipal judge's court, the police department shall forthwith secure a warrant for his arrest and execute the same by arresting such person and keeping him in custody until he can be taken before the municipal judge. 
(Prior code §9.5) 
2.16.060 - Bail. 
    When a cause for the violation of this code or any ordinance is continued, the defendant shall give bail for his appearance at the time and place set for trial by depositing a cash bond or executing a written recognizance with two sufficient sureties, in an amount fixed by the municipal judge, and thereupon such person shall be released. If such bail bond is not furnished, the defendant shall be committed to jail until the time of trial. 
(Prior code §9.6) 
2.16.070 - Judgment on bail bond. 
    If the defendant shall fail to appear at the time and place specified, or appearing shall depart the court without leave, the municipal judge may enter judgment against the defendant and forfeit any cash bond that has been posted, or he may enter judgment against the defendant and his sureties for the penalty of the bond. Upon the entering of such a judgment against the defendant and his sureties, the municipal judge shall issue a notice to the sureties requiring them to appear and show cause why the judgment should not be confirmed against them and execution issued. On the hearing thereunder the judgment may be set aside for good cause or it may be confirmed and execution issued. 
(Prior code §9.7) 
2.16.080 - Jury trial-Change of venue. 
    In all suits and prosecutions before the municipal judge, no change of venue shall be granted, nor shall the defendant be entitled to a jury trial except in cases where such jury trial is required by the constitution or laws of the state. Where there is a right to trial by jury, such jury shall be summoned, selected and empaneled in the same manner as in justice of the peace courts. 
(Prior code §9.8) 
2.16.090 - Stay of execution. 
    The municipal judge is authorized to grant a stay of execution not to exceed thirty days, on any fine assessed or jail sentence imposed, or both. If the defendant does not comply with the terms of the stay of execution, then the execution shall issue and the defendant shall be confined in the jail until the judgment is satisfied. 
(Prior code §9.9) 
2.16.100 - Sentence suspended. 
    The municipal judge is authorized to suspend the payment of any fine or costs, or any part thereof, assessed for any violation of this code, and he may impose reasonable conditions upon such suspension and revoke such suspension and reinstate the sentence for a violation of such conditions. 
(Prior code §9.10) 
2.16.110 - Appeals. 
    Appeals may be taken by any defendant from any judgment of the municipal judge to the county court of Kit Carson County in the manner provided by state law. 
(Prior code §9.11) 
2.16.120 - Fines paid to city treasurer. 
    All fines and penalties collected by the municipal judge for the violation of this code or the ordinances of the city shall be reported by the municipal judge and paid to the city treasurer monthly. 
(Prior code §9.12) 
2.16.130 - Court costs. 
    Court costs to be assessed in the municipal court of the city of Burlington against any defendant who pleads guilty or nolo contendere or who enters into a plea agreement or who, after trial, is found guilty of an ordinance violation shall be thirty dollars per court case. 
(Ord. 771 §1, 1999) 
Chapter 2.20 - EMERGENCY POLICE POWERS 
Sections: 

2.20.010 - Purpose. 
    The city will from time to time in the future, in all probability, have within its corporate limits fire, flood, civil disturbances and riots; and, therefore, it is deemed in the best interest of the city to exercise certain emergency police powers necessary to and incidental to the maintenance of the safety, health and welfare of the citizens of Burlington. 
(Ord. 443 §1, 1969) 
2.20.020 - Mayor's authority. 
    Emergency police powers shall be placed in the hands of the mayor of the city and these powers should be exercised only in the event of an emergency as herein contemplated and shall only be exercised for such period of time as the actual emergency exists and such powers shall only be invoked after a declaration and proclamation of an emergency. 
(Ord. 443 §2, 1969) 
2.20.030 - Powers of mayor. 
    In addition to any and all powers enumerated in this code, the mayor shall have further emergency powers necessary to preserve the peace and order of the city as follows: 
A.  The mayor shall have the power to declare an emergency to exist when, in his opinion, one or more of the following conditions exists: 
1.  That there is extreme likelihood of danger of destruction of life or property due to unusual conditions; 
2.  Unusual or extreme weather conditions, making use of city streets or areas difficult or impossible; 
3.  Civil unrest, commotion or uprising is imminent or exists; 
4.  There is a stoppage or loss of electrical power affecting a major portion of the city. 
B.  The emergency shall be declared in a proclamation of the mayor, which proclamation shall be delivered to the chief of police, who shall then see that such proclamation is delivered to all news media within the city and who shall also use public address systems throughout the city and immediately notify the public of such proclamation and that violators will be arrested and subject to penalty. 
C.  After declaration of such emergency, the mayor shall have the authority to exercise any or all of the following powers: 
1.  To call upon regular and auxiliary enforcement agencies and organizations within or without the city to assist in preserving and keeping the peace and the preservation of life and property of the citizenry of the city; 
2.  The power to close streets and sidewalks and to delineate areas within the city wherein an emergency exists; 
3.  To impose a curfew upon all or any portion of the city thereby requiring all persons in such designated curfew areas to forthwith remove themselves from the public street, alleys, parks or other public places; provided, however, that physicians, nurses and ambulance operators performing medical services, utility personnel maintaining essential public services, firemen and city authorized or requested enforcement officers and personnel may be exempted from such curfew; 
4.  To order the closing of any business establishments anywhere within the city for the period of the emergency, such businesses to include, but not be limited to, those selling intoxicating liquors, malt beverages, gasoline or firearms; 
5.  The power to do any and all acts necessary and incidental to the preservation of life, limb and property within the city. 
D.  The proclamation specifying with exactness the area in which the emergency is declared to exist shall become effective upon its issuance and dissemination to the public by the appropriate news media. 
E.  Any emergency proclaimed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall terminate after forty-eight hours from the issuance thereof, or upon the issuance of a proclamation determining an emergency no longer exists, whichever occurs first; provided, however, upon declaration of a second or further emergencies to exist the emergency powers set forth herein may be exercised during such further emergency period or periods, but never for more than forty- eight hours in one declared emergency period. No emergency period shall extend beyond the next regular, special or called meeting of the city council unless at such meeting the declaration of emergency is specifically approved by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. 443 §3, 1969) 
2.20.040 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person who willfully fails or refuses to comply with the order of duly authorized law enforcement officers or personnel charged with the responsibility of enforcing the proclamation of emergency authorized in this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 624 §9(part), 1995: Ord. 443 §4, 1969) 
Chapter 2.24 - SOCIAL SECURITY 
Sections: 

2.24.010 - Coverage for city officers and employees. 
    The city council has adopted an ordinance extending the benefits of old age and survivor's insurance to its officers and employees. The proper officers of the city are authorized to continue making payroll deductions from salaries and to make the required payment by the city and to do all other things necessary to continue the coverage of the officers and employees of the city in the old age and survivor's insurance system. 
(Prior code §3.8) 
Chapter 2.26 - REGISTRATION OF WRITE-IN CANDIDATES-CANCELLATION OF ELECTIONS[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
 Prior ordinance history: Ord. 605. 

2.26.010 - Write-in candidates-Affidavit of intent required. 
    No write-in vote for any municipal office shall be counted unless an affidavit of intent has been filed with the clerk by the person whose name is written in prior to twenty days before the day of election indicating that such person desires the office and is qualified to assume the duties of that office if elected. 
(Ord. 683 §1, 1994) 
2.26.020 - Cancellation of elections-Procedures. 
    If the only matter before the voters is the election of persons to office and if, at the close of business on the nineteenth day before the election, there are not more candidates than offices to be filled at such election, including candidates filing affidavits of intent, the clerk shall certify such fact to the council, and the council shall hold a meeting and may cancel and by resolution declare the candidates elected. Notice of such cancellation shall be published, if possible, in order to inform the electors of the municipality, and notice of such cancellation shall be posted at each polling place and in not less than one other public place. 
(Ord. 683 §2, 1994) 
Chapter 2.28 - CODE OF ETHICS 
Sections: 

2.28.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to promote public confidence in the city government, to maintain conformity with the provisions and intent of the Charter and to provide guidance to the members of the city council and members of the boards, commissions and other authorities appointed by the city council or city manager, concerning real or apparent conflicts of interest. 
(Ord. 648(part), 1989) 
2.28.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are defined and shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended. 
A.  "Board" means the following boards, commissions or other bodies or authorities: 
1.  Board of adjustment and appeals; and 
2.  Planning and zoning commission. 
B.  "Board member" means a member of any board appointed by the city administrator or city council whether under charter, ordinance, or state law, including regular and alternate members. Such does not include or cover any compensated full-time or part-time city employee unless such person is also a board member. 
C.  "Conflict of interest" means any personal or property interest, or any other kind of pecuniary interest or any other private interest held by an individual council or board member which may conflict or interfere with or otherwise influence, or which may reasonably be perceived by the public as influencing the conduct of public duties. 
D.  "Council member" means a member of the city council of the city. 
(Ord. 648(part), 1989) 
2.28.030 - Applicable law. 
    Unless otherwise required by law, the provisions of this chapter and those of the Charter will be the applicable law governing conflicts of interest within the city. 
(Ord. 648(part), 1989) 
2.28.040 - Restrictions-Generally. 
    The following restrictions shall apply to all council members and all board members. 
A.  No council member or board member may use any information obtained by virtue of his public position in furtherance of any personal or pecuniary interest or to further the personal or pecuniary interest of any other person. Confidential or privileged information shall not be disclosed except as provided by law. 
B.  No council member or board member may take any final action or vote to render any final decision or determination on any particular item or matter within the province of the council or board where: 
1.  The individual member has a conflict of interest, other than the common public interest, with regard to that particular item or matter before the council or board; or 
2.  Any member of his family may personally benefit from the final action, decision or determination regarding a particular item or matter before the council or board. 
C.  No council member or board member will be a party, by himself or through a firm appear on behalf of such a party, in a lawsuit in state court wherein the city is also a party without the consent of the city council being first requested and obtained. 
(Ord. 648(part), 1989) 
2.28.050 - Conflict of interest disclosure-Stepping down-Procedures. 
A.  In the event that any council member or board member has any conflict of interest of which he is aware, said council member or board member shall declare such interest to the council or board of which he is a member. In the event that any council member or board member is aware that he could potentially be construed as having a conflict of interest, said council member or board member shall disclose such potential interest to the council or board of which he is a member. 
B.  If any council member or board member fails to declare or disclose such interest, or where such person discloses a potential conflict of interest, the remaining members of the council or board shall establish by a majority vote whether said interest does in fact constitute a conflict of interest. When such conflict of interest is declared or established, the remaining council members or board members shall take any action they deem to be in the best interest of the city. 
C.  When the conflict of interest is declared or established as provided for above, the council member or board member with such an interest shall remove himself from the council or board before which the matter is being considered. After the final decision is made by the council or board with regard to the particular matter upon which the council member or board member has such an interest, he may return and resume his duties as a member of the council or board. 
(Ord. 648(part), 1989) 
2.28.060 - Guidelines. 
    All council members and board members shall be guided by the following general directives in dealing with potential conflicts of interest: 
A.  All council members and board members should avoid any conflicts of interest or appearance of conflicts of interest. 
B.  The city council and city administrator shall thoroughly examine the background of all applicants for real or potential conflicts of interest, and the appearance thereof, prior to appointing any board member. 
C.  All council members and board members should avoid the receipt of any compensation, gift, payment of expense, reward, gratuity, or any item of value tendered by a person where such person has an interest in some particular matter pending before the council or board. 
D.  A council member or board member may be a member of a firm which represents another person before the city council or a board; except, such circumstances shall be conclusively deemed to be a conflict of interest for such council member or board member. 
E.  A council member or board member may appear before the council or any board urging an argument concerning general city issues and policies. 
(Ord. 648(part), 1989) 
2.28.070 - Violations-Penalty. 
    Any council member or board member who violates any of the provisions of Section 2.28.040 through 23.28.050 shall be subject to the following penalties. 
A.  In all cases, the determination of the council as to whether there has been a violation shall be final. 
B.  In the case of a council member, if a violation is established to the satisfaction of a majority of the council, such violation shall be grounds for an official reprimand by the council. 
C.  In the case of a board member, if a violation is established to the satisfaction of a majority of the council, such violation shall be grounds for an official reprimand by the council and grounds for termination of such person's appointment to any board of which he is a member. If the council votes to terminate the appointment of a board member upon such grounds, the council may appoint another person to fulfill the term of the individual removed from office. 
(Ord. 648(part), 1989) 
2.28.080 - Guideline violations. 
    Any apparent violation of any of the provisions of Section 2.28.060 may be referred to the council for investigation and discussion by any city official, board or citizen of the city. If, upon investigation and discussion, the council finds that a violation of the guidelines contained in Section 2.28.060 has occurred, the city council may caution or reprimand the council member or board member responsible therefor or take such other action as it deems to be in the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. 648(part), 1989) 
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
Chapters: 
Chapter 3.04 - FISCAL PROCEDURES GENERALLY 
Sections: 

3.04.010 - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city shall commence on the first day of January of each year and shall coincide with the calendar year. 
(Ord. 828 §1, 2005: prior code §10.1) 
3.04.020 - Deposits-Investments. 
    The city treasurer shall deposit all of the funds and moneys which come into his or her possession by virtue of his or her office as city treasurer in one or more responsible banks located in the state which have been designated by written resolution of the council. The council may also authorize the city treasurer, by written resolution, to invest all or any part of such funds in securities which are authorized for such investment by state law. 
(Prior code §10.7) 
3.04.030 - Checks-How signed. 
    All checks drawn by the treasurer must be signed by the mayor, mayor pro-tem or the city administrator if the mayor has delegated such duties thereto and countersigned by the clerk, stating the particular fund or appropriation to which the same is chargeable and the person to whom payable. No money shall be drawn except as provided in this section. 
(Ord. 764 §1, 1999: Ord. 734, 1997: prior code §10.8) 
( Ord. No. 916, 6-13-2016 ) 
3.04.040 - Publication of financial statements. 
    The city council shall, within twenty days after the adjournment of each regular or special meeting, publish such of its proceedings as relate to the payment of bills, stating for what the same are allowed, the name of the person to whom allowed and to whom paid. It shall also publish a statement concerning all contracts awarded and rebates allowed. 
(Prior code §10.9) 
3.04.050 - Treasurer's annual report. 
    Annually, within ten days after the close of the fiscal year, the city treasurer shall make out and file with the clerk a full and detailed account of all receipts and expenditures of the city, and all of his transactions as such treasurer during the preceding fiscal year, and shall show in such account the state of the treasury at the close of the fiscal year. The city clerk shall immediately cause such account to be published in a newspaper published in the city. 
(Prior code §10.10) 
3.04.060 - Annual audit. 
    The city clerk shall select a qualified person as auditor and cause to be made an annual audit of the financial affairs and transactions of the city in accordance with the requirements of state law. 
(Prior code §10.11) 
Chapter 3.06 - SALES TAX SIMPLIFICATION 
Sections: 

3.06.010 - Sales tax-Nonapplicability. 
    For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the city of Burlington's sales tax shall not apply to the sale of construction and building materials, as the term is used in No. 29-2-109, CRS, if such materials are picked up by the purchaser and if the purchaser of such materials presents to the retailer a building permit or other documentation acceptable to the city evidencing that a local use tax has been paid or is required to be paid. 
(Ord. 610 §1, 1985) 
3.06.020 - Use tax-Nonapplicability. 
    For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the city of Burlington use tax shall not apply to the storage of construction and building materials. 
(Ord. 610 §2, 1985) 
3.06.030 - Sales tax-Credit for sales or use taxes previously paid to another municipality. 
    For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the city of Burlington's sales tax shall not apply to the sale of tangible personal property at retail or the furnishing of services if the transaction was previously subjected to a sales or use tax lawfully imposed on the purchaser or user by another statutory or home rule municipality equal to or in excess of two percent. A credit shall be granted against the city's sales tax with respect to such transaction equal in amount to the lawfully imposed local sales or use tax previously paid by the purchaser or user to the previous statutory or home rule municipality. The amount of the credit shall not exceed two percent. 
(Ord. 610 §3, 1985) 
3.06.040 - Use tax-Credit for sales or uses taxes previously paid to another municipality. 
    For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the city of Burlington's use tax shall not apply to the storage, use, or consumption of nay article of tangible personal property the sale or use of which has already been subjected to a legally imposed sales or use tax of another statutory or home rule municipality equal to or in excess of two percent. A credit shall be granted against the city's use tax with respect to a person's storage, use or consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased by him in a previous statutory or home rule municipality. The amount of the credit shall be equal to the tax paid by him by reason of the imposition of a sales or use tax of the previous statutory or home rule municipality on his purchase or use of the property. The amount of the credit shall not exceed two percent. 
(Ord. 610 §4, 1985) 
3.06.050 - Use tax-Alternative dispute resolution procedure-Deficiency notice or claim for refund. 
    For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the taxpayer may elect a state hearing on the city adminis-trator's final decision on a deficiency notice or claim for refund pursuant to the procedure set forth in this section. 
A.  As used in this section, "state hearing" means a hearing before the executive director of the department of revenue or delegate thereof as provided in No. 29-2-106.1(3), CRS. 
B.  When the city asserts that use taxes are due in an amount greater than the amount paid by a taxpayer, the city shall mail a deficiency notice to the taxpayer by certified mail. The deficiency notice shall state the additional use taxes due. The deficiency notice shall contain notification, in clear and conspicuous type, that the taxpayer has the right to elect a state hearing on the deficiency pursuant to No. 29-2-106.1(3), CRS. The taxpayer shall also have the right to elect a state hearing on the city's denial of such taxpayer's claim for a refund of use tax paid. 
C.  The taxpayer shall request the state hearing within thirty days after the taxpayer's exhaustion of local remedies. The taxpayer shall have no right to such hearing if he has not exhausted local remedies or if he fails to request such hearing within the time period provided for in this subsection. For purposes of this subsection, "exhaustion of local remedies" means: 
1.  The taxpayer has timely requested in writing a hearing before the city and such city has held such hearing and issued a final decision thereon. Such hearing shall be informal and no transcript, rules of evidence, or filing of briefs shall be required; but the taxpayer may elect to submit a brief, in which case the city may submit a brief. The city shall hold such hearing and issue the final decision thereon within ninety days after the city's receipt of the taxpayer's written request therefor, except the city may extend such period if the delay in holding the hearing or issuing the decision thereon was occasioned by the taxpayer, but, in any such event, the city shall hold such hearing and issue the decision thereon within one hundred eighty days of the taxpayer's request in writing therefor; or 
2.  The taxpayer has timely requested in writing a hearing before the city and the city had failed to hold such hearing or has failed to issue a final decision thereon within the time periods prescribed in subsection (C)(1) of this section. 
D.  If a taxpayer has exhausted his local remedies as provided in subsection (C) above, the taxpayer may request a state hearing on such deficiency notice or claim for refund, and such request shall be made and such hearing shall be conducted in the same manner as set forth in No. 29-2-106.1 (3) through (7), CRS. 
E.  If the deficiency notice or claim for refund involves only the city, in lieu of requesting a state hearing, the taxpayer may appeal such deficiency notice or denial of a claim for refund to the district court of the county of Kit Carson as provided in No. 29-2-106.1(8), CRS, provided the taxpayer complies with the procedures set forth in subsection (C) of this section. 
F.  If the city reasonably finds that the collection of use tax will be jeopardized by delay, the city may utilize the procedures set forth in Section 39-21-111, CRS. 
(Ord. 610 §5, 1985) 
3.06.060 - Severability. 
    It is declared to be the intention of the city council that each and every part of the ordinance codified in this chapter is severable, and if any term, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this chapter shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgement or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sen-tences, paragraphs and sections of this chapter since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this chapter in this chapter of any such unconstitutional or invalid term, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Ord. 610 §6, 1985) 
Chapter 3.08 - SALES AND USE TAX 
Sections: 

3.08.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to impose a sales tax on the sale of tangible personal property at retail, and the furnishing of services as provided in subpart (1)(d) of Part 105, Article 2, Title 29, Colorado Revised Statutes, 1973, upon every retailer in the city; and to impose a use tax for the privilege of storing, using or consuming in the city any construction and building materials and motor and other vehicles on which registration is required, purchased at retail, in accordance with the provisions of Article 2 of Title 29, CRS 1973, and any amendment thereto enacted before or after the effective date of this chapter. 
(Ord. 573 §1, 1980) 
3.08.020 - Words and phrases defined. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the definition of words herein contained shall be defined in Part 102, Article 26, Title 39, CRS 1973, and such definitions are incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. 573 §2, 1980) 
3.08.030 - Vendor's fee. 
    The vendor (retailer) shall be entitled, as collection agent for the city, to withhold a collection fee in the amount of three and one-third percent from the total amount remitted by vendor to the city each month. If any vendor is delinquent in remitting such tax, other than in unusual circumstances shown to the satisfaction of the executive director, the vendor shall not be allowed to retain any amounts to cover his expense in collecting and remitting such tax, and an amount equivalent to the full three and one-third percent shall be remitted to the executive director by any such delinquent vendor. 
(Ord. 573 §3, 1980) 
3.08.040 - General provisions and exemptions from taxation. 
A.  For the purpose of collection, administration and enforcement of this chapter by the Executive Director of the Colorado Department of Revenue, the provisions of article 26 of title 39, C.R.S., shall be deemed applicable and incorporated into this chapter. 
B.  The amount subject to tax under this chapter shall not include the state sales and use tax imposed by article 26, title 39, C.R.S. 
C.  The city sales tax under this chapter shall be subject to the following exemptions, and no city sales tax shall be charged upon the following items: 
1.  Machinery or machine tools as specified in section 39-26-709(1), C.R.S.; 
2.  Food as specified in section 39-26-707(1)(e), C.R.S.; 
3.  Electricity, coal, wood, gas, fuel oil, or coke for residential use as specified in section 39-26-715(1)(a)(II), C.R.S.; 
4.  Farm equipment and farm equipment under lease or contract as specified in section 39-26-716(2)(b) and (2)(c), C.R.S.; and 
5.  Components used in the production of energy, including but not limited to alternating current electricity, from a renewable energy source specified in section 39-26-724, C.R.S.. 
D.  For the purpose of this chapter, all retail sales shall be consummated at the place of business of the retailer, unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to a destination outside of the city limits, or to a common carrier for delivery to a destination outside of the city limits. 
E.  The gross receipts from sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax imposed by article 26 of title 39, CRS, 1973, regardless of the places to which delivery is made. 
F.  In the event that a retailer has no permanent place of business in the city, or more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated for the purpose of this sales tax shall be determined by the provisions of article 26 of title 39, C.R.S., and by the rules and regulations promulgated by the Colorado Department of Revenue. 
G.  All sales of personal property on which a specific ownership tax has been paid or is payable shall be exempt from the city sales tax when such sales meet both of the following conditions: 
1.  The purchaser as a nonresident of, or has its principal place of business outside of the city; and 
2.  Such personal property is registered or required to be registered outside the city limits under the laws of the state. 
(Ord. 573 §4, 1980) 
( Ord. No. 907, § 1, 10-12-2015 ; Ord. No. 908, § 1, 11-9-2015 ) 
3.08.050 - Schedule of sales tax. 
A.  There is imposed on all sales of tangible personal property at retail and the furnishing of services as provided in CRS, 1973, 39-26-104, as amended, a tax equal to two percent of the gross receipts. The tangible personal property and services taxable by this chapter shall be the same as the tangible personal property and services tables pursuant to CRS, 1973, 39-26-104, as amended. The imposition of the tax on individual sales shall be in accordance with schedules set forth in the rules and regulations promulgated by the Department of Revenue or by separate ordinance of the city. If any vendor, during any reporting period, shall collect as a tax an amount in excess of two percent of his total taxable sales, he shall remit to the director of revenue the full amount of tax herein imposed and also such excess. 
B.  The collection, administration and enforcement of this sales tax shall be performed by the executive director of revenue of the state in the same manner as the collection, administration and enforcement of the Colorado state sales tax. The provisions of Article 26, Title 39, CRS, 1973, as amended hereafter, and all rules and regulations promulgated by the director of revenue shall govern the collections, administration and enforcement of the sales tax imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. 573 §5, 1980) 
3.08.060 - Use tax. 
A.  There is imposed a use tax of two percent of the retail cost thereof, for the privilege of storing, using or consuming in the city any construction and building materials, and motor and other vehicles on which registration is required, purchased at retail. 
B.  In no event shall the use tax imposed by this chapter extend or apply: 
1.  To the storage, use or consumption of any tangible personal property, the sale of which is subject to a retail sales tax imposed by the city; 
2.  To the storage, use or consumption of any tangible personal property purchased for resale in the city, either in its original form or as an ingredient of a manufactured or compounded product, in the regular course of a business; 
3.  To the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property brought into the city by a nonresidents thereof for his own storage, use or consumption while temporarily within the city; however, this exemption does not apply to the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property brought into this state by a nonresident to be used in the conduct of a business in this state; 
4.  To the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property by the United States government or the state, or its institutions or political subdivisions, in their governmental capacities only or by religious or charitable corporations in the conduct of their regular religious or charitable functions; 
5.  To the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property by a person engaged in the business of manufacturing or compounding for sale, profit or use any article, substance or commodity, which tangible personal property enters into the process of or becomes an ingredient or component part of the product or service which is manufactured, compounded or furnished and the container, label or the furnished shipping case thereof; 
6.  To the storage, use or consumption of any article of tangible personal property the sale or use of which has already been subjected to a sales or use tax of another town, city or county equal to or in excess of that imposed by this chapter. A credit shall be granted against the use tax imposed by this chapter with respect to a person's storage, use or consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased by him elsewhere. The amount of the credit shall be equal to the tax paid by him by reason of the imposition of a sales or use tax of another town, city or county on his purchase or use of the property. The amount of the credit shall not exceed the tax imposed by this chapter. 
7.  To the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property and household effects acquired outside of the city and brought into it by a nonresident acquiring residency; 
8.  To the storage or use of a motor vehicle if the owner is or was, at the time of purchase, a nonresident of the city and he purchased the vehicle outside of the city for use outside the city and actually so used it for a substantial and primary purpose for which it was acquired and he registered, titled and licensed such motor vehicle outside the city; 
9.  To the storage, use or consumption of any construction and building materials and motor or other vehicles on which registration is required if a written contract for the purchase thereof was entered into prior to the effective date of such use tax; 
10.  To the storage, use or consumption of any construction and building materials required or made necessary in the performance of any construction bid, let, or entered into at any time prior to the effective date of this use tax chapter. 
(Ord. 573 §6, 1980) 
3.08.070 - Motor and other vehicle use tax collection. 
A.  The two percent use tax provided for in this chapter shall be applicable to every motor vehicle for which registration is required by the laws of the state, and no registration shall be made for any motor or other vehicle for which registration is required, and no certificate of title shall be issued for such vehicle or for a mobile home by the Department of Revenue or its authorized agents until any tax due upon the use, storage or consumption thereof pursuant to this chapter has been paid. 
B.  The use tax imposed by this chapter shall be collected by the authorized agent of the Department of Revenue in this county. 
C.  The proceeds of such use tax shall be paid to the city periodically in accordance with an agreement entered into by and between the city and the authorized county agent of the Department of Revenue. 
(Ord. 573 §7, 1980) 
3.08.080 - Construction and building materials use tax collection. 
A.  The collection of the use tax for construction and building materials shall be administered by the city council or its authorized representative. 
B.  Such tax may be paid by estimate through the payment of the tax at the time permits are issued for building and construction. For purposes of this section, fifty percent of the current replacement cost of the project shall be deemed to be the sale value of the construction and building materials stored, used or consumed therein. Once paid, such tax shall not be subject to refund in whole or in part. 
C.  As an alternative to the estimate procedure provided in subsection B of this section, payment of such use tax may be made by the filing of the applicant for a building permit or an affidavit stating that the applicant intends to purchase all building or construction materials necessary for the project described in the building application from a licensed retailer located within the city. 
D.  Every applicant for a building who utilized the alternative procedure provided in subsection C of this section, shall maintain and preserve detailed purchase and receipt records which shall be provided to the city or its authorized representative and any unpaid taxes due shall be subject to collection. 
E.  The collection and administration of the use tax imposed by this chapter shall be performed by the city council or its authorized representative in substantially the same manner as the collection, administration and enforcement of the Colorado sales and use tax. 
(Ord. 573 §8, 1980) 
3.08.090 - License requirement. 
A. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail, or provide services, which are taxable pursuant to Section 39-26-104, CRS, 1973, as from time to time amended, without first having obtained a license therefor. Such license shall be granted and issued by the city clerk and shall be in full force and effect for as long as the licensee maintains such business, or until revoked, or until the character or location of such business has changed. 
B.  Such licenses shall be granted and renewed only upon application stating the name and address of the person desiring such a license, the name of such business and the location and such other facts as the city clerk may require. 
C.  In case business is transacted at one or more separate premises by one person a separate license for each place of business shall be required. 
D.  Any person engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail, providing or furnishing taxable services in the city, which are taxable pursuant to Section 39-26-104, CRS, 1973, as from time to time amended, in the city, without having secured a license therefor, except as specifically provided herein, shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter. 
E.  Each license shall be numbered and shall show the name, residence, place and character of business of the licensee and shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the place of business for which it is issued. No license shall be transferable. 
F.  No license shall be required of any person engaged exclusively in the business of selling commodities or rendering services which are exempt from taxation under this chapter. 
G.  No license shall be issued to any business not engaged in lawful activity; including but not limited to; any businesses or persons located within city limits of Burlington, which sells, or is selling or distributing marijuana within the city limits of this city. 
(Ord. 573 §9, 1980) 
(Ord. No. 573-A, § 1, 11-11-2010) 
3.08.100 - Election and amendments. 
A. Before this sales tax chapter shall become effective, it shall be submitted to and receive the approval of a majority of the qualified electors of the city voting at special election to be held on the twenty-eighth day of October, 1980. 
B.  Except as to the two percent rate of tax herein imposed, the city council may amend, alter or change this chapter, subsequent to adoption by a majority vote of the council. Such amendment, alteration or change need not be submitted to the electors of the city for their approval. 
(Ord. 573 §10, 1980) 
3.08.110 - Violation-Penalty. 
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars, or by imprisonment for not more than ninety days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 624 §9(part), 1987: Ord. 573 §11, 1980) 
Chapter 3.12 - TELEPHONE UTILITIES TAX 

3.12.010 - Levy. 
    There is levied on and against each telephone utility company operating within the city a tax on the occupation and business of maintaining a telephone exchange and lines connected therewith in the city and of supplying local exchange telephone service to the inhabitants of the city. The annual amount of tax levied hereby shall be five thousand four hundred dollars, payable in twelve equal monthly installments. 
(Ord. 523 §1, 1976) 
3.12.020 - Effective date. 
    The tax levied by this chapter shall commence on August 5, 1976, and shall be due and payable in twelve equal monthly installments with the first such installment due thirty days after the effective date. 
(Ord. 523 §2, 1976) 
3.12.030 - Failure to pay. 
    If any telephone utility company subject to the provisions of this chapter shall fail to pay the taxes as herein provided, the full amount thereof shall be due and collected from such company, and the same together with an addition of ten percent of the amount of taxes due shall be and hereby is declared to be a debt due and owing from such company to the city. The city attorney upon direction of the city council shall commence and prosecute to final judgment and determination in any court of competent jurisdiction an action at law to collect the debt. 
(Ord. 523 §3, 1976) 
3.12.040 - Local purpose. 
    The tax herein provided is upon occupations and businesses in the performance of local functions and is not a tax upon those functions relating to interstate commerce. It is expressly understood that none of the terms of this chapter be construed to mean that any telephone utility company is issued a franchise by the city. 
(Ord. 523 §4, 1976) 
3.12.050 - Tax in lieu of other taxes, etc. 
    The tax herein provided shall be in lieu of all other payments by or fees and taxes on any telephone utility subject to the provisions of this chapter, other than ad valorem taxes. 
(Ord. 523 §5, 1976) 
Chapter 3.14 - FRANCHISE FEES FOR TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES 
Sections: 

3.14.010 - Liability for franchise fees. 
    Each company that attaches to utility poles erected and maintained by the city shall be liable to the city for the payment of franchise fees based on telecommunication services offered to city residents. 
(Ord. 813 §1 (part), 2003) 
3.14.020 - Collection. 
    Franchise fees based on telecommunication services offered to city residents shall be paid by each company that attaches to utility poles erected and maintained by the city not less than annually together with any other franchise fees for which such company is liable unless a court of competent jurisdiction or the Federal Communications Commission ("FCC") determines that such no such fees shall be collected by a municipality for telecommunications services. It shall be the responsibility of any company offering telecommunication services to city residents to prove that it is not liable for franchise fees as a result of determination by a court of competent jurisdiction or the FCC. 
(Ord. 803 §1 (part), 2003) 
Chapter 3.16 - PURCHASING SYSTEM 
Sections: 

3.16.010 - Purchases. 
    All purchases of goods and supplies for and on behalf of the city shall be made only upon written purchase order prepared on forms provided for this purpose. Such purchase orders shall be numbered; shall give the name and address of the person from whom the purchase is made; shall show shipping instructions, the itemized articles ordered or labor performed or services rendered, and the department and purpose for which the articles are ordered. Each purchase order shall be executed in triplicate; one copy shall be retained in bound form by the city; the original and one copy shall be forwarded to whomever the order is addressed; and the original purchase order shall be returned to the city showing the price of the goods in an itemized bill and a signed acknowledgment that the account is true and just. The city administrator shall be the city purchasing agent and all purchase orders shall be valid and the bills paid only when the same are signed by him or her. 
(Prior code §10.6) 
Chapter 3.20 - SPECIAL REVENUE SHARING TRUST FUND 
Sections: 

3.20.010 - Established. 
    A special revenue sharing trust fund is established to account for all moneys received from distributions by the federal government under authority and by direction of the State and Local Fiscal Assistance Act of 1972, including any and all earnings, or prorated share of earnings, on such distributions. 
(Ord. 492 §1, 1973) 
3.20.020 - Appropriation. 
    An appropriation is made from the special revenue sharing trust fund for payment of the appropriations which are legitimate objects of expenditure under the State and Local Fiscal Assistance Act, in total twenty-five thousand two hundred dollars, that have been authorized by the city council for the fiscal year ending April 30, 1974. 
(Ord. 492 §2, 1973) 
Chapter 3.24 - CONSERVATION TRUST FUND 
Sections: 

3.24.010 - Created. 
    A conservation trust fund is created pursuant to CRS 1963, 138-1-98 and 139-88-20. 
(Ord. 500 §1, 1974) 
3.24.020 - Deposits and expenditures. 
    Any moneys received from the state in 1974 and subsequent years for conservation trust fund purposes shall be deposited in the conservation trust fund and shall be expended, upon direction of the council, only in accordance with the provisions of CRS 1963, 138-1-98. 
(Ord. 500 §2, 1974) 
3.24.030 - Affidavit. 
    The mayor is authorized to prepare and sign, on behalf of the city council, an affidavit certifying to the Department of Revenue that the council has established a conservation trust fund in accordance with House Bill No. 1084 and that the city wishes to qualify for distribution of state moneys appropriated for conservation trust fund purposes. 
(Ord. 500 §3, 1974) 
Chapter 3.28 - LODGER'S TAX 
Sections: 

3.28.010 - Imposition of tax. 
    There is levied and charged a hotel room tax in the amount of four percent (4%) of the entire amount charged for furnishing rooms or accommodations for consideration in a hotel, motel, apartment hotel, lodginghouse, motor hotel, guest house, guest ranch or other similar lodging business. The entire amount subject to tax shall not include city or state sales taxes or charges for food service, beverages, telephone, laundry, or other services incidental to the furnishing of lodging or accommodations for which a separate charge or bill is made. 
(Ord. 838 §1, 2006: Ord. 628 §1, 1988) 
3.28.020 - Exemptions. 
    The following transactions shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this chapter. 
A.  Accommodations provided to the United States, state of Colorado, the city of Burlington, or any of their agencies or political subdivisions; 
B.  Accommodations provided to religious, charitable and eleemosynary corporations in the conduct of regular religious, charitable or eleemosynary functions and activities; 
C.  Accommodations provided to an individual who is a permanent resident of a hotel, motel, apartment hotel, lodginghouse, business and who enters into a written agreement for occupancy for a period of at least thirty (30) consecutive days. 
(Ord. 628 §2, 1988) 
3.28.030 - Collection of tax. 
A.  Every vendor providing accommodations taxable by this chapter shall collect the tax from each customer and shall remit such tax and make a return to the city on or before the twentieth day of each month, on account of accommodations provided in the preceding month. Said return shall contain such information and be in such form as the city may prescribe. 
B.  The burden of proving that any transaction is exempt from the tax shall be upon the vendor. 
C.  In the event any vendor collects more than the two percent tax imposed by this chapter, such amount shall nonetheless be remitted, in full, to the city. 
D.  The tax collected by the vendor shall be held in trust by the vendor for the city until remitted to the city. 
E.  The vendor shall maintain, keep and preserve suitable records of all transactions and such other books and accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of taxes for which the vendor is liable. All such records shall be kept for at least a period of three years and shall be open to inspection and audit by the city at any reasonable time. 
(Ord. 628 §3, 1988) 
3.28.040 - Enforcement. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to fail to pay the tax imposed by this chapter or for any vendor to fail to collect it and remit it to the city or for any person to otherwise violate any provision of this chapter. 
B.  A penalty in the amount of ten percent of the tax due or the sum of fifty dollars, whichever is greater, shall be imposed upon the vendor and become due in the event the tax is not remitted by the twentieth of the month, as required by this chapter, and one percent interest shall accrue each month on the unpaid balance. 
C.  If any vendor fails to make a return and pay the tax imposed by this chapter, the city may make an estimate, based upon available information of the amount of tax due, and all the penalty and interest provided above. The city shall mail notice of such assessment to the vendor at his address as indicated in city records. If payment is not made within ten days from the date of mailing, the city may proceed as provided in this section or otherwise allowed by law to collect such estimate and other amounts due. 
D.  The tax imposed by this chapter shall be a lien upon the goods and business fixtures of the vendor and upon the real property and appurtenant premises at which the taxable transactions occurred. The city may foreclose such lien in accordance with law and record notices of such lien in the Kit Carson County records. 
E.  The city may certify the amount of any delinquent taxes as a delinquent charge upon the property at which the taxable transaction occurred to the county treasurer for collection in the same manner as delinquent general ad valorem taxes are collected. 
F.  Any person convicted of violation of any provision of this chapter may be sentenced to a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars or imprisonment in jail not to exceed ninety days, or by both such time and imprisonment; provided, however, no person under the age of eighteen may be sentenced to any term of imprisonment. 
(Ord. 628 §4, 1988) 
3.28.050 - Tourism promotional fund. 
A.  There is created a fund to be known as the "tourism promotional fund." All of the revenues derived from the tax imposed by this chapter, less all out-of-pocket costs incurred by the city in the collection or enforcement of this chapter, shall be placed in a such fund. 
B.  All expenditures for such fund shall be used for the purpose of promoting tourism, advertising the community, attracting conferences, conventions and meetings or for other purposes related to attracting tourist and visitor business to the city. 
(Ord. 628 §5, 1988) 
Title 5 - BUSINESS TAXES, LICENSES AND REGULATIONS 
Chapters: 
Chapter 5.04 - BOWLING ALLEYS AND BILLIARD PARLORS 
Sections: 

5.04.010 - Bowling, pinball, pool and billiards. 
    It is unlawful for any person to keep, operate or maintain any business or public place within the city wherein bowling or pinball alleys or pool or billiard tables may be played, without first obtaining a license therefor. 
(Prior code §13.1) 
5.04.020 - Application for license. 
    Application for such a license shall be made to the city clerk, and such application shall show the location of the premises where such games are to be operated and the number and kind of games for which a license is desired. 
(Prior code §13.1-1) 
5.04.030 - License fee. 
A.  The annual license fee for such games shall be as follows: 
1.  Bowling or pinball alleys: forty dollars ($40.00) for the first alley and twenty dollars ($20.00) for each additional alley; two runs to be considered as one alley. 
2.  Pool and billiard tables: fifteen dollars for the first table and ten dollars for each additional table. 
B.  Such fees shall be paid semiannually, one-half on or before January 1st and one-half on or before July 1st of each year. 
(Prior code §13.1-2) 
Chapter 5.06 - ARMED SECURITY GUARDS 
Sections: 

5.06.010 - Definitions. 
    When used in this chapter, the following words and phrases, unless the context indicates a different meaning, shall be interpreted as follows: 
A.  "Security guard" means an individual who, while armed, is self-employed or employed by a single employer for the purpose of watching, guarding or otherwise protecting the persons or property of his or her employer, or to preserve the peace in the conduct of that employer's business. 
B.  "Company" means and includes any entity engaged in the business or occupation of providing one or more security guards. 
C.  "Peace officer" means a sheriff, deputy sheriff, police officer, state patrol officer, coroner, marshal, any officer, guard, or supervisory employee of any institution within the Colorado Department of Institutions or private correctional facility within the city limits of the city of Burlington, a district attorney or the attorney general, a probation or parole officer, an officer or member of the National Guard while acting under the call of the governor in cases of emergency or civil disorder, an agent of the Colorado Bureau of Investigation, a wildlife conservation officer, and security guard employed by the state of Colorado. 
D.  "Misdemeanor crime of domestic violence" means an offense that is a misdemeanor under federal or Colorado law that has, as an element, the use or attempted use of physical force, or the threatened use of a deadly weapon, committed by a current or former spouse, parent, or guardian of the victim, by a person with whom the victim shares a child in common, by a person who is cohabiting with or has cohabited with the victim as a spouse, parent or guardian, or by a person similarly situated to a spouse, parent or guardian of the victim. A person is not considered to have been convicted of such an offense for purposes of this chapter unless: 
1.  The person was represented by counsel or knowingly and intelligently waived the right to counsel in the case; and 
2.  Where prosecution for any such offense for which a person was entitled to a jury trial in the jurisdiction in which the case was tried, either: 
a.  The case was tried by jury, or 
b.  The person knowingly and intelligently waived the right to have the case tried by a jury, by guilty plea, or otherwise. 
    A person is not considered to have been convicted of such an offense for purposes of this chapter if the conviction has been expunged or set aside, or is an offense for which the person has been pardoned or has had civil rights restored (if the law of the applicable jurisdiction provides for the loss of civil rights under such an offense). 
(Ord. 796 §1 (part), 2003) 
5.06.020 - License required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to act as a security guard in the city without first having obtained a license as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 796 §1 (part), 2003) 
5.06.030 - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or regulate activities of: 
A.  Any peace officer while acting or employed in his or her official capacity; 
B.  Any private detective not engaged in providing security guard services. 
(Ord. 796 §1 (part), 2003) 
5.06.040 - Licensing requirements. 
    No individual shall be licensed under the provisions of this chapter unless: 
A.  The applicant is a legal resident of the United States of the age of twenty-one (21) years or older; 
B.  If the applicant is a company, the company shall be organized or authorized to do business by the state of Colorado. 
(Ord. 796 §1 (part), 2003) 
5.06.050 - Licensing eligibility-Mental/physical condition-Prior criminal history. 
    No individual is eligible for a license if the individual's mental or physical condition may jeopardize the health, safety, or welfare of any person, or if the individual, or any member, partner, officer, director, or the holder of more than ten percent (10%) of the ownership of the company, has been convicted of: 
A.  Any crime of murder, rape, aggravated assault, kidnapping, burglary, assault with a deadly weapon, armed robbery, or misdemeanor crime of domestic violence within the ten (10) year period immediately preceding the date of application; 
B.  Any felony sex offense, felony drug offense, or any crime involving infliction of violence upon the person of another within the five-year period immediately preceding the date of application. 
(Ord. 796 §1 (part), 2003) 
5.06.060 - License application. 
A.  Individual License. Any individual desiring to engage in the security guard business in the city shall make application in writing to the chief of police for a license, which application shall set forth: 
1.  The name of the applicant; 
2.  The applicant's place of residence, including previous residences for the three preceding years; 
3.  The applicant's employment for the five preceding years; 
4.  A statement of any felony convictions of the applicant in any state or federal court; 
5.  A statement of any misdemeanor convictions (other than traffic) of the applicant for offenses against any state or local laws; 
6.  The description and identifying number of any weapon to be used in the applicant's employment; 
7.  The names and addresses of three persons of whom inquiry can be made as to the character, standing, and reputation of the applicant; 
8.  Before submission of the application, the applicant shall make arrangements to appear at the police department for photographing and fingerprinting; 
9.  Documentation acceptable to the chief of police that the applicant has been qualified in the previous six months by an approved instructor of the National Rifle Association to use and discharge a weapon. In order to maintain the license issued under this chapter, security guards and companies employing such persons shall be requalified every six months and shall provide documentation to the chief of police of such requalification. Failure to provide the documentation of requalification as provided in this section shall result in revocation of the license issued under this chapter; 
10.  Such further and additional information as the chief of police may require for the investigation of the application and enforcement of this chapter. 
B.  Company License. Any company desiring to engage in the security guard business in the city shall make application in writing to the chief of police for a license, which application shall set forth: 
1.  The name of the company; 
2.  A description of the nature and type of business to be conducted; 
3.  The names and places of residence of the officers, directors or other managers of a company making such application, together with the names and addresses of any persons holding more than ten percent (10%) of the ownership interest of such company; 
4.  The address of the principal office or place of business of the applicant; 
5.  The name of the individual in charge of the applicant; 
6.  The name of the individual in charge of or responsible for the operations of the applicant in the city; 
7.  The names and addresses of not less than three persons of whom inquiry can be made as to the character, standing and reputation of the company making application; 
8.  A duly certified copy of the articles or certificate or incorporation or other document evidencing filing with the Colorado secretary of state and, if a foreign company, the qualification of such company to conduct business in the state of Colorado; 
9.  A statement of the number of persons to be employed as security guards, and for each such security guard, the information requested in paragraphs (1) through (9) in Section 5.06.060(A). Additionally, before submission of the application, each person to be employed as a security guard shall make arrangements to appear at the police department for photographing and fingerprinting; 
10.  A statement of the number of vehicles to be used in the conduct of the business and a description of each vehicle, including vehicle identification numbers and license plate numbers; 
11.  Written acknowledgement by the applicant of the conditions to be expressed in the license, and that the license may be revoked; 
12.  Such further and additional information as the chief of police may require for investigation of the application and enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. 796 §1 (part), 2003) 
5.06.070 - Application fee. 
    The application is accompanied by an application fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) ("application fee"), plus one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) for each individual applicant ("security check fee"). For each company applicant, the application is accompanied by the application fee, together with the security check fee for each individual listed in the application pursuant to Section 5.06.060(B)(9). The application fee and security check fee(s) are nonrefundable and are applied to payment of the license fees provided by this chapter if a license is granted. Security check fees may be waived by the chief of police at his or her sole discretion. 
(Ord. 796 §1 (part), 2003) 
5.06.080 - Investigation. 
    Upon receipt, each application shall be referred to the chief of police who shall immediately institute investigation of the applicant's business and character as he or she deems necessary for the protection of the public, and shall endorse the application within thirty (30) business days after the date of receipt. 
A.  If, as a result of the investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on the application his or her disapproval and his or her reasons for disapproval, and return the application to the city clerk who shall notify the applicant that the application is disapproved and that no license shall be issued. 
B.  If, as a result of the investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on the application his or her approval and return the application to the city clerk. 
(Ord. 796 §1, (part) 2003) 
5.06.090 - License issuance. 
    After the receipt and investigation of an application and upon being satisfied that the individual or company making it is in good repute and intends to carry on an honest and legitimate business, and that all requirements of this chapter have been met, the chief of police shall direct the city clerk to issue the applicant a license authorizing the applicant to carry on a security guard business within the city for the period of one year from and after the date of such license. 
    The city clerk shall not issue any license without the authority and direction of the chief of police as provided in this chapter, nor until all license fees shall have been paid. 
(Ord. 796 §1 (part), 2003) 
5.06.100 - Security guard license-Temporary permit. 
    The chief of police may, after receipt of an application, issue a temporary permit pursuant to the following provisions: 
A.  "Temporary permit" means a permit issued by the chief of police authorizing the applicant to engage in the activity governed by this chapter for a period of not more than thirty (30) days. 
B.  No temporary permit is issued unless: 
1.  An application for a license has been filed. 
2.  The application fee for such license has been paid. 
3.  It appears that the application meets the requirements of this chapter. 
C.  No individual or company is issued a temporary permit under the provisions of this chapter unless his or her mental and physical condition are such that his or her performance as a permittee will not jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of any person. 
D.  The chief of police may regulate, either by general rules or by imposition of conditions in specific cases, the time period, location, and scope of activities allowed by any temporary permit. Such rules, restrictions and conditions shall be determined by the chief of police in the interest of public safety and shall not be limited to the requirements of this chapter. 
E.  A temporary permit does not authorize any individual to carry or use any firearm unless: 
1.  Permission to carry such firearm or weapon is stated in the temporary permit; and 
2.  Such firearm or weapon is registered with the police department as provided by Section 5.06.060(A)(6). 
(Ord. 796 §1 (part), 2003) 
5.06.110 - License renewal. 
    A license, having once been granted under the provisions of this chapter, may be renewed by filing an application for renewal and payment of the license fee, unless such previous license shall have been revoked or the chief of police shall otherwise direct. An application for renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration of the term for which the previous license was granted. 
(Ord. 796 §1 (part), 2003) 
5.06.120 - Licenses not transferable. 
    No license granted under the provisions of this chapter is transferable. This section shall not be construed to prevent or prohibit a change by the licensee in the manager, superintendent or other person in charge of the business, provide a certificate setting forth the change is first filed by the licensee with the chief of police. 
(Ord. 796 §1 (part), 2003) 
5.06.130 - Vehicle marking. 
    The vehicles used in the conduct of any security guard business within the city by the licensee shall not exhibit coloring, marking, or equipment so similar to marked police vehicles or with any lights or sirens in violation of the traffic code of the city, or the laws of the state of Colorado, nor shall any insignia be painted on the sides of the vehicles which are similar to, or which could be confused with, the insignia on police vehicles. 
(Ord. 796 §1 (part), 2003) 
5.06.140 - Registration of firearms. 
A.  No security guard shall carry, use or exhibit any firearm unless it is registered with the police department, and a permit is issued by the chief of police. The permit authorized by this section does not authorize the carrying of a concealed weapon. 
B.  Before issuing any permit, the chief of police shall require the applicant for the permit to demonstrate the need for such permit and proficiency in the use, maintenance and care of such firearm in such a manner as the chief of police shall determine. 
C.  All licensees who are authorized to carry a firearm shall submit the make, model, caliber, and type of weapon, and the serial number of the weapon carried, to the chief of police without delay. 
(Ord. 796 §1 (part), 2003) 
5.06.150 - Identification card. 
A.  In addition to the license, the chief of police shall issue to each licensed security guard an identification card, which shall include the following: 
1.  The type of license and the expiration date thereof; 
2.  The name, address, physical description and picture of the licensee; 
3.  The signature of the licensee, the city clerk and the chief of police; 
4.  That the licensee is authorized to carry a firearm, and information concerning the registered firearm that the licensee is authorized to carry. 
B.  Licensees are required to exhibit their certificates of license and identification card to any peace officer upon demand, and refusal to do so shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 796 §1 (part), 2003) 
5.06.160 - License revocation. 
    Any license or permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked for any of the following causes: 
A.  Material misrepresentation or concealment in the application for a license. 
B.  Violation of any state or municipal law or ordinance relating to use or possession of firearms or weapons. 
C.  Impersonation of a peace officer. 
D.  Conviction of any felony offense under the laws of Colorado or the United States; or the conviction of any criminal offense or city ordinance violation, except traffic violations, committed while acting as a security guard. 
E.  In the case of any company licensee, any intentional direction of or participation in any act which would be grounds for the revocation of a security guard's license. 
F.  Any violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 796 §1 (part), 2003) 
5.06.170 - License suspension. 
    Whenever grounds for revocation of a license exist, as provided in Section 5.06.160, such license may be suspended for a specified term of not more than two years, in which event: 
A.  The license shall not be revoked. 
B.  The applicant shall not act or engage in business in the licensed capacity during the period of suspension. 
C.  The suspended license shall not be renewed while the suspension continues in effect. 
(Ord. 796 §1 (part), 2003) 
5.06.180 - Change in personnel, place of business, or vehicle. 
A.  Whenever a security guard is discharged for any reason, his or her employer shall immediately notify the chief of police of the discharge. 
B.  Whenever a security guard terminates his or her employment or is discharged, his or her employer shall immediately surrender to the chief of police any and all licenses, permits and identification cards issued to such individual with respect to this chapter. In the event the individual surrendering an identification card is reemployed during the remainder of the period of the license, the identification card may be reissued to him or her without charge. 
C.  Any licensee changing its or his or her place of business or residence shall immediately notify the chief of police of the change. A change of the place of business or residence shall not be deemed a transfer of the license or require the payment of any additional fees. 
D.  Whenever a vehicle is acquired by a licensee for use in the conduct of his or her business, the type and description of such vehicle, together with the type and description of any vehicle replaced by it, shall be immediately reported to the chief of police. 
(Ord. 796 §1 (part), 2003) 
5.06.190 - Unlawful acts. 
    In addition to other acts prohibited by this chapter, it shall be unlawful: 
A.  For any licensee to fail to turn over any person arrested by such licensee pursuant to the laws of the state of Colorado immediately to the city's police department or other public law enforcement agency. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as authorizing any licensee to make an arrest not authorized under the laws of the state of Colorado to be made by a private citizen. 
B.  For any licensee who fires a firearm within the city to fail to immediately report such incident to the police department. 
C.  For any licensee to hinder or interfere with any investigation under the jurisdiction of the police department. 
D.  For any licensee to fail to report immediately to the police department all violations of city ordinances or to fail to report to the police department or other public law enforcement agency all violations of state or federal laws which constitute crimes. 
E.  For any licensee, while engaged in his or her course of employment, to wear a uniform or insignia similar to that worn by any peace officer. 
F.  For any licensee under this chapter to represent himself or herself to be a peace officer. 
G.  For any licensee to carry any firearm not registered as provided by Section 5.06.060(A)(6) while in the performance of duties as a security guard. 
H.  For failure of any licensee to surrender his or her identification card after discharge. 
I.  For any person other than a peace officer or member of the armed forces of the United States or Colorado National Guard acting in the lawful discharge of his or her duties or a person who has a valid permit and license pursuant to the Federal Code for such weapon to knowingly possess an illegal weapon. As used in this paragraph, the term "illegal weapon" means a firearm silencer, machine gun, short shotgun, short rifle, ballistic knife, blackjack, gas gun, metallic knuckles, gravity knife or switchblade knife, as these terms are defined in Colorado Revised Statutes Section 18-12-101, or as amended. 
(Ord. 796 §1 (part), 2003) 
5.06.200 - Penalty. 
    It is unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of this chapter. Any person who is convicted of such a violation shall be punished by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each day of a violation. In addition, any person convicted of a violation may have their license revoked by the chief of police. The chief of police shall establish the procedure for revoking the license, and the procedures shall include provisions for a notice and a hearing. 
(Ord. 796 §1 (part), 2003 
Chapter 5.08 - TRANSIENT DEALER'S LICENSE 
Sections: 

5.08.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "transient dealer's license chapter." 
(Ord. 724 (part), 1996: Ord. 627 (part), 1988) 
5.08.020 - Restrictions. 
It is unlawful within the city for any solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants and transient vendors of merchandise or services to enter in or upon the private property of any residence or business within the city at any time without first having been requested or invited to do so by the owner/occupant of the private residence for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares, and merchandise and peddling or attempting to sell same. Licensees shall be allowed to engage in peddling or soliciting activities only between the hours of eight a.m. and eight p.m. 
(Ord. 724 (part), 1996: Ord. 627 (part), 1988) 
5.08.030 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply and form a part of this chapter: 
    "Itinerant merchants" and "transient vendors" mean any person, either as principal or agent, who engages in the business of traveling about, carrying with him for sale and selling manufactured goods, wares, or merchandise. 
    "Peddler," "huckster" or "hawker" means one who travels from place to place carrying his wares with him. A peddler offers for sale, consummates the sale and delivers the goods or services at one and the same time to the ultimate consumer. 
    "Solicitor," "canvasser" or "drummer" means one who also travels from place to place but is distinguished from a peddler in that he does not carry his wares with him. A solicitor generally will carry samples and take orders for future delivery of the merchandise. 
    "Transient or itinerant merchant," "seller" or "vendor" means a person who sells and delivers from a stock in much the same way as a permanent business. However, this type of vendor generally sets up temporary shop in a building, tent or trailer. 
(Ord. 724 (part), 1996: Ord. 627 (part), 1988) 
5.08.040 - License-Required. 
    It is also, in addition to the prohibitions set forth in Section 5.08.020 of this chapter, unlawful for any person to be engaged in the business of the transient dealer, peddler, solicitor, hawker, itinerant, merchant, huckster, canvasser or transient vendor within the city without first obtaining a license for conducting any such business or activity within the city as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 724 (part), 1996: Ord. 627 (part), 1988) 
5.08.050 - License-Application. 
A.  Every person, before transacting any business as a transient dealer or any other activity described in Section 5.08.030 of this chapter, shall first procure from the city clerk a license permitting him to engage in any of the selling or soliciting activities referred to in this chapter. This license shall be referred to as a "transient dealers license." 
B.  This transient dealer's license shall be issued for the calendar year when the application for the transient dealer's license application is submitted to the city clerk. 
C.  Applicants for a transient dealer's license shall file with the city clerk at least three days prior to the date upon which the applicant desires to begin his business, a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the clerk, which shall give the following information: 
1.  Name, date of birth and physical description of the applicant; 
2.  The permanent home address and full local address of the applicant; 
3.  A brief description of the nature of the business and goods shown for sale or for future delivery, including the manufacturer, producer and supplier of such goods; 
4.  If employed, the name, address and phone of the employer together with credentials establishing the exact relationship between the employer and employee; 
5.  Colorado State sales tax number; 
6.  The length of time for which the right to do business is desired; 
7.  Anticipated taxable sales; 
8.  The fingerprints of the applicant; 
9.  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of any crime or misdemeanor and if the applicant has been so convicted, a statement as to the nature of the offense and conviction; 
10.  The particular manner and means by which he intends to sell his goods or take his orders. 
D.  At the time of the filing of the application, a license fee of two hundred fifty dollars shall be paid to the city clerk to cover the cost of investigating the facts stated in the application and administrative costs. 
E.  At the time of filing of the application, the applicant shall provide the city clerk an estimate of his anticipated taxable sales in accordance with the city sales tax ordinance and shall deposit a sum equal to two percent of the amount with the city clerk of the city; provided, however, that the deposit shall not be less than two hundred fifty dollars. Upon verification by the city that the licensee has paid the sales tax due the city, the balance of the deposit, if any, shall be returned to him within ten working days of verification. If the licensee does not seek return of the deposit within ninety days from the expiration of the license, the city clerk may declare the deposit forfeited and notify the licensee thereof at the address shown on the license. 
(Ord. 724 (part), 1996: Ord. 627 (part), 1988) 
5.08.060 - License-Issuance. 
    Upon receipt of such application, an investigation shall be conducted at the direction of the city clerk to determine the applicant's business and moral character. 
A.  If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character and business responsibility are found to be unsatisfactory, the city clerk shall so endorse upon the application and set forth the reasons therefor, and thereupon shall notify the applicant of the disapproval of such application and that no license will be issued thereunder. 
B.  If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character and business responsibility are found satisfactory, the city clerk shall endorse the same on the application and, upon receipt of the necessary fees as set forth in this chapter, shall execute and deliver to the applicant a license to carry on such business within the corporate limits of the city for the calendar year when the application for the transient dealer's license application is submitted to the city clerk. 
C.  The license so issued to a successful applicant shall contain the signature of the city clerk, the type of license issued, the kind of goods to be sold thereunder, the date of issuance, the expiration date thereof, and a photograph of the applicant. 
D.  Any person issued such a license by the city clerk shall be required to have it in his possession while conducting business within the city. Any person shall, when his license is demanded of him by any law enforcement officer, exhibit his license for examination by such officer, and if he neglects or refuses to do so, he shall be subject to the same penalty as if he had no license. 
E.  If the city clerk refuses a transient dealer's license, the applicant may appeal the refusal to the city administrator. 
(Ord. 724 (part), 1996: Ord. 627 (part), 1988) 
5.08.070 - License-Records required. 
    The city clerk shall maintain for a period of two years a record of all licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and all license fees collected, which fees shall be paid into the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. 724 (part), 1996: Ord. 627 (part), 1988) 
5.08.080 - License-Terms-Cancellation. 
A.  Transient dealer's licenses issued under this chapter may be revoked by the city clerk after notice to the licensees and an immediate hearing at which the licensees may be heard, for any of the following causes: 
1.  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements contained in the application for the license; 
2.  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in the course of carrying on his business as a transient dealer; 
3.  Any violation of this chapter; 
4.  Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; 
5.  Conducting the business of a transient dealer in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace, or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
B.  Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at his address as set forth on the application, at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
C.  If the city clerk revokes a transient dealer's license, the applicant may appeal the revocation to the city administrator. 
(Ord. 724 (part), 1996: Ord. 627 (part), 1988) 
5.08.090 - License-One user allowed. 
No more than one individual person shall engage in business or operate under the same transient dealer's license, whether as principal or agent, or as an assistant to any principal or agent. 
(Ord. 724 (part), 1996: Ord. 627 (part), 1988) 
5.08.100 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 860, § 1, adopted June 29, 2009, deleted § 5.08.100, which pertained to selling on streets prohibited and derived from Ord. 724 (part), adopted in 1996; and Ord. 627 (part) adopted in 1988. 
5.08.110 - Special events license. 
The sponsor of any fair, show or exhibition of arts, crafts or similar handiwork shall apply to the city clerk for a special events license at least fourteen days prior to the event. Such application shall include the name and local address of the sponsor, proposed duration, names and addresses of the artisans taking part in the fair, purpose of the event, goods or types of goods to be sold, and a statement as to whether or not the applicant or its agents have ever been convicted of any crime or misdemeanor and the nature thereof. 
A.  At the time of filing of the application, a license fee of fifty dollars shall be paid to the city clerk to cover the cost of investigating the facts stated in the application and administrative costs. 
B.  Prior to conducting any business, each artisan taking part in the fair shall file at least five days prior to the event, a sworn statement in writing on a form furnished by the city clerk, which shall give the following information: 
1.  Name and permanent home/business address; 
2.  Date of birth; 
3.  Colorado State sales tax number; 
4.  Anticipated taxable sales; 
5.  A sales tax deposit shall be made as described in Section 5.08.050(E) of this chapter. 
C.  Artisans covered under the special events license shall be exempt from the license fee, but are subject to the sales tax deposit as described in Section 5.08.050(E). 
D.  Organizations as described in Section 5.08.120 shall be exempt from the special events license fee but are subject to all other requirements under this section. 
E.  The city clerk may impose conditions on the approval of the special events license including, but not limited to, required sanitation and clean-up measures, security measures, or to secure the payment of the sales tax due to the city. 
(Ord. 724 (part), 1996: Ord. 627 (part), 1988) 
5.08.120 - Exemptions. 
    All religious, charitable, nonprofit and philanthropic organizations having the majority of their membership located within Kit Carson County shall be exempted from the license and fees required by this chapter; however, such organizations must register with the city clerk prior to any solicitation activities. 
(Ord. 724(part), 1996: Ord. 627(part), 1988) 
Chapter 5.10 - BUSINESS INCENTIVE PROGRAM 
Sections: 

5.10.010 - Application for business incentives. 
    Any new business intending to locate within the city limits of the city of Burlington, and any existing business that intends to expand may apply to the city for variable business incentives by completing an application for tax incentive consideration available at city hall and delivering it to the Burlington Economic Development Board (BEDB). The BEDB may require supplemental documentation from any applicant, as determined by the BEDB. 
(Ord. 830 §1(part), 2005) 
5.10.020 - Business incentives available. 
    Business incentives available at the discretion of the city council, include the following: 
A.  A percentage reduction in the city's share of real property taxes collected by Kit Carson County, Colorado, if jobs are created or retained; 
B.  A percentage reduction in the city's share of real property taxes collected by Kit Carson County, Colorado based on the amount spent by any business for new construction of a building or expansion of an existing building; 
C.  A percentage reduction in the city's share of personal property taxes collected by Kit Carson County, Colorado, if jobs are created or retained; 
D.  A percentage reduction in the city's share of personal property taxes collected by Kit Carson County, Colorado based on the amount spent by any business for equipment acquisitions; and 
E.  A percentage reduction in the Burlington Public School District No. RE 6J's share of personal property taxes benefiting the Burlington Public School District No. RE 6J collected by Kit Carson County, Colorado, if approved by such school district in conjunction with any application for business incentives. 
(Ord. 830 §1(part), 2005) 
5.10.030 - Limitation on business incentives. 
    The total value of all business incentives granted to an applicant shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total value of the city's share of both real and personal property taxes by Kit Carson County, Colorado that would be payable by the applicant without any business incentives for the first five years of the operation of the applicant's business after the grant of business incentives (maximum grant). 
(Ord. 830 §1(part), 2005) 
5.10.040 - Procedure for granting business incentives. 
    Applications for business incentives will be reviewed by the BEDB based on criteria developed by the BEDB. After review, the BEDB may make recommendations to the city council for the type of business incentives that the applicant qualified for, based on his or her application and the period during which such business incentives may be granted. All such recommendations by the BEDB shall be based solely on tax years. After receipt of the BEDB's recommendations, the city council may review the BEDB's recommendations and by resolution may grant, deny or modify the business incentives recommended by the BEDB to any applicant, and the city council's decision shall be final. 
(Ord. 830 §1(part), 2005) 
5.10.050 - Criteria for granting business incentives. 
    The BEDB shall determine criteria to be used in evaluating applications to determine the type or value of business incentives for which an applicant may qualify. Any criteria used by the BEDB in evaluating an application for business incentives shall be made available to the city council at the time the BEDB makes its recommendations to the city council for the granting of any business incentives. 
(Ord. 830 §1(part), 2005) 
5.10.060 - Adjustment of business incentives granted. 
    The city may adjust any business incentives granted to an applicant, if the applicant: (a) fails to meet the projected employment objectives, (b) exceeds the projected employment objectives, (c) projected construction is less than projected, or (d) projected construction is greater than projected. Adjustments will be made according to the percentage change from the projection for the remaining period of the granted business incentive. 
(Ord. 830 §1(part), 2005) 
5.10.070 - Saturated market. 
    No business incentives will be available to any new or expanding business, if the BEDB determines that the new business or expansion of the existing business might result in saturation of the market in which such new or expanding business intends to or does operate. Such determination shall be made solely in the discretion of the BEDB based on the information available to it at the time any application is made for business incentives. 
(Ord. 830 §1(part), 2005) 
5.10.080 - Procedure to claim exemption. 
    An applicant who has been granted business incentives in accordance with this chapter must first pay its applicable real and/or personal property tax for the tax year during which the business incentive was granted. After payment, the applicant shall deliver a receipt issued by Kit Carson County, Colorado's treasurer to the city, together with a copy of the applicant's tax statement, and the city shall issue a check to the applicant for the amount of the business incentive granted (i.e., if the business incentive granted is a fifty percent (50%) reduction in the city's share of real property taxes for the 2005 tax year, the applicant's receipt showing payment of real property taxes for the 2005 tax year shall result in the city's issuance of a check payable to the applicant in the amount of fifty percent (50%) of the city's share of the applicant's payment made to Kit Carson County, Colorado for such real property taxes). 
(Ord. 830 §1(part), 2005) 
Chapter 5.12 - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 898 , §§ I-XXI, adopted September 29, 2014, set out provisions to be included in the Code but did not specify manner of inclusion. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Ch. 5.12, §§ 5.12.010-5.12.210. 

5.12.010 - Purpose and findings. 
A.  Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the City, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the City. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
B.  Findings. Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult uses on the community presented in hearings and in reports made available to the Council, and on findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., TDA "Kandyland", 529 U.S. 277 (2000), and City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc. 121 S. Ct. 1223 (2001) and on studies in other communities including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier, California; Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Cleveland, Ohio; and Beaumont, Texas; and also on findings from the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group On The Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses, (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), the Council finds: 
1.  Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled by the operators of the establishments. Further, there is presently no mechanism to make the owners of these establishments responsible for the activities that occur on their premises. 
2.  Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses defined in this chapter as adult theatres and cabarets engage in higher incidence of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than employees of other establishments. 
3.  Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, or live sex shows. 
4.  Offering and providing such space encourages such activities, which creates unhealthy conditions. 
5.  Persons frequent certain adult theatres, adult arcades, and other sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the premises of such sexually oriented businesses. 
6.  At least fifty communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, Non A, Non B amebiasis, salmonella infections and shigella infections. 
7.  Colorado reported nine thousand six hundred thirty-nine AIDS cases to CDC, cumulatively, from the beginning of the epidemic through December 2008. Colorado ranked twenty-third highest among the fifty states in cumulative reported AIDS cases. 
8.  In 2012, twenty-one thousand six hundred thirty-one cases of chlamydia and two thousand eight hundred twenty-two cases of gonorrhea were reported to Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. 
9.  The surgeon general of the United States in his report of October 22, 1986, has advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse, exposure to infected blood and blood components, and from an infected mother to her newborn. 
10.  According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts. 
11.  Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities. 
12.  Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view "adult" oriented films. 
13.  The findings noted in the above paragraphs raise substantial governmental concerns. 
14.  Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns. 
15.  A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators of the sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a licensing procedure will place a heretofore nonexistent incentive on the operators to see that the sexually oriented business is run in a manner consistent with the health, safety and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the City. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and control of the premises and activities occurring therein. 
16.  Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting on premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult theatres. 
17.  Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to keep information regarding current employees and certain past employees will help reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from working in such establishments. 
18.  The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented business, where such information is substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases. 
19.  It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases to obtain a limited amount of information regarding certain employees who may engage in the conduct which this chapter is designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to such activity. 
20.  The fact that an applicant for an adult use license has been convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention of this chapter. 
21.  The barring of such individuals from the management of adult uses for a period of years serves as a deterrent to and prevents conduct which leads to the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases. 
22.  The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of the City will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 898 , § I, 9-29-2014) 
5.12.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Adult Arcade" means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated, slug-operated, or for any form of consideration, or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
B.  "Adult Bookstore," "Adult Novelty Store" or "Adult Video Store" means a commercial establishment which, as one of its principal purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
1.  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or 
2.  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities." 
    A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and still be categorized as adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
C.  "Adult Cabaret" means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features: 
1.  Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude; or 
2.  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or 
3.  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
D.  "Adult Motel" means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
1.  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; and has a sign visible from the public right of way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or 
2.  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or 
3.  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
E.  "Adult Motion Picture Theater" means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
F.  "Adult Theater" means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude, or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities." 
G.  "Employee" means a person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent or otherwise and whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of said business. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises. 
H.  "Escort" means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
I.  "Escort Agency" means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
J.  "Establishment" means and includes any of the following: 
1.  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
2.  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
3.  The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
4.  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
K.  "Licensee" means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license; and in the case of an employee, a person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in a sexually oriented business. 
L.  "Nude Model Studio" means any place where a person who appears semi-nude, in a state of nudity, or who displays "specified anatomical areas" and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. Nude Model Studio shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the State of Colorado or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure: 
1.  That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude or semi-nude person is available for viewing; and 
2.  Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
3.  Where no more than one nude or semi-nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
M.  "Nudity" or a "State of Nudity" means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
N.  "Person" means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
O.  "Semi-Nude" or in a "Semi-Nude Condition" means the showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
P.  "Sexual Encounter Center" means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
1.  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
2.  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude. 
Q.  "Sexually Oriented Business" means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center. 
R.  "Specified Anatomical Areas" means: 
1.  The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or 
2.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
S.  "Specified Criminal Activity" means any of the following offenses: 
1.  Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance by a child; possession or distribution of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; engaging in organized criminal activity; sexual assault; molestation of a child; gambling; or distribution of a controlled substance; or any similar offenses to those described above under the criminal or penal code of other states or countries; 
2.  For which: 
a.  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
b.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
c.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any twenty-four-month period. 
3.  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with the applicant. 
T.  "Specified Sexual Activities" means any of the following: 
1.  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; 
2.  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or 
3.  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (a) through (b) above. 
U.  "Substantial Enlargement" of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than twenty-five percent (25%), as the floor areas exist on the date this chapter takes effect. 
V.  "Transfer of Ownership or Control" of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following: 
1.  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
2.  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
3.  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Ord. No. 898 , § II, 9-29-2014) 
5.12.030 - Classification. 
    Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows: 
A.  Adult arcades; 
B.  Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores, or adult video stores; 
C.  Adult cabarets; 
D.  Adult motels; 
E.  Adult motion picture theaters; 
F.  Adult theaters; 
G.  Escort agencies; 
H.  Nude model studios; and 
I.  Sexual encounter centers. 
(Ord. No. 898 , § III, 9-29-2014) 
5.12.040 - License required. 
A.  It is unlawful: 
1.  For any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually oriented business license issued by the City pursuant to this chapter. 
2.  For any person who operates a sexually oriented business to employ a person to work for the sexually oriented business who is not licensed as a sexually oriented business employee by the City pursuant to this chapter. 
3.  For any person to obtain employment with a sexually oriented business without having secured a sexually oriented business employee license pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the City. 
C.  All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter. The application may request and the applicant shall provide such information (including fingerprints) as to enable the City to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in this chapter. 
D.  A person, who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business, must sign the application for a license as an applicant. If a person other than an individual wishes to operate a sexually oriented business, all persons legally responsible for the operations of the sexually oriented business or who have power to control or direct its operations must sign the application for a license as applicant. Such persons include, but are not limited to, general partners, corporate officers, corporate directors, and controlling shareholder(s). Each application must be qualified under the following section and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
E.  The completed application for a sexually oriented business license shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents: 
1.  If the applicant is: 
a.  An individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name and any aliases and submit proof that he/she is eighteen years of age; 
b.  A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any; 
c.  A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of its state of incorporation, the names and capacity of all officers, directors and controlling stockholders, and the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process. 
2.  If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant; he or she must state 1) the sexually oriented business's fictitious name and 2) submit the required registration documents. 
3.  Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has been convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter, and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date, place, and jurisdiction of each. 
4.  Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has had a previous license under this chapter or other similar sexually oriented business ordinances from another city or county denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is licensed under this chapter whose license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation. 
5.  Whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant holds any other licenses under this chapter or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another city or county and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed businesses. 
6.  The single classification of license for which the applicant is filing. 
7.  The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone number(s), if any. 
8.  The applicant's mailing address and residential address. 
9.  A recent photograph of the applicant(s). 
10.  The applicant's driver's license number. 
11.  A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. 
12.  A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within thirty days prior to application by a registered land surveyor depicting the property lines and the structures containing any existing sexually oriented businesses within one thousand feet of the property to be certified; the property lines of any established religious institution/synagogue, school, or public park or recreation area within one thousand feet of the property to be certified. For purposes of this section, a use shall be considered existing or established if it is in existence at the time an application is submitted. 
13.  If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which shall exhibit on the premises, in a viewing room or booth of less than one hundred fifty square feet of floor space, films, video cassettes, other video reproductions, or live entertainment which depict specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, then the applicant shall comply with the application requirements set forth in Section 5.12.140. 
F.  Before any applicant may be issued a sexually oriented business employee license, the applicant shall submit on a form to be provided by the City the following information: 
1.  The applicant's name or any other name (including "stage" names) or aliases used by the individual; 
2.  Age, date, and place of birth; 
3.  Height, weight, hair and eye color; 
4.  Present residence address and telephone number; 
5.  Present business address and telephone number; 
6.  Date, issuing state and number of driver's permit or other identification card information; and 
7.  Proof that the individual is at least eighteen years of age. 
G.  Attached to the application form for a sexually oriented business employee license as provided above, shall be the following: 
1.  A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's face, and the applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the police department. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant. 
2.  A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such applicant previously operated or is seeking to operate, in this or any other county, city, state, or country has ever had a license, permit, or authorization to do business denied, revoked, or suspended, or had any professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked, or suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation, or suspension, state the name, the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction, and describe in full the reason for the denial, revocation, or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation, or suspension shall be attached to the application. 
3.  A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of each. 
(Ord. No. 898 , § IV, 9-29-2014) 
5.12.050 - Issuance of license. 
A.  Upon the filing of said application for a sexually oriented business employee license, the city shall issue a temporary license to said applicant. The application shall then be referred to the appropriate city departments for an investigation to be made on such information as is contained on the application. The application process shall be completed within thirty days from the date the completed application is filed. After the investigation, the City shall issue a license, unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following findings is true: 
1.  The applicant has failed to provide information reasonable necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form; 
2.  The applicant is under the age of eighteen years; 
3.  The applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal activity" as defined in this chapter; 
4.  The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule or regulation, or prohibited by a particular provision of this chapter; or 
5.  The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee license revoked by the City within two years of the date of the current application. If the sexually oriented business employee license is denied, the temporary license previously issued is immediately deemed null and void. Denial, suspension, or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this subsection shall be subject to appeal as set forth in Section 5.12.100. 
B.  A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to annual renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by the City that the applicant has not been convicted of any specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter or committed any act during the existence of the previous license, which would be grounds to deny the initial license application. The renewal of the license shall be subject to the payment of the fee as set forth in Section 5.12.060. 
C.  Within thirty days after receipt of a completed sexually oriented business application, the City shall approve or deny the issuance of a license to an applicant. The City shall approve the issuance of a license to an applicant unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following findings is true: 
1.  An applicant is under eighteen years of age. 
2.  An applicant or a person with whom applicant is residing is overdue in payment to the City of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him/her in relation to any business. 
3.  An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
4.  An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has been denied a license by the City to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding twelve months or whose license to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding twelve months. 
5.  An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has been convicted of a specified criminal activity defined in this chapter. 
6.  The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not been approved by the health department, fire department, and the building official as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. 
7.  The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid. 
8.  An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  The license, if granted shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the sexually oriented business and the classification for which the license is issued pursuant to Section 5.12.030. All licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that they may be easily read at any time. 
E.  The health department, fire department, and the building official shall complete their certification that the premises is in compliance or not in compliance within twenty days of receipt of the application by the City. 
F.  A sexually oriented business license shall issue for only one classification as found in Section 5.12.030. 
(Ord. No. 898 , § V, 9-29-2014) 
5.12.060 - Fees. 
A.  Every application for a sexually oriented business license (whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied by a one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) non-refundable application and investigation fee. 
B.  In addition to the application and investigation fee required above, every sexually oriented business that is granted a license (new or renewal) shall pay to the City an annual non-refundable license fee of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) within thirty days of license issuance or renewal. 
C.  Every application for a sexually oriented business employee license (whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied by an annual one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) non-refundable application, investigation, and license fee. 
D.  All license applications and fees shall be submitted to the City Clerk of the City. 
(Ord. No. 898 , § VI, 9-29-2014) 
5.12.070 - Inspection. 
A.  An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the Police Department, Health Department, Fire Department, Zoning Department, or other City departments or agencies to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
B.  A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or employee commits a misdemeanor if he refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is open for business. 
(Ord. No. 898 , § VII, 9-29-2014) 
5.12.080 - Expiration of license. 
A.  Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in Section 5.12.040. Application for renewal shall be made at least thirty days before the expiration date, and when made less than thirty days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected. 
B.  When the City denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the City finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety days have elapsed since the date denial became final. 
(Ord. No. 898 , § VIII, 9-29-2014) 
5.12.090 - Suspension. 
A.  The City shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty days if it determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has: 
1.  Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter; 
2.  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 898 , § IX, 9-29-2014) 
5.12.100 - Revocation. 
A.  The City shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in Section 5.12.090 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding twelve months. 
B.  The City shall revoke a license if it determines that: 
1.  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process; 
2.  A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
3.  A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; 
4.  A licensee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
5.  Except in the case of an adult motel, a licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sex act to occur in or on the licensed premises; or 
6.  A licensee is delinquent in payment to the City, County, or State for any taxes or fees past due. 
C.  When the City revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one year from the date the revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the City finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. 
D.  After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application, or suspension or revocation of any license, the applicant or licensee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in any court of competent jurisdiction. The administrative action shall be promptly reviewed by the court. 
(Ord. No. 898 , § X, 9-29-2014) 
5.12.110 - Transfer of license. 
    A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. 
(Ord. No. 898 , § XI, 9-29-2014) 
5.12.120 - Location of sexually oriented businesses. 
A.  A person commits a misdemeanor if that person operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business in any zoning district other than C-3, as defined and described in the City of Burlington zoning code. 
B.  A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within one thousand feet of: 
1.  A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities; 
2.  A public or private educational facility including but not limited to child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges, and universities; school includes the school grounds, but does not include facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school; 
3.  A boundary of a residential district as defined in the City of Burlington zoning code; 
4.  A public park or recreational area which has been designated for park or recreational activities including but not limited to a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, wilderness areas, or other similar public land within the city which is under the control, operation, or management of the city park and recreation authorities; 
5.  The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use as defined in the City of Burlington zoning code; 
6.  An entertainment business which is oriented primarily towards children or family entertainment; or 
7.  A licensed premises, licensed pursuant to the alcoholic beverage control regulations of the State. 
C.  A person commits a misdemeanor if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within one thousand feet of another sexually oriented business. 
D.  A person commits a misdemeanor if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business. 
E.  For the purpose of subsection B of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as the part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a use listed in subsection B. Presence of a city, county or other political subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for purposes of calculating and applying the distance requirements of this section. 
F.  For purposes of subsection C of this section, the distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or objects or political boundaries, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. 
G.  Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on July 1, 2014, that is in violation of subsection A through F of this section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed one year, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended, or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within one thousand feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the later established business(es) is/are nonconforming. 
H.  A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a use listed in subsection B of this section within one thousand feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application for a license is submitted after a license has expired or been revoked. 
(Ord. No. 898 , § XII, 9-29-2014) 
5.12.130 - Additional regulations for adult motels. 
A.  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar commercial establishments has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this chapter. 
B.  A person commits a misdemeanor if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented license, he rents or subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or subrents the same sleeping room again. 
C.  For purposes of subsection B of this section, the terms "rent" or "subrent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(Ord. No. 898 , § XIII, 9-29-2014) 
5.12.140 - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films, videos or live entertainment in viewing rooms. 
A.  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, live entertainment, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Upon application for a sexually oriented [business] license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed thirty-two square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The City may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
2.  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
3.  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the City. 
4.  It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at least one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
5.  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
6.  It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the view area specified in subsection A.5 remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials and, at all times, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection A.1 of this section. 
7.  No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any time. 
8.  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five foot-candles as measured at the floor level. 
9.  It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
10.  No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between viewing rooms or booths. 
11.  No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between viewing booths or rooms. 
12.  The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or holes exist. 
13.  The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting. 
14.  The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or other porous material shall be used within forty-eight inches of the floor. 
B.  A person having a duty under subsection 1 through 14 of subsection A above commits a misdemeanor if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. No. 898 , § XIV, 9-29-2014) 
5.12.150 - Additional regulations for escort agencies. 
A.  An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen years. 
B.  A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of eighteen years. 
(Ord. No. 898 , § XV, 9-29-2014) 
5.12.160 - Additional regulations for nude model studios. 
A.  A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen years. 
B.  A person under the age of eighteen years commits an offense if the person appears semi-nude or in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person under eighteen years was in a restroom not open to public view or visible to any other person. 
C.  A person commits an offense if the person appears in a state of nudity, or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right of way. 
D.  A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 898 , § XVI, 9-29-2014) 
5.12.170 - Additional regulations concerning public nudity. 
A.  It shall be a misdemeanor for a person who knowingly and intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appears in a state of nudity or depicts specified sexual activities. 
B.  It shall be a misdemeanor for a person who knowingly or intentionally in a sexually oriented business appears in a semi-nude condition unless the person is an employee who, while semi-nude, shall be at least ten feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least two feet from the floor. 
C.  It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while semi-nude in a sexually oriented business, to solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron or customer or for any patron or customer to pay or give any gratuity to any employee, while said employee is semi-nude in a sexually oriented business. 
D.  It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while semi-nude, to touch a customer or the clothing of a customer. 
(Ord. No. 898 , § XVII, 9-29-2014) 
5.12.180 - Prohibition against children in a sexually oriented business. 
    A person commits a misdemeanor if the person knowingly allows a person under the age of eighteen years on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. No. 898 , § XVIII, 9-29-2014) 
5.12.190 - Hours of operation. 
    No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open at any time between the hours of 1:00 A.M. and 8:00 A.M. on weekdays and Saturdays, and 1:00 A.M. and 12:00 P.M. on Sundays. 
(Ord. No. 898 , § XIX, 9-29-2014) 
5.12.200 - Exemptions. 
A.  It is a defense to prosecution under Section 5.12.170 that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
1.  By a proprietary school, licensed by the State of Colorado; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
2.  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
3.  In a structure: 
a.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and 
b.  Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
c.  Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
(Ord. No. 898 , § XX, 9-29-2014) 
5.12.210 - Injunction. 
    A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid license or in violation of Section 5.12.120 of this chapter is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Such violations shall be punishable by a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) or thirty days imprisonment. Each day a sexually oriented business so operates is a separate offense or violation. 
(Ord. No. 898 , § XXI, 9-29-2014) 
Chapter 5.14 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE BUSINESSES 

5.14.010 - Tasting of alcoholic beverage events. 
    Pursuant to C.R.S. § 12-47-301(10), the city hereby establishes the following procedures and standards for conducting tasting of alcoholic beverage events within licensed facilities: 
A.  Applications for tasting events may only be submitted for consideration by the city council by licensed retail liquor stores and liquor-licensed drugstores on an application provided by the city. The application may be rejected if the application fails to establish that the applicant is able to conduct tasting events without violating the provisions of Colorado Liquor Code or this section or that the event will not create a public safety risk to the neighborhood. 
B.  The applicant shall submit a completed application form with the thirty dollar ($30.00) application fee for tasting events. Dates for events provided on the application may be altered by notifying the city clerk forty eight (48) hours in advance of the additional event. 
C.  Tasting events shall be conducted only by a person who has completed a server training program that meets the standards established by the liquor enforcement division in the department of revenue and who is a retail liquor licensee, or a liquor-licensed drugstore, or an employee of a licensee and only on a licensee's licensed premises. 
D.  The alcohol used in tasting events shall be purchased through a licensed wholesaler, licensed brew pub, or winery licensed pursuant to C.R.S. § 12-47-403 at a cost that is not less than the laid-in cost of such alcohol. 
E.  The size of an individual alcohol sample shall not exceed one ounce of malt or vinous liquor or one-half of one ounce of spirituous liquor. 
F.  Tasting events shall not exceed a total of five hours in duration per day, which need not be consecutive. 
G.  Tasting events shall be conducted only during the operating hours in which the licensee on whose premises the tasting events occur is permitted to sell alcohol beverages, and in no case earlier than 11 a.m. or later than 7:00 p.m. 
H.  The licensee shall prohibit patrons from leaving the licensed premises with an unconsumed sample. 
I.  The licensee shall promptly remove all open and unconsumed alcohol beverage samples from the licensed premise or shall destroy the samples immediately following the completion of the tasting event. 
J.  The licensee shall not serve a person who is under twenty-one (21) years of age or who is visibly intoxicated. 
K.  Alcohol samples shall be in open containers and shall be provided to a patron free of charge. 
L.  No manufacturer of spirituous or vinous liquors shall induce a licensee through free goods of financial or in-kind assistance to favor the manufacturer's products being sampled at a tasting event. The licensee shall bear the financial and all other responsibility for a tasting event. 
(Ord. No. 927 , § 1, 5-30-2017) 
Title 6 - ANIMALS 
Sections: 
Chapter 6.04 - DOGS 
Sections: 

6.04.010 - License-Required. 
It is unlawful for any person who is the owner or custodian of any dog to keep or permit the same to be in the city without obtaining a license therefor. 
(Prior code §17.6) 
6.04.020 - License-Fee. 
The annual license fee shall be five dollars for each dog licensed in the City of Burlington. 
(Prior code §17.6-1) 
(Ord. No. 870, § 1, 5-24-2010) 
6.04.030 - License and tag issuance. 
Upon application for a dog license and payment of the required fee, the city clerk shall issue a dog license which shall be numbered and also a metal tag bearing the same number as the license, which tag shall be securely attached to the collar to be worn at all times by the dog so licensed. 
(Prior code §17.6-2) 
6.04.040 - Impoundment of unlicensed dogs. 
The members of the police department, or other persons designated by the council, shall take up and impound in a suitable place provided therefor, any dog found within the city which does not have attached to its collar a tag showing that the dog is licensed for the current year. 
(Prior code §17.7) 
6.04.050 - Running at large. 
    It is unlawful for any owner, possessor or person who keeps any dog to permit the dog to run at large or to be off or away from the premises of the owner, possessor or keeper thereof, unless on a leash under the control of some responsible person, or within a vehicle or other confinement; and a dog shall be deemed to be running at large when off or away from the premises of the owner, possessor, or keeper thereof, and not under the control of such owner, possessor, or keeper or his agent or some other responsible person, either by leash, cord or chain. 
(Prior code §17.8) 
6.04.060 - Impoundment of dogs running at large. 
    The members of the police department, or any other person designated by the city council, shall apprehend and take into custody any dog found running at large, and impound the same in a suitable place provided for that purpose, and such dog may be impounded without the necessity of filing a complaint. 
(Prior code §17.9) 
6.04.070 - Record of dogs impounded-Notice. 
    The person impounding a dog shall make a record of all dogs impounded for lack of a license tag or for running at large, entering the breed, color and sex of such dog and whether licensed. If licensed, he shall enter the name and address of the owner and the number of the license tag. It shall be the duty of the poundmaster to keep all dogs so impounded for a period of six days. Not later than twenty-four hours after the impounding of any dog the owner thereof shall be notified, or if the owner is unknown, written notice shall be posted at two or more conspicuous places describing the dog and place and time of taking. 
(Prior code §17.10) 
6.04.080 - Claiming of impounded dogs. 
    If the owner of an impounded dog appears within six days from the date his/her dog is impounded and pays the license fee (if unpaid), and all costs and charges incurred by the city for impounding and maintenance of such dog, the dog shall be returned to the owner unless the dog is rabid or infected as hereinafter stated; provided, however, that the claiming of any such dog shall be prima facie evidence of the violation by such owner and shall subject such owner to the penalties provided in this section, and to the penalty for not licensing the dog if it is unlicensed. The following costs and charges shall be paid to the city clerk: for impounding any dog, ten dollars; for keeping any dog, five dollars per day; for giving notice five dollars. 
(Ord. 779 §1, 2001: Prior code §17.11) 
6.04.090 - Disposition of unclaimed dogs. 
    If at the expiration of six days from the date any such dog is impounded, such dog shall not have been redeemed, it shall be disposed of or destroyed. Any dog which appears to be suffering from rabies or affected with mange or any other infectious or dangerous disease shall not be released but shall be forthwith destroyed. 
(Prior code §17.12) 
Chapter 6.08 - MISCELLANEOUS ANIMAL REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

6.08.010 - Keeping of animals prohibited. 
    It is declared to be a nuisance and it is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain within the corporate limits of the city, except within the confines of a duly licensed livestock sales ring or sale barn, any cattle, horses, mules, sheep, goats, swine, rabbits, chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese or other fowl. 
(Ord. 382 §1, 1964: prior code §17.1) 
6.08.015 - Noisy animals prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person who is the owner or custodian of any animal, including dogs and cats, to allow any animal to cause an unnecessary disturbance within any neighborhood in the city by loud, repeated or habitual barking, howling, yelping, baying, mewing, roaring, braying or screeching. Any animal causing such disturbance may be impounded in the same manner as is provided for dogs running at large in Section 6.04.060 of this title. Provisions regarding impounded dogs in Sections 6.04.070, 6.04.080 and 6.04.090 of this title shall also apply to any animal impounded under this section. 
(Ord. 832 §1, 2005) 
6.08.020 - Animals not to run at large. 
    It is unlawful for any person who is the owner or custodian of any cattle, horses, mules, sheep, hogs or goats, to suffer or permit the same to run at large within the city. Any such animals found running at large may be taken up, impounded and disposed of by the police department in the manner provided by state law. 
(Prior code §17.3) 
6.08.030 - Cruelty to animals. 
    It is unlawful for any person having charge or custody of any animal to overwork, torture, fail to provide it with proper food, drink and protection from the weather, cruelly beat, mutilate or kill needlessly, or to transport in a cruel or inhuman manner, the animal, or to cause any of these acts to be done. 
(Prior code §17.5) 
6.08.040 - Dead animals. 
    It is unlawful for any person to bring into or carry through or allow to remain in the city any dead animal or decaying animal matter; and any animal dying within the city shall be removed by the owner or keeper thereof within twenty-four (24) hours after its death. 
(Ord. 497 §8.4, 1973) 
6.08.050 - Prohibition for the feeding of feral animals. 
A.  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to regularly, indiscriminately, and or intentionally place food, water or other forms of sustenance and or shelter for the access of any feral animal(s). 
B.  Definitions. 
1.  Enforcement authority means the City Manager, Chief of Police, Animal Control officer and their respective designees. 
2.  "Feral Animal" means an animal that is wild or was once domesticated that has escaped from a domestic or captive status and is living more or less as a wild animal. A feral animal can be but is not limited to a feline, canine, swine, goat or any other previously domesticated animal. 
C.  [Prohibitions.] It shall be unlawful for any person to regularly, indiscriminately, and or intentionally place food, water or other forms of sustenance and/or shelter for the access of any feral animal(s). 
    The prohibition for feeding feral animals shall include all City of Burlington property and public properties inside the city limits of Burlington. 
D.  [Permits.] At the discretion of the City Manager, the City may grant a 30 day permit and may collect a fee for the feeding of feral animals. 
1.  The permit may be issued for, but not limited to, the capture, relocation, spaying, neutering or rendering aid to feral animals. 
2.  That the location of the feeding is identified for the permit and the permit is posted in the immediate area. 
3.  That food is not left directly on the ground during the use of the permit and that all food and material is removed after the permit expires. 
E.  Fines and Penalties. Any person who is found to have committed a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and who has no prior offenses within a year may be assessed a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00). No more than fifty dollars ($50.00) of the fine may be waived, reduced, suspended or deferred. 
(Ord. No. 889, §§ 1-6, 9-30-2013) 
Chapter 6.12 - DOG AND CAT CARE AND POSSESSION REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

6.12.010 - Humane treatment required. 
    No owner, keeper or harborer of cat(s) and/or dog(s) shall fail to provide such animal with wholesome food and water, shelter and protection from the weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, and with humane care and treatment. No person shall permit or cause any fight or other combat between animals or between animals and humans. 
(Ord. 702 §1, 1995) 
6.12.020 - Dog kennels-Definition-Prohibition. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep, maintain, harbor or possess on the premises of any one household or on the premises of any business establishment, except upon the premises of a licensed veterinary hospital, more than three dogs over three months old, and one litter of pups under three months old, except without the prior written permission of the Burlington city council. Except as provided herein, any person, firm or corporation who shall keep, maintain, harbor or possess on its premises more than three dogs over three months old, and more than one litter of pups under three months old, shall be classified as owning or operating a dog kennel. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to own, operate or maintain a dog kennel within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. 702 §2, 1995) 
6.12.030 - Catteries-Definition-Prohibition. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep, maintain, harbor or possess on the premises of any one household or on the premises of any business establishment, except on the premises of a licensed veterinary hospital, more than three cats over three months old, and one litter of kittens under three months old, except without the prior written permission of the Burlington city council. Except as provided herein, any person, firm or corporation who shall keep, maintain, harbor or possess on its premises more than three cats over three months old, and more than one litter of kittens under three months old, shall be classified as owning or operating a cattery. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to own, operate or maintain a cattery within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. 702 §3, 1995) 
6.12.035 - Impoundment of cats. 
A.  If any person violates Section 6.12.030 of this chapter by keeping, maintaining, harboring or possessing on the premises of one household or any business establishment other than a licensed veterinary hospital of more than three cats over three months old and one litter of kittens under three months old with the written permission of the Burlington city council, those cats in excess of the number permitted by the Burlington city council may be taken by members of the police department or other persons designated by the Burlington city council and impounded in a suitable place provided therefor. 
B.  Any cat impounded as a result of the violation of Section 6.12.030 of this chapter shall be impounded for a period of seventy-two hours. If the owner of the cat is known after any such impounding, the owner shall be notified of the impoundment, and if the owner is unknown, the impoundment shall be posted in two or more conspicuous places describing the cat and the place and time of taking. 
C.  If within seventy-two hours from the date any such cat is impounded, the owner of such cat shall appear and claim the cat, the owner shall pay to the city clerk any and all costs and charges incurred by the city for the impounding and maintenance of such cat, including any and all costs of transportation incurred in transporting the cat to its place of shelter. Upon such payment, but only so long as restoring the cat to the owner does not result in the owner's violation of Section 6.12.030 of this chapter and so long as the cat is not suffering from rabies or any other infectious or dangerous disease, the cat shall be returned to the owner. 
D.  If at the expiration of seventy-two hours from the date any cat is impounded, such cat shall not have been claimed by the owner, or the owner has claimed the cat but such claim would result in the owner's violation of Section 6.12.030 of this chapter, or the cat is suffering from rabies or any other infectious or dangerous disease, the cat shall be disposed of or destroyed. 
(Ord. 755 §§1-4, 1998) 
6.12.040 - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the city police or by an animal control officer appointed by the city manager. 
(Ord. 702 §4, 1995) 
6.12.050 - Violation. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 702 §5, 1995) 
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY 
Chapters: 
Chapter 8.04 - BOARD OF HEALTH 
Sections: 

8.04.010 - Powers and duties. 
    The mayor and council shall constitute the board of health and shall have the power to compel the removal or abatement of any nuisance, source of filth, cause of disease, or unwholesome business or establishment within the city limits or within one mile of the outer boundaries thereof, and shall have the powers and perform such duties as now are, or may hereafter be prescribed by the laws of the state or the ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. 497 §8.1, 1973) 
8.04.020 - Health officer. 
A.  The board of health shall appoint a physician licensed under the laws of the state to practice medicine, as the health officer. He or she shall not receive a regular salary but shall be paid a reasonable sum in return for his services rendered. 
B.  The health officer shall advise the board of health concerning all matters upon which they shall require medical advice. He or she shall, subject to the control of the board of health, enforce all laws of the state and provisions of this code in relation to matters of health and sanitation. He or she shall cause all nuisances to be properly abated and for the purpose of carrying out the requirements of this code he or she shall be permitted at all times to enter into premises, houses, stores, or other buildings or places, to take such steps as he or she shall deem necessary to make an examination thereof, and to cause all dead animals or other nauseous or unwholesome substances or things to be buried, removed or disposed of as he or she may direct. The health officer is also granted authority to do all things which are reasonably necessary to prevent the spread of communicable disease and to enforce compliance with the laws and regulations of the State Department of Public Health. 
(Ord. 497 §8.2, 1973) 
Chapter 8.08 - NUISANCES* 
Sections: 

8.08.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    "Inoperable vehicle" means any automobile, truck or self-propelled vehicle that either: (a) is incapable of moving under its own power, (b) lacks a valid current license plate, or (c) does not comply with the minimum safety requirements of the Colorado Motor Vehicle Law. 
    "Nuisance" means any substance, act, occupation, condition or use of property declared a "nuisance" by this chapter or declared a "nuisance" by the state of Colorado or by any court or agency thereof, or known as a "nuisance" to common law, or which is of such nature and duration as to: 
1.  Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or safety of the public; 
2.  In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of property; 
3.  Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct or render dangerous for passage any street, highway or other public way. 
(Ord. 824 §1(part), 2004; Ord. 662(part), 1992) 
8.08.020 - Nuisances prohibited. 
    No person being the owner, agent or occupant or having under his or her control any building, lot or premises or unimproved real estate within the city limits of the city of Burlington, Colorado, shall maintain or allow any nuisance to be or remain therein. 
(Ord. 662(part), 1992) 
8.08.030 - Authority of city to declare nuisances. 
    Any act, condition, substance, occupation or use of property which substantially meets the criteria of a nuisance as in Section 8.08.010 may be so declared by the city council, and nothing in Section 8.08.040 shall be construed to limit the power of the city to make such declaration. 
(Ord. 662(part), 1992) 
8.08.040 - Nuisances declared. 
A.  Unwholesome Business. Offensive or unwholesome businesses or establishments are prohibited. From and after the effective date of this chapter, it is unlawful for any person of any kind to allow or suffer upon his or her premises or any premises of which he or she is entitled to possess any offensive or unwholesome business or establishment within the city, or within one mile beyond the outer limits of the city as such outer limits are now, or may be hereafter, constituted. Any slaughterhouse or other place for slaughtering animals within this city is therefor declared to be a nuisance. 
B.  Junkyards and Dumping Grounds. All places used or maintained as junkyards or dumping grounds or for the wrecking or disassembling of inoperable vehicles or machinery of any kind or for the storing or leaving of worn out, wrecked or inoperable vehicles, trailers, boats and house trailers or machinery of any kind, or of any parts thereof, or for the storing or leaving of any machinery or equipment used by contractors or builders or by other persons, which places essentially interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by others, are declared to be nuisances. 
C.  Discharge of Noxious Liquids. The discharge out of or from any house or place of foul or noxious liquid or substance of any kind whatsoever into or upon any adjacent ground or lot or into any street, alley or public place in the city is declared a nuisance. 
D.  Stale Matter. The accumulation of any stale, putrid or stinking fat or grease or other matter is declared to be a nuisance. 
E.  Sewer Inlet. Any article or material accumulated in any sewer, sewer inlet or privy vault that has a sewer connection, which causes or might cause such sewer. Sewer inlet or privy vault to become noxious or offensive to others or injurious to public health, is declared to be a nuisance. 
F.  Dead Animals-Removal. The body of any animal which has died and which is undisposed of after twenty-four (24) hours after death is declared to be a nuisance. 
G.  Stagnant Ponds. Any cellar, vault, drainer, sewer, pond of water or other place in this city that shall be noxious or offensive to others, or injurious to public health, through an accumulation or deposit of noxious, offensive or foul water or other substances shall be deemed a nuisance. This applies in all cases for which no other specific provisions are made in this chapter or any other ordinance of the city. 
H.  Open Wells, Cisterns or Excavations. It is declared that excavations exceeding five feet in depth, cisterns and wells or an excavation used for storage of water are public nuisances, unless the same are adequately covered with a locked lid or other covering weighing at least sixty (60) pounds or are securely fenced with a solid fence to a height of at least five feet, and it is unlawful for any person to permit such nuisance to remain on premises owned or occupied by him or her. Any well or cistern on any property within the limits of the city of Burlington, whenever a chemical analysis or other proper test of the location of the same shows that the water shall be noxious or offensive to others, shall be deemed a nuisance. Any abandoned or unused well or cistern shall be filled with dirt and covered. 
I.  Reserved. 
J.  Handbills, Posters and Placards. Any handbill, poster, placard or painted or printed matter which shall be stuck, posted or pasted upon any public or private house, store or other building or upon any fence, power pole, telephone pole or other structure without the permission of the owner, agent or occupant of the house shall be deemed a nuisance. 
K.  Unused Appliances. Any unused refrigerator, washer, dryer, freezer or other appliance within any accessible yard or lot or carport or residential garage within the limits of the city of Burlington without the door of the same being removed is declared a nuisance. 
L.  Vacant Buildings. It is declared a nuisance for the owner of any vacant building to fail to replace any broken window or fail to secure any other means of entry into such building within seventy-two (72) hours after notice is given by the city. 
M.  Transporting of Garbage or Manure. The transport of manure, garbage, swill or offal upon any street in this city in a vehicle which is not fitted with a substantially tight enclosed box thereon allowing no portion of such filth to be scattered or thrown into such street is declared a nuisance. 
N.  Removal of Inoperable Vehicles. Any inoperable vehicle parked on any lot or piece of ground in the city of Burlington not removed from city limits within thirty (30) days after: (1) the expiration of its registration as determined by examining the license plate on the exterior of the vehicle, or (2) the failure to display a state license plate, is a nuisance. 
O.  Barking, Yelping, Howling or Mewing by Dogs or Cats. Any dog or cat which, by loud or frequent or habitual barking, yelping, howling or mewing, causes a serious annoyance to the neighborhood or to persons passing to and for upon the streets or sidewalks is declared a nuisance. 
P.  Accumulation of Garbage, Refuse, Etc. Any accumulation of refuse, trash or other waste or discarded material, including discarded building and construction materials, that endangers the public health and safety is declared to be a nuisance. 
Q.  Smoke and Odor from Burning. Any smoke and odor resulting from the burning of refuse, trash or other materials including, but not limited to, those materials outlined in subsection P of this section, is declared to be a nuisance. 
R.  Accumulation of Manure. The accumulation of manure or other animal waste in quantities which endanger or tend to endanger the public health and safety is declared a nuisance. The provisions does not apply to a light spread of manure upon lawns or gardens or which is plowed under the surface of the ground. 
S.  Excessive Fumes, Smoke and Noise from Diesel Engines. Any excessive fumes, smoke, and/or noise from diesel engines interfering with the peace and quiet of residential neighborhoods is declared to be a nuisance. 
(Ord. 824 §1(part), 2004; Ord. 662(part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. 860, § 2, 6-29-09) 
8.08.050 - Complaints. 
Complaints of nuisances may be made to the city administrator. Whenever possible, any complaint shall state the nature of such nuisance, the location, including street address, name of the owner, agent or occupant of the building or lot, if known, and the name and address of the complainant. 
(Ord. 662(part), 1992) 
8.08.060 - Inspections-Right of entry-Emergencies. 
A.  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever an authorized representative of the city shall have reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a nuisance hereunder, the city administrator may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed on him/her. If such building or premises is occupied, such person shall first present proper credentials and demand entry; and if such building or premises is unoccupied, he/she shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or occupant or other person or persons having charge or control of the building or premises and, upon locating said owner, occupant or other person or persons, shall present proper credentials and demand entry. If entry is refused, such person shall give the owner or occupant, or, if said owner or occupant cannot be located after a reasonable effort, he shall leave at the building or premises, a twenty-four hours written notice of intention to inspect. The notice given to the owner or occupant or left on the premises as aforesaid shall state that the property owner has the right to refuse entry and that in the event that such entry is refused, inspection may be made only upon issuance of a search warrant by the municipal judge of the city of Burlington or a judge of any other court having jurisdiction. 
B.  After the expiration of said twenty-four-hour period from the giving or leaving of notice, the city administrator, or his/her authorized representative, may appear before the municipal judge of the municipal court of the city of Burlington and, upon a showing of probable cause, shall obtain a search warrant entitling him/her to enter said building or go upon such premises. Upon presentation of said search warrant and proper credentials, or possession of the same in the case of any unoccupied building or premises, said person may enter into said building or go upon said premises using such reasonable force as may be necessary to gain entry. 
C.  For the purposes of subsection (B) of this section, a determination of probable cause will be based upon reasonableness, and if a valid public interest justifies the intrusion contemplated, then there is probable cause to issue a search warrant. The person applying for such warrant shall not be required to demonstrate specific knowledge of the condition of the particular structure or premises in issue in order to obtain a search warrant. It is unlawful for any owner or occupant of said building or premises to resist reasonable force used by any authorized agent acting pursuant to this section. 
D.  Whenever an emergency situation exists in relation to the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter, the city administrator, or his/her authorized representative, upon a presentation of proper credentials or identification in the case of an occupied building or premises, or possession of said credentials in the case of an unoccupied building or premises, may enter into any building or go upon any premises within the jurisdiction of the city of Burlington. In said emergency situation, such person or his/her authorized representative may use such reasonable force as may be necessary to gain entry into said building or upon said premises. 
E.  For purposes of subsection (D) of this section, an emergency situation shall include but not be limited to any situation where there is imminent danger of loss of life, limb and/or property. It is unlawful for any owner or occupant of said building or premises to resist reasonable force used by the authorized official acting pursuant to this subsection. 
(Ord. 662(part), 1992) 
8.08.070 - Abatement of nuisances-Failure to comply. 
A.  Each and every nuisance declared or defined by any ordinance of the city or otherwise is prohibited, and the city administrator is authorized, in his/her discretion, to cause the same to be summarily abated in such manner as he/she may direct, subject to the limitations herein provided. If any nuisance is found to exist upon public property, it shall be the duty of the city to abate such nuisance immediately. 
B.  Upon authorization of the city administrator, if any nuisance found to exist shall cause such imminent danger to the life, limb, property or health as to require immediate abatement, any such nuisance may be summarily abated by action of the city administrator. 
C.  In the case of any nuisance not requiring summary abatement, it shall be the duty of the city administrator to cause notice to be served upon the person responsible for any nuisance which may be found, requiring said person to abate the same in a reasonable time and in such reasonable manner as prescribed, and such notice may be given or served by any officer directed or deputized to give or make the same. In causing notice to be served, the city administrator may authorize city officials, inspectors or any other appropriate city employee to issue notice of abatement. The reasonable time for abatement shall not exceed fourteen days unless it appears from the facts and circumstances that compliance could not reasonably be made within fourteen days or that a good-faith attempt at compliance is being made. Such notice shall be in writing, signed by the official issuing the same and shall be personally served upon the owner or occupant of the premises upon which said nuisance exists or, if not occupied, then by posting the same prominently at some place on the premises upon which said nuisance exists. If service is by posting as aforesaid, then a copy of said notice shall also be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of such property as shown upon the tax rolls of Kit Carson County, Colorado, at the address of such owner as therein shown. 
D.  If, after notification, a nuisance is not voluntarily abated, the following procedures shall apply: 
1.  If the person notified in accordance with subsection (C) of this section shall neglect or refuse to comply with the requirements of said notice to abate the nuisance within the time specified, such person shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter, and the city administrator, or his/her authorized agent, may proceed at once, upon the expiration of the time specified in such notice, to commence appropriate legal action to cause such nuisance to be abated; provided, that if the owner is unknown or cannot be found, the city administrator may proceed to abate such nuisance after notice has been posted for the period equal to the time specified to abate such nuisance. In either case, the expense of such abatement shall be collected form the owner of the property upon which said nuisance existed. 
2.  When any owner has responsibility for a nuisance and such nuisance shall exist or be found and said owner fails to abate the same after the giving of such notice as provided for in this chapter, within the time limited therein, or as extended, then the city attorney is authorized to institute proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction to obtain a judicial determination that such nuisance exists, to abate such nuisance, to enjoin the same and for such other and further relief as may seem necessary or proper, including but not limited to the costs and expenses of abatement. 
3.  Upon a judicial determination that a nuisance exists, the chief of police may be authorized to abate said nuisance or cause the same to be abated, employing such forces and persons as may be necessary to abate said nuisance or cause the same to be abated, including the employees of the city or by contract or otherwise. All other city officials and employees are authorized and directed to render such assistance to the chief of police as may be required for the abatement of such nuisance and in connection with the enforcement thereof. 
4.  Any officer or employee of the city of Burlington who shall be authorized herein to abate any nuisance specified in this chapter shall have authority to engage the necessary assistance and incur the necessary expenses thereof. In any case where a nuisance is to be abated by the city, it shall be the duty of said authorized person to employ such assistance and adopt such means as may be necessary to effect abatement of said nuisance. It shall also be the duty of the city or any of its representatives to proceed in all abatement. 
(Ord. 662(part), 1992) 
8.08.080 - Responsibility for costs of abatement-Collection-Failure to pay. 
A.  The person or persons responsible for any nuisances within the city shall be liable for and pay and bear all costs and expenses of the abatement of said nuisance, which costs and expenses may be collected by the city in any action at law, referred for collection by the city attorney in his discretion or collected in connection with an action to abate a nuisance or assessed against the property as hereinafter provided. 
B.  The notice required by this chapter shall, in addition to other requirements herein, state that, if the nuisance is not abated within the time stated in the notice, the costs of such abatement may be assessed as a lien against the property (describing the same) pursuant to the terms of this chapter, referring to this chapter together with an additional five percent assessment for inspection and incidental costs and an additional ten percent assessment for costs of collection, and collected in the same manner as real estate taxes against the property. If the owner of the property is not personally served with a copy of such notice, then a true copy of such notice shall be mailed by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of such property as shown upon the tax rolls of Kit Carson County, Colorado, at the address of such owner as therein shown. 
C.  If after the expiration of the period of time provided for in said notice, or as extended, costs or expenses are incurred by or on behalf of the town in the abatement, or in connection with the abatement of the nuisance, and said costs are not otherwise collected, then the city treasurer may thereafter certify to the city clerk the legal description of the property upon which such work was done, together with the name of the owner thereof as shown by the tax rolls of Kit Carson County, Colorado, together with a statement of the work performed, the date of performance and the costs thereof. 
D.  Upon receipt of such a statement from the city treasurer, the city clerk shall mail a notice to the owner of said premises as shown by said tax roll, at the address shown upon the tax rolls, by first-class mail, postage prepaid, notifying such owner that work has been performed pursuant to this chapter, stating the date of performance of the work, the nature of the work and demanding payment of the costs thereof (as certified by the city treasurer), together with a five percent assessment for inspection and other incidental costs in connection therewith. Such notice shall state that if said amount is not paid within thirty days after mailing the notice, it shall become an assessment on and a lien against the property of said owner, describing the same, and be certified as an assessment against such property, together with the ten percent assessment for costs of collection, and the above-mentioned assessments will be collected in the same manner as a real estate tax upon the property. 
E.  If the clerk shall not receive payment within the period of thirty days following the mailing of such notice, the clerk shall inform the city council of such fact, and the council shall thereupon enact an ordinance assessing the whole cost of such work, including a charge of five percent of said whole cost for inspection and other incidental costs in connection therewith upon the lots and tracts of land upon which the nuisance was abated, together with a charge of ten percent of said whole costs of collection. 
F.  Following the passage of such ordinance, the clerk shall certify the same to the county treasurer, who shall collect the assessment, including the ten percent charge for costs of collection, in the same manner as other taxes are collected. 
G.  Each such assessment shall be a lien against each lot or tract of land until paid and shall have priority over other liens except general taxes and prior special assessments. 
(Ord. 662(part), 1992) 
8.08.090 - Remedies cumulative and nonexclusive. 
A.  No remedy provided herein shall be exclusive, but the same shall be cumulative, and the taking of any action hereunder, including charge or conviction of violation of this chapter in the municipal court of the city of Burlington, shall not preclude or prevent the taking of other action hereunder to abate or enjoin any nuisance found to exist. 
B.  Whenever a nuisance exists, no remedy provided for herein shall be exclusive of any other charge or action, and, when applicable, the abatement provisions of this chapter shall serve as and constitute a concurrent remedy over and above any charge or conviction of any municipal offense or any other provision of law. Any application of this chapter that is in the nature of a civil action shall not prevent the commencement or application of any other charges brought under the municipal ordinances or any other provision of law. 
(Ord. 662(part), 1992) 
8.08.100 - Violations and penalties. 
A.  Whenever in any section of this chapter, the doing of any act is required, prohibited or declared to be unlawful and no definite fine or penalty is provided for a violation thereof, any person, firm or corporation who shall be convicted of a violation of any such section shall be subject to such penalties as are provided in Chapter 1.16 of the Burlington Municipal Code. 
B.  Any person who shall have possession or control of any private ground or premises, whether he is owner thereof or not, in or upon which any such nuisance shall exist or may be found, whether such nuisance has been heretofore or shall be hereafter created, shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense, as the author of a nuisance, for every period of twenty-four hours continuance of such nuisance after due notice given to abate the same. 
(Ord. 662(part), 1992) 
Chapter 8.12 - GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND WEEDS 
Sections: 

8.12.010 - Garbage, rubbish defined. 
    As used in this chapter, "rubbish" includes all inorganic refuse matter such as trash, paper, tin cans, glass, ashes, sweepings, coffee grounds, etc. The word "garbage" includes only organic refuse resulting from the preparation of food, and decayed and spoiled food from any source, excluding coffee grounds. 
(Prior code §15.1) 
8.12.020 - Littering prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to throw, place or deposit in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public place within the city, or upon any private property therein without the permission of the owner, any bottles, broken glass, nails, tacks, wire or cans, rubbish, or any other destructive or injurious materials, or any lighted or burning substance. 
(Prior code §15.2) 
8.12.030 - Burning rubbish and garbage prohibited. 
    It is unlawful to burn outdoors any rubbish, garbage or any other combustible matter, whether in ashpits or other receptacles or on the ground, or in any other manner whatsoever, in the area consisting of Blocks 9, 10, 21, 22, 29, 30, 41 or 42, New Burlington, according to the recorded plat thereof. Such area is hereafter referred to as the "restricted area." 
(Prior code §15.3) 
8.12.040 - Garbage and rubbish kept separately. 
    Rubbish shall be kept separate from and not commingled with garbage and shall be placed in containers sufficient to hold the same without spilling or scattering until removed. In the restricted area, combustible matter in rubbish containers shall not be burned, but in other areas may be burned if desired. Rubbish containers shall be receptacles of such type and size as can be readily lifted and dumped into a truck, and rubbish shall not be deposited in ashpits or receptacles of such nature that it will require shoveling to remove the same therefrom. 
(Prior code §15.4) 
8.12.050 - Garbage cans required. 
    Garbage shall be deposited in metal cans sufficient to receive that amount which may accumulate between the times of collection, but no garbage can shall have a capacity exceeding fifteen gallons, and each can shall be provided with bail or handles and a tight fitting cover. Rubbish or substances other than garbage shall not be deposited in garbage cans, and garbage shall not be wrapped. All surplus water shall be drained from garbage before it is placed in cans. 
(Prior code §15.5) 
8.12.060 - Removal of garbage and rubbish. 
A.  Rubbish containers and garbage cans shall be placed in the rear of lots and buildings, as close to alleys as is feasible, and shall be accessible to collectors at all reasonable times. 
B.  Rubbish may be removed and disposed of by the owner or occupant of the property upon which it accumulates or by the regular employees of such owner or occupant, but otherwise shall be collected and removed only by employees of the city or persons under contract with such city, and such owner or occupant of property shall not contract with or hire any third person regularly to collect and remove rubbish from his property. No person except the owner or occupant of property on which it accumulates, or employees of the city, or persons under contract with the city, shall make regular and periodical collections of rubbish in the city. 
C.  Garbage shall be collected and removed only by employees of the city or persons under contract with the city, and no other persons shall collect garbage in the city or convey the same through any street, alley or public way within the city. 
(Prior code §15.6) 
8.12.070 - Exclusive contracts permitted. 
    The city council may enter into exclusive contracts or agreements with any person to collect and remove rubbish and/or garbage in the city or any part thereof, and the council may make provision for such collection and removal by its own employees or agents. 
(Prior code §15.7) 
8.12.080 - Collection dates. 
    Rubbish and garbage shall be collected and removed from each and every property and premises in the city at such regular intervals as the council may from time to time prescribe by resolution, and the number of collections may be varied according to the character of the property or business involved and the amount of rubbish or garbage accumulating on the premises. Owners and occupants of property in the city shall be notified in such manner as the council may direct, of any schedule of collections or any revision thereof, and such schedule shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk and open to public inspection. At least twice a year, and at such times as the council may fix and determine, and in accordance with such rules and regulations as the council may establish, the city, acting by and through its employees or persons under contract with it, shall make a general collection and clean-up of tree branches and cuttings and other types of trash and waste matter not included in the definition of rubbish set out in Section 8.12.010. There shall be no additional charge for this service. 
(Prior code §15.8) 
8.12.090 - New construction excluded. 
    The collection and removal of rubbish herein provided for shall not include the collection and removal of rubbish or waste material arising out of or developed from new construction or the remodeling of any premises, and the removal and disposal of such rubbish and waste material shall be the responsibility of the owner of the premises or of the contractor engaged in such new construction or remodeling. 
(Prior code §15.9) 
8.12.100 - Collection charges. 
    The charges for the collection and removal of rubbish and garbage by employees of the city or by persons under contract of the city shall be fixed by resolution of the council and the council shall set up a schedule of monthly rates to be charged and paid by each property and business in the city. Such schedule shall be graduated according to the amount of garbage and rubbish to be disposed from the premises of each such property or business, and such schedule of rates may be revised from time to time by the city council. Owners or occupants of property shall be duly notified of any adoption or revision of rates in such manner as the council may direct and such schedule shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk and open to public inspection. Charges for the removal of rubbish and garbage shall be payable, billed and collected in the same manner and upon the same terms as, and together with, charges for light and water collected by the city. 
(Ord. 454 §1, 1969: prior code §15.10) 
8.12.110 - Unlawful acts. 
    It is unlawful for any person within the city: 
A.  To fail, refuse or neglect to provide for the collection, removal and disposal of rubbish and garbage which may be accumulated upon any property owned, occupied or controlled by such manner, in the manner herein provided. 
B.  To burn rubbish, garbage or any other combustible matter in the restricted area. 
C.  To deposit any garbage in the city dump. 
(Prior code §15.11) 
8.12.120 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of Sections 8.12.130 through 8.12.180, the following definitions shall apply: 
A.  "Brush" means volunteer growth of bushes, shrubs or trees which are out of place at the location where growing. The term shall also include all cuttings from bushes, shrubs or trees. 
B.  "Property" means all lots and tracts of land within the city including the alleys behind, and the sidewalk areas in front of such lot or tract. 
C.  "Rubbish" means any foreign material out of place on such property, including but not limited to bottles, cans, grass cuttings, paper and junk materials of all kinds. 
D.  "Weeds" means any unsightly, useless, troublesome or injurious herbaceous plant which is out of place in the location where it is growing. Weeds shall also include all rank vegetable growth which exhales unpleasant and noxious odors. Weeds shall also include any high and/or rank vegetable growth that may conceal filthy deposits. 
(Ord. 600 §15.12.1, 1984) 
8.12.130 - Removal required-Exceptions. 
    It is the duty of every person owning vacant or improved property including easements and drainageways within the city to keep cut to within ten inches of the ground all weeds and to keep such property free from brush and rubbish of all kinds. However, this chapter shall not apply to vegetable gardens, flower gardens and shrubbery plots. Wheat, barley, oats, rye and similar agricultural commodities also shall be exempted. 
(Ord. 600 §15.12.2, 1984) 
8.12.140 - Notice to remove. 
    Whenever the city determines that the provisions of Section 8.12.130 have not been complied with, the city may notify the owner or owners of such property directing the removal of such weeds, brush or rubbish. Such notice shall be issued by the city clerk and sent by registered or certified mail to the last known address of the record owner or owners of the property. Such notice shall direct the removal of such weeds, brush or rubbish within fifteen days from the date of the notice. Such notice shall further advise the owner or owners that, in the event such weeds, brush or rubbish are not removed within the stated time, the city shall cause the work to be done at the expense of the owner or owners and that said costs, if not promptly paid, shall constitute a lien against the property. If there is no last known address of the owner or if the notice mailed to the owner is returned without delivery, the city shall post a similar notice in a conspicuous spot on the premises for at least ten days. 
(Ord. 600 §15.12.3, 1984) 
8.12.150 - Failure to remove. 
    If the owner or owners fail to remove the weeds, brush or rubbish within the time and in the manner prescribed herein, the city administrator may have the weeds, brush or rubbish removed from the property. 
(Ord. 600 §15.12.4, 1984) 
8.12.160 - Assessment of costs-Notice. 
    The costs of removing the weeds, brush or rubbish from the property shall be chargeable against the delinquent owner or owners jointly and severally and against the property. In addition to the actual out-of-pocket costs incurred by the city, the costs shall include an additional amount equal to five percent or twenty-five dollars, whichever is more, of the out-of-pocket costs to cover inspection and other incidental costs to the city. The city may either remove the weeds, brush or rubbish or hire an independent contractor for the purpose. 
(Ord. 600 §15.12.5, 1984) 
8.12.170 - Establishment of lien. 
    The cost of removing the weeds, brush or rubbish from the property (including the five percent or twenty-five dollars, whichever is more, additional amount) together with a ten percent penalty thereon to defray the cost of collection, shall be reported to the county treasurer, to be placed by her upon the tax list for the current year and to be collected in the same manner as other taxes or assessments are collected. The laws of the state for the assessment and collection of general taxes, including the laws for the sale of property for taxes and the redemption thereof, shall apply to and have full effect for the collection of all such assessment. 
(Ord. 600 §15.12.6, 1984) 
8.12.180 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person owning property within the city who, within fifteen days after notice directing such person to remove weeds, brush or rubbish, fails to do so, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable as set forth in Section 1.16.020. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to waive the provisions for assessment of costs and establishment and enforcement of liens upon the property. 
(Ord. 624 §9(part), 1987: Ord. 600 §15.12.7, 1984) 
Chapter 8.16 - TREES AND SHRUBS 
Sections: 

8.16.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health of the community forest and thereby the health and safety of the public by promoting good arboriculture practices. 
(Ord. 654 §1, 1991) 
8.16.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the words set out in this section should have the following meanings: 
    "Firewood hazard" is defined as cut wood intended for burning in a stove or fireplace that is stored in a detrimental manner or condition with bark still on (in the case of elm wood), or so that weeds cannot be kept mowed and rodents or other pests cannot be controlled. 
    "Hazard trees" are defined as trees, shrubs and all other woody vegetation on public and private property that pose a threat to public safety by their condition or location. 
    "Park trees" are defined as trees, shrubs and all other woody vegetation in public parks and all property owned by the city. 
    "Street trees" are defined as trees, shrubs and all other woody vegetation on land located within city easements. 
(Ord. 654 §2, 1991) 
8.16.030 - Establishment of a city tree board. 
    The Burlington tree board will consist of seven members appointed by the city council. Members will serve without compensation. 
    The Burlington tree board will appoint officers annually and will operate according to standard meeting procedures. Members will be appointed for three year terms and can be re-appointed. The term of two of the initial members will be for one year; the term of two of the initial members will be for two years; and the term of three of the initial members be for three years. 
(Ord. 654 §3, 1991) 
8.16.040 - Responsibilities of the tree board. 
    The Burlington tree board will have the responsibility of educating the community about the advantages of growing trees. It will provide the community with information on viable species for the area, how to plant the trees and how to maintain them. The board will also prepare and update a community forestry program and organize annual tree planting and Arbor Day projects. 
    The Burlington tree board, when requested by the city council, will consider, investigate, report and recommend upon any special matter coming within the scope of its responsibility. 
(Ord. 654 §4, 1991) 
8.16.050 - Appointment and duties of the city arborist. 
    The city administrator shall be considered the city arborist and have authority to determine the course of action to be taken in dealing with hazard trees and other problems concerning trees in the city. The tree board will have authority to perform any duties regulating the planning, planting, maintenance and removal of trees and shrubs on city property and within city easements. 
(Ord. 654 §5, 1991) 
8.16.060 - Public tree care. 
    The city of Burlington shall have the right to plant, spray, prune, maintain and remove trees and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. 
    The Burlington tree board may remove or cause to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe conditions or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, utility lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or disease. 
(Ord. 654 §6, 1991) 
8.16.070 - Dead or diseased tree removal on private property. 
    The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within the city limits when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitutes a potential threat to other trees within the city. The tree board will notify in writing the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by said owners at their own expense within one hundred twenty days after the date of the notification. In the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the city shall have the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of removal on the owner's utility bill. In the case of an absentee owner that does not receive a utility bill, the cost of the removal shall be charged on the owner's property tax notice. 
(Ord. 654 §7, 1991) 
8.16.080 - Tree topping. 
    It is unlawful as a normal practice for any person or firm to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes may be exempted from the provisions of this chapter at the discretion of the tree board. 
(Ord. 654 §8, 1991) 
8.16.090 - Removal of stumps. 
    All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground. 
(Ord. 654 §9, 1991) 
8.16.100 - Interference with city tree board. 
    It is unlawful for any person to interfere with the tree board or any of its agents, while engaging in the planting, spraying, maintaining and removing of any street trees, park trees or trees on private property. 
(Ord. 654 §10, 1991) 
8.16.110 - Review by the city council. 
    The city council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and decisions of the Burlington tree board. Any person may appeal from any ruling or order of the tree board to the city council who may hear the matter and make final decisions. 
(Ord. 654 §11, 1991) 
Chapter 8.18 - SALE AND USE OF FIREWORKS 
Sections: 

8.18.010 - Sale and use of fireworks. 
    It is unlawful for any person to sell, possess or discharge any fireworks other than permissible fireworks anywhere within the city limits. Persons under the age of sixteen (16) years may only possess and discharge permissible fireworks if such person is under adult supervision. 
(Ord. 807 §1 (part), 2002) 
8.18.020 - Definitions. 
    The terms used in this chapter shall be defined as set forth in this section: 
A.  "Fireworks" means and includes, but is not limited to, any article, device or substance prepared for the primary purpose of producing a visual or auditory sensation by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation that meets the description of fireworks as set forth in the U.S. Department of Transportation Hazardous Materials Regulations, Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations, Parts 173.88 and 173.100. "Fireworks" does not include those exceptions set forth in Colorado Revised Statutes Section 12-28-101(3)(b). 
B.  "Permissible fireworks" shall have the same meaning as they are given in Colorado Revised Statutes Section 12-28-101(8). 
(Ord. 807 §1 (part), 2002) 
8.18.030 - Ban when conditions warrant. 
    The city may prohibit and ban all sale and use of fireworks, including permissible fireworks, at any time that conditions warrant such a ban for the protection and safety of city residents and other persons as well as property by adopting a resolution setting forth the reasons for the ban and the time period during which the ban shall remain in effect, which resolution shall be published in the same manner as an ordinance. 
(Ord. 807 §1 (part), 2002) 
8.18.040 - Penalty. 
    The penalty for violation of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than one dollar nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00), or imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both in accordance with the general penalty provisions of the Burlington Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 807 §1 (part), 2002) 
Title 9 - CRIMES, PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE 
Chapters: 
Chapter 9.01 - OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS 
Sections: 

9.01.010 - Assault and battery. 
    No person shall knowingly kick, strike, shove, beat, or in any other manner come into contact with the person of another in a violent or angry manner or cause bodily injury to the person so contacted. 
(Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999) 
Chapter 9.02 - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 
Sections: 

9.02.010 - Criminal mischief. 
    No person shall intentionally deface, injure, damage, interfere, or tamper with, or cause, aid in or permit any such action to any public or private property without the consent of the property owner. 
(Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999) 
9.02.020 - Criminal trespass. 
    A person commits criminal trespass if: 
A.  He or she unlawfully enters or remains in or upon premises which are enclosed in a manner designed to exclude intruders or are fenced; or 
B.  He or she knowingly and unlawfully enters or remains upon the premises of a hotel, motel or apartment building; or 
C.  He or she enters or remains upon premises clearly and conspicuously posted with no trespassing signs; or 
D.  He or she refuses or fails to leave the premises when asked to do so by the owner or person in charge of the premises, whether the premises are a private residence or building or business open to the public; or 
E.  He or she returns to any premises, public or private, from which he or she has been barred by the owner or person in charge, after being advised by the owner or person in charge that he or she shall no longer be permitted on the premises. 
(Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999) 
9.02.030 - Theft. 
    A person commits theft when he or she knowingly obtains or exercises control over anything belonging to another without authorization or by threat or deception, and: 
A.  Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the thing belonging to another; or 
B.  Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the thing belonging to another in such a manner as to deprive the owner of its use or benefit; or 
C.  Where the thing belonging to another is valued less than five hundred dollars, upon conviction, the defendant shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars nor more than three hundred dollars. 
    In imposing penalty for violation of this section, the adjudicating officer of the municipal court is specifically authorized and empowered to require restitution in full to the person or entity from whom any such theft occurred as a portion of, and/or in addition to, any other penalty deemed appropriate by such court. 
(Ord. 787 §1, 2001; Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999) 
9.02.040 - Theft or mutilation of library property. 
    Any person who takes, without complying with the appropriate check-out procedures, or who willfully retains any property belonging to any publicly-supported library, including the Burlington Public Library, for thirty days after receiving written notice to return the same after expiration of the time that by the rules of such institution such property may be kept, or who mutilates such property shall be guilty of theft. 
    In imposing penalty for violation of this section, the adjudicating officer of the municipal court is specifically authorized and empowered to require restitution in full to the person or entity from whom any such theft occurred as a portion of, and/or in addition to, any other penalty deemed appropriate by such court. 
(Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999) 
9.02.050 - Theft by check. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to issue, pass, or negotiate a check as payment for any goods, services, or other things of value, or in exchange for cash when that person knows that, at the time of the issuance of the check, insufficient funds existed in the account being drawn upon to cover this and all other checks outstanding at the time of issuance. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to issue or pass a check as payment for goods, services, or other things of value, or in exchange for cash when that person, having been notified in writing either by the drawee upon which the check was drawn, the person or firm to which the check was originally issued, or the Burlington police department, on behalf of the person or firm to which the check was originally issued, that the check has been twice refused for insufficiency of funds, and fails to make good the check within ten days of that notification. Said notification shall be sent to the address set forth in subsection (B)(2) of this section by way of the U.S. Postal Service, certified mail, return receipt requested. Said return receipt, or the letter, envelope or return receipt marked "unclaimed" shall be conclusive proof of compliance with the notice requirements of this section. The following shall constitute prima facie evidence of violation of this section that the person or firm to which the check was originally issued: 
1.  Obtained at least two forms of nonphotographic identification or one form of identification bearing a photograph from the drawer at the time of acceptance of the check; 
2.  Obtained an address of the drawer of the check at the time of the acceptance of the check, with the printed address for the drawer on the check constituting sufficient evidence of the drawer's address; 
3.  Presented the check to the drawee for acceptance or refusal for the first time within thirty days after the date of issuance of the check; and 
4.  Eleven days following the date of delivery or attempted delivery of a letter of notification (as described in subsection B of this section), the drawer has failed to respond and make payment in full for the amount owed on the check and all reasonable charges incurred as a result of the return of the check. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person to stop payment or cause payment to be stopped on any check issued or passed as payment for any goods, services, or other things of value, or in exchange for cash, when that person does so with the intent to defraud. 
D.  It is unlawful for any person to open a checking account, negotiable order of withdrawal account or share account using false identification or an assumed name for the purpose of and with the intent of committing theft by check. 
E.  Nothing in this section shall apply where the value of the check is five hundred dollars or greater, or where the offender is under accusation or formal criminal filing involving the issuance of two or more checks within any sixty day period within the state of Colorado with an aggregate value of five hundred dollars or more, nor shall this section apply where the offender has been previously convicted under this section or under any existing or former statute of the state of Colorado involving the issuance of bad checks or theft or fraud by check. 
F.  A bank, savings and loan association, industrial bank or credit union shall not be civilly or criminally liable for releasing information relating to the drawer's account to any police authority or officer of the court of the city of Burlington, the release of which is for the purpose of investigating or prosecuting a violation of this section. 
G.  In imposing penalty for violation of this section, the adjudicating officer of the municipal court is specifically authorized and empowered to require restitution in full to the person or entity to whom any such check described herein was issued as a portion of, and/or in addition to, any other penalty deemed appropriate by such court. 
(Ord. 787 §2, 2001; Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999) 
Chapter 9.03 - OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS AND GOVERNMENT 
Sections: 

9.03.010 - Resisting or obstructing an officer. 
    It is unlawful for any person to resist any police officer of the city, or to in any way interfere with or hinder him while in the discharge or apparent discharge of his or her duty. 
(Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999: prior code §16.3) 
9.03.020 - Aiding prisoner escape. 
    It is unlawful for any person to rescue or attempt to rescue, or to aid in the escape of, any person in the custody of a police officer or in the custody of the police department at the city jail. 
(Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999: prior code §16.4) 
Chapter 9.04 - OFFENSES RELATING TO ALCOHOL AND ILLEGAL SUBSTANCES 
Sections: 

9.04.010 - Illegal possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol by minors. 
    Any person under twenty-one years who possesses or consumes ethyl alcohol on property anywhere within the city limits commits illegal possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol by a minor. 
A.  Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or any other law enforcement officer so authorized to enforce this chapter within the city limits including, but not limited to, all public places. Enforcement shall be by issuance of a summons and complaint for appearance in the municipal court to any person found violating this section. No law enforcement officer shall enter upon any private property to investigate any violation of this section without probable cause. 
B.  Affirmative Defenses. It shall be an affirmative defense to the offense described in subsection A of this section that the ethyl alcohol was possessed or consumed by a person under twenty-one years of age under the following circumstances: 
1.  While such minor was legally upon private property with the knowledge and consent of the owner or legal possessor of such private property and the ethyl alcohol was possessed or consumed with the consent of such minor's parent or legal guardian who was present during such possession or consumption; or 
2.  When the existence of ethyl alcohol in a person's body was due solely to the ingestion of a confectionery which contained ethyl alcohol within the limits prescribed by Section 25-5-410(1)(i)(II) of the Colorado Revised Statutes, or the ingestion of any substance which was manufactured, designed or intended primarily for a purpose other than oral human ingestion, or the ingestion of any substance which was manufactured, designed or intended solely for medicinal or hygienic purposes, or solely from the ingestion of a beverage which contains less than one-half of one percent of ethyl alcohol by weight; or 
3.  The possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol took place for religious purposes protected by the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. 
C.  Prima Facie Evidence of Violation. Prima facie evidence of violation of subsection A of this section shall consist of: 
1.  Evidence that the defendant was under the age of twenty-one years and possessed or consumed ethyl alcohol within the city limits; or 
2.  Evidence that the defendant was under the age of twenty-one years and manifested any of the characteristics commonly associated with ethyl alcohol intoxication or impairment within the city limits. 
D.  General Provisions. During any trial for violation of this section, any bottle, can, or any other container with labeling indicating the contents of such bottle, can or container shall be admissible into evidence, and the information contained on any label on such bottle, can or other container shall be admissible into evidence and shall not constitute hearsay. A judge or jury, whichever is appropriate, may consider the information upon such label in determining whether the contents of the bottle, can or other container were composed in whole or in part of ethyl alcohol. A label which identifies the contents of any bottle, can or other container as containing ethyl alcohol including, but not limited to, "beer," "ale," "malt beverage," "fermented malt beverage," "malt liquor," "wine," "champagne," "rum," "scotch," "whiskey," "gin," "vodka," "tequila," "schnapps," "brandy," "cognac," "liqueur," "cordial," "alcohol," or "liquor" shall constitute prima facie evidence that the contents of the bottle, can or other container was composed in whole or in part of ethyl alcohol. 
E.  Punishment. Illegal possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol by an underage person shall be punished by a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). The court, upon sentencing a defendant pursuant to this section may, in addition to any fine, order that the defendant perform up to twenty-four (24) hours of useful public service, subject to the conditions and restrictions of Colorado Revised Statutes §18-1.3-507, and may further order that the defendant submit to and complete an alcohol evaluation or assessment, an alcohol education program or an alcohol treatment program at such defendant's own expense. 
(Ord. 787 §3, 2001; Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 856, § 1, 12-8-08) 
9.04.015 - Sale or other disposition of ethyl alcohol to minors. 
Except as provided in Section 9.04.010(B), it is unlawful for any person to: 
A.  Sell, serve, give away, dispose of, exchange, or deliver or permit the sale, serving, giving or procuring of any ethyl alcohol to or for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age; 
B.  Obtain or attempt to obtain any ethyl alcohol by misrepresentation of age or by any other method in any place where ethyl alcohol is sold when such person is under twenty-one (21) years of age; 
C.  Possess ethyl alcohol in any store, in any public place, including public streets, alleys, roads or highways, or upon property owned by the state of Colorado or any subdivision thereof, or inside vehicles while upon the public streets, alleys, roads or highways when such person is under twenty-one (21) years of age; 
D.  Knowingly, or under conditions that an average parent or guardian should have knowledge of, suffer or permit any person under twenty-one (21) years of age, of whom such person may be a parent or guardian, to violate the provisions of subsection B or C of this section; 
E.  With knowledge, permit or fail to prevent the use of his or her identification, including a driver's license, by a person who is under twenty-one (21) years of age, for the unlawful purchase of any alcohol beverage. 
(Ord. 787 §4, 2001) 
9.04.020 - Possession of marijuana. 
It is unlawful for any person to possess any amount of marijuana as described, unless that person has been medically screened and has been determined by a physician to qualify for the consumption, possession or use of "medicinal" marijuana as distributed by a lawful, legal medical marijuana distributor and only after said person has been issued a current medical marijuana card allowing them to possess, use or consume marijuana. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any person or business located in the city limits of Burlington to possess for sale, gift or distribution any amount of marijuana. 
    For purposes of this section, the term "marijuana" shall include "cannabis" and all parts of the plant cannabis sativa L., whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted therefrom, and every compound, manufacture, salt derivative and mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or its resins, but shall not include fiber produced from its stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant, or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination if these items exist apart from any other item defined as "cannabis" or "marijuana" in this section. 
(Ord. 787 §5 2001: Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 787-A, § 1, 11-12-2010) 
9.04.021 - Prohibition of marijuana in city-owned properties and vehicles. 
A.  [Purpose.] The purpose of this section is to promote the general public welfare and safety throughout the City of Burlington, Kit Carson County, Colorado by prohibiting the use, consumption, possession, transfer, display, sale or growing of marijuana in City owned buildings, facilities or property to enhance the day-to-day operations of said buildings and facilities and to ensure those using our facilities are not impeded. 
B.  [Definitions.] Unless otherwise specified or the context otherwise requires, any terms used herein shall have the same meanings as provided in Article XVIII, Section 16 of the Colorado Constitution. Definitions for this section include the following: 
1.  "Marijuana" or "Marihuana" means all parts of the plant of the genus cannabis whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or its resin, including marihuana concentrate. "Marijuana" or "Marihuana" does not include industrial hemp, nor does it include fiber produced from the stalks, oil, or cake made from the seeds of the plant, sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination, or the weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or other product. 
2.  "Marijuana Accessories" means any equipment, products, or materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, composting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, vaporizing, or containing marijuana, or for ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana into the human body. 
3.  "City owned buildings, facilities, vehicles and property" means any and all structures owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the City of Burlington or any of its agents, Councils, assigns, or entities; including but not limited to: the City Hall building, Outback Park, Parmer Park, Burlington Swimming Pool, Skate Park, Burlington Municipal Court Building, Burlington/Kit Carson County Airport, Burlington Animal Shelter, McArthur Senior Center, City Shops, Solid Waste and Recycling Center, Old Town, Community Center, Burlington Public Library, and all City vehicles. This definition shall not include secured personal vehicles located within such areas. 
    The use, consumption, possession, transfer, display, sale or growing of marijuana and marijuana accessories are hereby prohibited in all City owned buildings, facilities, vehicles and property. 
C.  Enforcement. This section shall be enforced by the City of Burlington Police Department. 
D.  Violation. This section applies to all employees, agents, and visitors when they are in City owned buildings, facilities, vehicles and property. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this section. All violations of this section shall be brought before the Burlington Municipal Court. Furthermore, anyone in violation of this section shall be required to leave and may be precluded from using the City owned buildings, facilities, vehicles and properties. Those failing to do so, may be deemed trespassers. Employees and agents of the City violating this policy may also be subject to further disciplinary action as may be allowed by law. This section shall not apply to law enforcement officers and agencies who may possess marijuana or marijuana accessories in City owned buildings and facilities pursuant to a legitimate law enforcement function. 
E.  Disposition of Fines and Forfeitures. Unless otherwise provided by law, all fines and penalties, and the surcharge thereon, for the violation of this section shall be paid into the treasury of the City of Burlington. The fine for a first offense and for any subsequent offense shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation and each day shall be deemed a separate violation. 
F.  Surcharges. In addition to the fines and penalties prescribed in this section, any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be subject to the statutory surcharges as may be adopted and imposed by the Burlington Municipal Court. These surcharges shall be paid to the Burlington Municipal Court Clerk by each person convicted of violating this section. 
G.  Scope. This section shall apply within the incorporated City of Burlington. This section applies to all employees, agents, and visitors when they are in City owned buildings, facilities, properties and vehicles. This section shall in no way limit application and enforcement of any statutes of the State of Colorado, but shall be in addition thereto. 
(Ord. No. 884, 3-11-2013, eff. 4-13-2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 884, adopted Mar. 11, 2013, set out provisions to the Code but did not specify manner of inclusion. At the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 9.04.021. 
9.04.022 - Prohibition of marijuana facilities within the city. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the general public welfare and safety throughout the City of Burlington, Kit Carson County, Colorado by prohibiting the operation of marijuana cultivation facilities, marijuana product manufacturing facilities, marijuana testing facilities or retail marijuana stores. 
B.  Definitions. Unless otherwise specified or the context otherwise requires, any terms used herein shall have the same meanings as provided in Article XVIII, Section 16 of the Colo. Constitution. These definitions include, but are not limited to the following: 
1.  "Marijuana" or "marihuana" means all parts of the plant of the genus cannabis whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or its resin, including marihuana concentrate. "Marijuana" or "marihuana" does not include industrial hemp, nor does it include fiber produced from the stalks, oil, or cake made from the seeds of the plant, sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination, or the weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or other product. 
2.  "Marijuana accessories" means any equipment, products, or materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, composting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, vaporizing, or containing marijuana, or for ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana into the human body. 
3.  "Marijuana cultivation facility" means an entity of any kind which is used, intended to be used, or designed to be used to cultivate, prepare, and package marijuana and sell marijuana to retail marijuana stores, to marijuana product manufacturing facilities, and to other marijuana cultivation facilities, but not to consumers. 
4.  "Marijuana establishment" means a marijuana cultivation facility, marijuana testing facility, a marijuana product manufacturing facility, or a retail marijuana store. This shall also include retail sales from residences. 
5.  "Marijuana product manufacturing facility" means an entity of any kind which is used, intended to be used, or designed to be used to purchase marijuana; manufacture, prepare, and package marijuana products; and sell marijuana and marijuana products to other marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to retail marijuana stores, but not to consumers. 
6.  "Marijuana products" means concentrated marijuana products and marijuana products that are comprised of marijuana and other ingredients and are intended for use or consumption, such as, but not limited to, edible products, ointments, and tinctures. 
7.  "Marijuana testing facility" means an entity of any kind which is used, intended to be used, or designed to be used to analyze and certify the safety and potency of marijuana. 
8.  "Medical marijuana center" means an entity licensed by a state agency to sell marijuana and marijuana products pursuant to Section 14 of this Article and the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code. 
9.  "Retail marijuana store" means an entity of any kind which is used, intended to be used, or designed to be used to purchase marijuana from marijuana cultivation facilities and marijuana and marijuana products from marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to sell marijuana and marijuana products to consumers. 
C.  Applicability. 
1.  This section shall apply throughout the City of Burlington, including but not limited to public, county and state lands. 
2.  If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this section is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this section. The Council hereby declares that it would have passed this section, and each section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases are declared unconstitutional or invalid. 
D.  Unlawful Acts. 
1.  Any of the following shall be a violation of this section and shall be subject to the remedies and penalties provided for in this section: 
a.  Maintaining an entity of any kind which is used, intended to be used, or designed to be used to cultivate, prepare, and package marijuana and sell marijuana to retail marijuana stores, to marijuana product manufacturing facilities, and to other marijuana cultivation facilities, but not to consumers. 
b.  Maintaining an entity of any kind which is used, intended to be used, or designed to be used to purchase marijuana; manufacture, prepare, and package marijuana products; and sell marijuana and marijuana products to other marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to retail marijuana stores, but not to consumers. 
c.  Maintaining an entity of any kind which is used intended to be used, or designed to be used to analyze and certify the safety and potency of marijuana. 
d.  Maintaining an entity of any kind which is used, intended to be used, or designed to be used to purchase marijuana from marijuana cultivation facilities and marijuana and marijuana products from marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to sell marijuana and marijuana products to consumers. 
E.  Enforcement. 
1.  This section shall be enforced by the Burlington Police Department. 
2.  Scope. This section shall apply within the Burlington City limits, and to all other areas designated herein. This section shall in no way limit application and enforcement of any statutes of the State of Colorado but shall be in addition thereto. 
3.  Penalties: The City may seek such criminal or civil penalties as are provided by Colorado law and provided for herein. 
F.  Civil Remedies and Enforcement Powers. 
1.  The City shall have the following remedies and enforcement powers for violations of any acts outlined in section 2 above. 
2.  Injunctive Relief: The City may seek an injunction or other equitable relief in court to stop any violation of this section of any acts outlined in section 2 above and may recover costs of any such action. 
3.  Surcharges. § 30-15-408. Disposition of fines and forfeitures. The fine for a first offense and for any subsequent offense shall be not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation and each day shall be deemed a separate violation. In addition to the fines and penalties prescribed in this section, any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be subject to the statutory surcharges of ten dollars ($10.00) for the Victims and Witnesses Assistance and Law Enforcement Fund, and ($15.00) for the Colorado Traumatic Brain Injury Trust Fund. An additional surcharge of 10% of the fine or ($50.00) shall also be assessed for the Police Department Training/Equipment Fund. These surcharges shall be paid to the clerk of the court by each person convicted of violating this section. The clerk shall transmit the moneys to the respective funds in accordance with C.R.S. § 30-15-402(2). 
G.  Criminal Prosecution. 
1.  If so directed by the Burlington Chief of Police, a criminal prosecution may be brought against any person who violates any provision of this section in accordance with §§ 30-15-402 and 410, C.R.S. 
2.  Violation of the provisions of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. In addition to this penalty, persons convicted of a violation of this section are subject, pursuant to § 30-15-402, C.R.S., to a surcharge of $10.00, to be paid to the Clerk of the Court for credit to the Victims and Witnesses Assistance and Law Enforcement Fund established in the judicial district and an additional surcharge of 10% of the fine or $50.00 shall also be assessed for the Police Department Training/Equipment Fund. 
3.  All fines and forfeitures for the violation of this section shall be paid to the Municipal Court Clerk within thirty (30) days of receipt and shall be deposited as directed. 
(Ord. No. 885, §§ 1-5, 3-11-2013, eff. 4-13-2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 885, §§ 1-5, adopted Mar. 13, 2013, set out provisions to the Code but did not specify manner of inclusion. At the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 9.04.022. 
9.04.030 - Possession of drug paraphernalia. 
Any person who possesses drug paraphernalia and knows or reasonably should know that the drug paraphernalia could be used under circumstances in violation of the laws of the state of Colorado commits illegal possession of drug paraphernalia. 
A.  Determination Considerations. In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court, in its discretion, may consider, in addition to all other relevant factors, the following: 
1.  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use; 
2.  The proximity of the object to controlled substances; 
3.  The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object; 
4.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the knowledge of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, or evidence that such person reasonably should know, that it will be delivered to persons who he/she knows or reasonably should know, could use the object to facilitate a violation of this section; 
5.  Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use; 
6.  Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use; 
7.  National or local advertising concerning its use; 
8.  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale; 
9.  Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a supplier of like or related items to the community for legal purposes, such as an authorized distributor or dealer of tobacco products; 
10.  The existence and scope of legal uses for the object in the community; and 
11.  Expert testimony concerning its use. 
    In the event a case brought pursuant to this section is tried before a jury, the court shall hold an evidentiary hearing on issues raised pursuant to this section. Such hearing shall be conducted in camera. 
B.  Punishment. Conviction of possession of drug paraphernalia shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars. 
C.  Drug Paraphernalia Defined. "Drug paraphernalia" means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the laws of the state of Colorado. "Drug paraphernalia" includes, but is not limited to: 
1.  Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of controlled substances under circumstances violating the laws of the state of Colorado; 
2.  Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances; 
3.  Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana; 
4.  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances; 
5.  Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances; 
6.  Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances; or 
7.  Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the human body, such as: 
(a)  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal bowls; 
(b)  Water pipes; 
(c)  Carburetion tubes and devices; 
(d)  Smoking and carburetion masks; 
(e)  Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand; 
(f)  Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials; 
(g)  Chamber pipes; 
(h)  Carburetor pipes; 
(i)  Electric pipes; 
(j)  Air-driven pipes; 
(k)  Chillums; 
(l)  Bongs; 
(m)  Ice pipes or chillers. 
(Ord. 787 §6, 2001) 
Chapter 9.08 - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY 
Sections: 

9.08.010 - Indecent exposure. 
    It is unlawful for any person to expose any part of his or her person indecently, or to make a meretricious display, in or near any public place or place open to public view. 
(Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999: prior code §16.9) 
9.08.020 - Prostitution. 
    It is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain a bawdy house, house of assignation, house of prostitution, house of ill fame or other place for the practice of prostitution, fornication, adultery or sexual perversion, or to offer to secure another person for the purpose of committing an act of prostitution, or to commit or offer or agree to commit an act of prostitution or sexual perversion. 
(Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999: prior code §16.12) 
9.08.030 - Obscene publication. 
    It is unlawful for any person to sell, give away or exhibit obscene or immoral publications, prints, pictures or illustrations. 
(Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999: prior code §16.13) 
9.08.040 - Gambling house. 
    It is unlawful for any person to keep a gambling house or to permit or suffer any faro bank, keno table, poker table, dice table, playing cards or other instrument or device whatsoever used for playing any game or games of chance, to be set up or used in the city, whereon or wherewith any game or games of chance may be played for money or other article of value in any room, building or other place in his or her possession or under his or her control. 
(Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999: prior code §16.14) 
9.08.050 - Gambling. 
    It is unlawful for any person within the city to play at any game whatsoever for any sum of money or other thing of value, or to make any bet or wager for any sum of money or other property of value upon the result of such game or gambling device. 
(Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999: prior code §16.15) 
9.08.060 - Lotteries. 
    Except where licensed and authorized by the state, it is unlawful for any person to set up, maintain or carry on in the city any lottery or chance for money or gift distribution. 
(Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999: prior code §16.16) 
9.08.070 - Loitering near schools. 
    It is unlawful for any person to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in, about or on any school grounds or buildings, either on foot or in or on any vehicle, without having some lawful business therein or thereabout, or to annoy, disturb or otherwise prevent the orderly conduct of classes and activities of any such school, or to conduct himself or herself in a lewd, wanton or lascivious manner in speech or behavior in or about any such school building or grounds. 
(Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999: prior code §16.19) 
9.08.080 - Carrying open containers of liquors. 
    It is unlawful for any person to carry or have any open containers of any malt, vinous or spirituous liquors on the grounds of any public school in the city, or on any street, sidewalk, alley or other public way or public place except in licensed premises in the city. All law enforcement officers are authorized and empowered to arrest or cause to be arrested, with or without process, any person found violating the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999: Ord. 471 §1, 1971) 
Chapter 9.12 - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE 
Sections: 

9.12.010 - Disturbance of the peace. 
    No person shall make, suffer, or allow any loud or raucous noise, whether produced by some implement or device, mechanical or otherwise, including, but not limited to, amplification devices, stereos, etc., or by the use of his or her own voice in a manner calculated to disturb or tend to disturb the peace and quiet of others by violent, tumultuous, offensive or obstreperous conduct, or by loud or unusual noises, or by unseemly, profane, obscene or offensive language. "Disturbing the peace" shall include, but not be limited to, shouting, crying, blowing a horn, use of any sound amplifying device, or creating any other loud or unusual noise in aid of drawing attention to his or her activity but shall not include public events held in appropriate places properly sanctioned by the chief of police and/or the city council. 
(Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999: prior code §16.5) 
9.12.020 - Disturbance of worship. 
    It is unlawful for any person to disquiet or disturb any congregation or assembly for religious worship by making a noise or by rude or indecent behavior or profane discourse within the place of worship or so nearby as to disturb the order or solemnity of the meeting. 
(Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999: prior code §16.6) 
9.12.030 - Unlawful assembly. 
    It is unlawful for any three or more persons to assemble together in the city with an intent to do an unlawful act or, being assembled, mutually to agree or act in concert to do an unlawful act with force or violence against the person or property of another or against the peace and to the terror of others or, being present at such meeting or assembly, to fail to endeavor to prevent the commission or perpetration of such unlawful act. 
(Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999: prior code §16.7) 
9.12.040 - Disorderly conduct. 
    It is unlawful for any person to commit any act which constitutes disorderly conduct. "Disorderly conduct" is defined as (a) fighting or brawling, (b) the use of offensive language, or the commission of any acts of a nature to corrupt the public morals or to outrage the sense of public decency, or which affect the peace and quiet of persons who may witness it or hear it and who may be disturbed or provoked to resentment by it, (c) the commission of any act or attempt to commit any act which is against the law or order of the community, or (d) the commission of any act or attempt to commit any act which is likely to lead to a breach of the peace. 
(Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999: prior code §16.8) 
Chapter 9.16 - WEAPONS 
Sections: 

9.16.010 - Carrying concealed weapons. 
    It is unlawful for any person to wear under his or her clothes or conceal about his or her person or to display in a threatening manner or to flourish any dangerous or deadly weapon unless such person is a law enforcement officer of any governmental unit while on duty or discharging the duties of his or her office. 
(Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999: prior code §16.1) 
9.16.020 - Discharge of firearms. 
A.  Except as set forth in Section 9.16.020(B) below, it is unlawful for any person, except a law enforcement officer in the performance of his or her duties or person(s) with an approved permit issued by the chief of police and/or the city administrator, to fire or discharge firearms within the city. For purposes of this section, the term "firearms" shall be construed to include a revolver, pistol, shotgun or rifle or device of any description that may be used for the expulsion of projectiles by the use of air, explosion, or thrust via mechanical inertia including, but not limited to, firearms of any description, spring gun, air guns, gas-operated guns, devices of archery (bows and arrows, crossbows, slings, slingshots), and mechanical devices (catapults) that use weighted inertia or centrifugal force to dispel, launch or hurl objects. 
    A permit may be issued by the chief of police and/or city administrator upon application to the chief of police and/or city administrator during regular business hours. Before issuing a permit hereunder, the chief of police and/or city administrator may consider the character of the applicant, safety issues, proposed area within which firearms shall be used, surrounding area that may be affected by the use of firearms, reasons for the proposed use of firearms, community need, and any other relevant factors. 
B.  The following activities are specifically exempt from the prohibition set forth in Section 9.16.020(A) above so long as written request is made to the chief of police and/or city administrator sufficiently in advance of the activity to all approval: 
1.  Public observances or celebrations by a regularly constituted organization or committee when specifically approved in writing and in advance by the chief of police and/or city administrator; 
2.  Indoor and outdoor shooting ranges at specific locations specifically approved in writing and in advance by the chief of police and/or city administrator; 
3.  Educational program relating to firearms usage when specifically approved in writing and in advance by the chief of police and/or city administrator; and 
4.  Certain situations involving the discharge of noise devices such as air guns or firearms discharging blanks for the purpose of redirecting wildlife when specifically approved in writing and in advance by the chief of police and/or city administrator. 
    Prior to approval of any of the activities set forth in this section, the chief of police and/or city administrator shall insure that sufficient adult supervision shall be present for the event and that the adult supervisor(s) have sufficient training or experience in safety with firearms. 
(Ord. 816 §1, 2003: Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999: prior code §16.2) 
Chapter 9.20 - OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS 
Sections: 

9.20.010 - Curfew. 
It is unlawful for any person under eighteen (18) years of age to loiter, frequent or be upon any street, sidewalk or alley, or any place of business for amusement which caters to the public within the city limits during the hours of 12:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m. for each day of the year (365), unless such minor is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or some person over twenty-one (21) years of age who has legal custody of such minor, or unless there exists an emergency which would necessitate the presence of such minor upon or in such place or places, or the minor was engaged in a lawful employment activity or was going to or coming from lawful employment. 
(Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999: Ord. 465 §1, 1970: prior code §16.17) 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 7-30-07; Ord. No. 851, § 1, 3-10-08) 
9.20.020 - Parents permitting violation. 
It is unlawful for any parent or legal guardian or any person having legal custody of a minor to knowingly permit or allow such minor to loiter, frequent or be in public places or businesses in violation of Section 9.20.010 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999: prior code §16.18) 
9.20.030 - Parental responsibility. 
Whenever a summons and complaint for a violation of this Code is filed against a child, the court shall send a parent or guardian, by first class mail, a notice that includes the alleged violation; date of the violation; location at which the violation occurred; and the date, time and place of the scheduled court appearance; and an order that the parent or guardian appear with the minor at each and every court appearance. It shall be the duty of each such parent to appear with the child at each and every court appearance. It shall be unlawful for a parent to fail to appear at each and every required court appearance or to fail to comply with the written promise to appear with the child. 
(Ord. 844 §1(part), 2007) 
9.20.040 - Responsibility of parents for payment of fine. 
A.  Whenever a minor under the age of eighteen (18) years residing or living with his or her parents is convicted of an offense of this Code for which the court imposes a fine, restitution, or court fees or costs, the parents of the minor shall be jointly responsible for payment of such fine, restitution, or court fees or costs. It shall be an affirmative defense to the obligation created by this section if the parent demonstrates to the court that, at the time of the offense, either: 
1.  The parent did not have lawful custody of the minor; 
2.  The minor was not residing with the parent; or 
3.  The minor is emancipated. 
B.  For the purposes of this section only, the term "emancipated minor" means a minor over fifteen (15) years of age and under eighteen (18) years of age who has, with real or apparent assent of his or her parents, demonstrated his or her independence from his or her parents in matters of care, custody, and earnings. The term may include but shall not be limited to any such minor who has the sole responsibility for his or her own support, who is married, or who is in the military. A person who fails to pay any court-ordered fine, restitution, or court fees or costs shall be subject to the general penalty provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. 844 §1(part), 2007) 
Chapter 9.30 - LOST, STOLEN, CONFISCATED OR ABANDONED PROPERTY 
Sections: 

9.30.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the term "custodian" means the chief of police or his or her successor in office, or his or her designee and successor in office. 
(Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999: Ord. 641 (part), 1989) 
9.30.020 - Chief of police designated custodian. 
    The chief of police of the city is designated as the official custodian of each and every article or object of personal property lost, stolen, confiscated or abandoned, which property is not in the lawful custody of any other person or court, and which property has been acquired by or delivered to the chief of police or one of his or her subordinates for care, custody and control. 
(Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999: Ord. 641 (part), 1989) 
9.30.030 - Property held as evidence. 
    The custodian shall keep in his or her custody all articles of personal property seized or held as evidence, which property has been delivered to the custodian, or one of his or her subordinates, for care, custody and control, for use in any pending or prospective trial, until the final disposition of any charges, including appeals or the lapse of time for filing an appeal. Thereafter, unless ordered to the contrary by the city council or a court having jurisdiction, the custodian or his or her designee shall make disposition of such property in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999: Ord. 641 (part), 1989) 
9.30.040 - Property disposition-Generally. 
    All lost, stolen, confiscated or abandoned property, which property has been delivered to the custodian for care, custody and control, not being held pending the disposition of charges or civil litigation pursuant to Section 9.30.030 of this chapter, shall be subject to disposition according to the provisions of Sections 9.30.050 through 9.30.080 of this chapter unless otherwise provided in this chapter or ordered to the contrary by the city council or by any court. 
(Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999: Ord. 641 (part), 1989) 
9.30.050 - Notification of owner. 
    The custodian shall examine any such property, and if the identity of the owner is readily available to the custodian from public records known to and used by him or her, the custodian shall notify the apparent owner by telephone, or if unable to contact by telephone, by U.S. first class mail, postage prepaid, to the last known address of such apparent owner, mailed within a reasonable time after identification of the apparent owner, describing the property and stating that it is held by the custodian and may be sold or otherwise disposed of unless claimed within thirty days of the giving or mailing of such notice. 
(Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999: Ord. 641 (part), 1989) 
9.30.060 - Disposal of unclaimed property. 
    If any property remains unclaimed sixty days after it is no longer required to be held for evidence pursuant to Section 9.30.030 of this chapter or sixty days after the mailing of any letter of notice or telephone call provided for in Section 9.30.050 of this chapter, such property may be retained by the custodian and kept for use by the city for training programs or otherwise disposed of from time to time by the custodian or his or her designee as hereinafter set forth. 
A.  Bicycles, tricycles or other articles made for use by children may be sold as hereinafter provided or may, alternatively, be given either directly or by making it available for distribution through religious, charitable, civic or other organizations or institutions; provided, however, that at least ten days prior to any such disposition, public notice of intention to dispose of any such articles shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, together with a description thereof, and including a statement that the rightful owner may claim any such article within the period between the date of the publication and the time of the actual donation, upon satisfactory proof of identity and ownership. 
B.  Any unclaimed property may be sold at public sale; provided, however, that the custodian shall cause notice to be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city not less than ten days before such sale setting forth a description of each article to be sold, the time, date and place of sale and a statement that any person who claims to be the owner of or claims any interest in any article so described may appear at the police department before the time and date set for the commencement of the public sale to reclaim the property upon presentation of satisfactory proof of identity and ownership of such article. 
C.  Unclaimed property which consists of jewelry, gems, watches, precious metals or other property having a unique value, including firearms, or which, in the judgment of the custodian, may bring a higher price if sold on sealed bids, may, at the discretion of the custodian, be sold either at public sale as heretofore provided or to the highest bidder after solicitation of sealed bids from at least three regular dealers in the particular type of property. No such sale shall be conducted until notice shall have been published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city setting forth a description of each article to be sold, the time, date and place of bid opening, and that any person who claims to be the owner of or claims any interest in any article so described may appear at the police department before the time and date set for the opening of such bids to reclaim the property upon presentation of satisfactory proof of identity and ownership. Any person desiring to submit a sealed bid may do so, and such bids shall be opened, and the property shall be sold to the highest bidder at the time and place specified in the notice; provided, however, the right to reject any and all bids shall be reserved, and any and all bids may be rejected if deemed too low or for any other reason. Sales of firearms shall be made only to properly licensed dealers, except that hunting and sporting rifles and shotguns may be sold to any qualified adult. 
(Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999: Ord. 641 (part), 1989) 
9.30.070 - Reclaiming property. 
    All unclaimed property may be reclaimed by the rightful owner upon proof of identity and ownership satisfactory to the custodian or his or her designee, if claimed before the donation or sale thereof. 
(Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999: Ord. 641 (part), 1989) 
9.30.080 - Failure to claim property. 
    Failure to make a claim of ownership within the time limits prescribed in this chapter and before the sale or donation of any article shall forever bar the owner or any person claiming ownership by, through or under the owner from making any subsequent claim of ownership. Further, if any property has been advertised for sale and for any reason not sold, the same may be donated or destroyed or kept or used by the city without further notice if a claim of ownership is not made with the time limit prescribed in this chapter and the owner or any person claiming ownership by, through or under the owner shall thereafter be barred from making any claim of ownership to such property. 
(Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999: Ord. 641 (part), 1989) 
9.30.090 - Proceeds of sale. 
    All proceeds of any sale made pursuant to this chapter shall be paid to the city treasurer who shall deposit them in the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999: Ord. 641 (part), 1989) 
9.30.100 - Exceptions. 
    Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, objects and articles of property as described in Sections 9.30.110 and 9.30.120 of this chapter may be kept, held or disposed of as hereinafter provided without compliance with the provisions of Sections 9.30.040 through 9.30.090 of this chapter relating to donation or sale. 
(Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999: Ord. 641 (part), 1989) 
9.30.110 - Firearms. 
    Unless ordered to the contrary by a court of competent jurisdiction or otherwise required by state or federal law, firearms and other weapons which may not lawfully be kept, possessed or retained by the owner or person otherwise entitled to the possession thereof or which may not otherwise lawfully be returned to the owner thereof or which are unclaimed after notice to the owner pursuant to Section 9.30.050 of this chapter or the owner of which is not known, may be kept and retained by the police department for use in its training programs or otherwise, or may be donated to museums or historical societies as the custodian may order for purposes of historical preservation. If such firearms or weapons are declared surplus by the police department, their disposition may be made as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999: Ord. 641 (part), 1989) 
9.30.120 - Destruction of certain property. 
    If the property consists of burglar tools of any description, or unlawful firearms, or cartridges or explosives, or armored or bulletproof clothing, or other dangerous weapons, or gambling apparatus, instruments or articles, or narcotics or controlled drugs, or medicines for the purpose of inducing abortion or preventing conception, or beer, wine, spirituous liquors or fermented malt beverages, or soiled, bloody or unsanitary clothing, or solids or liquids of unknown or uncertain composition, or drugs, or hallucinogenic substances, or hypodermic syringes and needles, obscene pictures, prints, effigies, statues, or any poisonous, noxious or deleterious solids or liquids, or any other property which reasonably might result in injury to the health or safety of the public or which might be subject to unlawful use, the custodian or his or her designee may destroy each and every article thereof. 
(Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999: Ord. 641 (part), 1989) 
9.30.130 - Specific exceptions. 
    Motor vehicles, lost or stray animals and other property which is required to be disposed of otherwise than as provided in this chapter by the terms of any law or ordinance shall not be disposed of according to the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999: Ord. 641 (part), 1989) 
9.30.140 - Conduct of sale. 
    The custodian or his or her designee shall conduct all sales made pursuant to the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999: Ord. 641 (part), 1989) 
9.30.150 - Rights of finder. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, whenever any item of lost or abandoned property has been found and delivered to the custodian or the custodian's subordinates for care, custody and control, such item shall be returned to the original finder whenever claim has been made by the finder and the following conditions have been met: 
A.  The claimant is the person who originally found the lost or abandoned property; 
B.  The claimant, after surrendering the property to the custodian, has served written notice of his or her intention to make a claim on that item within sixty days of the surrender of the item; 
C.  The lost or abandoned property has remained unclaimed by the owner or person having a right to such property for sixty days after the surrender of the same to the custodian; and 
D.  The lost or abandoned property is not stolen or confiscated property, nor is the property held under the exceptions outlined in Sections 9.30.110 through 9.30.130 of this chapter, nor is it property held as evidence pursuant to Section 9.30.030 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 772 §1(part), 1999: Ord. 641 (part), 1989) 
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
Chapters: 
Chapter 10.04 - MODEL TRAFFIC CODE ADOPTED 
Sections: 

10.04.010 - Model Traffic Code adopted. 
Pursuant to Parts 1 and 2 of Article 16 of Title 31, C.R.S., as amended, there is hereby adopted by reference the 2010 edition of the "Model Traffic Code for Colorado Municipalities," promulgated and published as such by the Colorado Department of Transportation ("CDOT"), Safety and Traffic Engineering Branch, 4201 E. Arkansas Avenue, EP 700., Denver, Colorado 80222. The subject matter of the Model Traffic Code relates primarily to comprehensive traffic control regulations for the city. The purpose of this chapter and the code adopted herein is to provide a system of uniform traffic regulations consistent with state law and generally conforming to similar regulations throughout the state and the nation. Not less than one copy of the Model Traffic Code adopted herein is now filed in the office of the clerk of the City of Burlington, Colorado, and may be inspected during regular business hours. After adoption of the Model Traffic Code, a copy of the code may be kept in the office of the chief of police instead of the city clerk. The copy of the Model Traffic Code shall be certified by the mayor and the city clerk to be a true and correct copy. 
(Ord. 706 §1, 1995: Ord. 537 §1, 1978) 
(Ord. No. 878, § 1, 1-9-2012) 
10.04.015 - Deletions. 
The 2010 edition of the Model Traffic Code is adopted as if set out at length save and except the following articles and/or sections which are declared to be inapplicable to this municipality and are therefore expressly deleted: 
Part 17, Penalties and Procedure - deleted 
(Ord. 706 §2, 1995) 
(Ord. No. 878, § 2, 1-9-2012) 
10.04.020 - Additions or modifications. 
A. Part 17, Penalties and Procedures, is hereby added to the 2010 Model Traffic Code as adopted by the city of Burlington to read as follows: 
    1701. Municipalities - traffic offenses classified - schedule of fines. 
1.  It is a traffic offense for any person to violate any provision of the Code. 
2.  Pursuant to C.M.C.R. 210(b)(4), the court may by order, which may from time to time be amended, supplemented, or repealed, designate the traffic offenses, the penalties for which may be paid at the office of the court clerk or violations bureau. 
3.  The court in addition to any other notice, by published order to be prominently posted in a place where fines are to be paid, shall specify by suitable schedules the amount of fines to be imposed for violations, designating each violation specifically in the schedules. Such fines will be within the limits set by ordinance. 
4.  Fines and costs shall be paid to, receipted by, and accounted for by the court clerk. 
5.  If a person receives a penalty assessment notice for a violation under this section 1701 and such person pays the fine for the violation on or before the date the payment is due, the points assessed for violation are reduced as follows: 
a.  For a violation having an assessment of three (3) or more points under Section 42-2-127(5), C.R.S., as amended, the points are reduced by two (2) points; 
b.  For a violation having an assessment of two (2) points under Section 42-2-127(5), C.R.S., as amended, the points are reduced by one (1) point. 
    1703. Parties to a crime. Every person who commits, conspires to commit, or aids or abets in the commission of any act declared in this code to be a traffic offense, whether individually or in connection with one or more other persons or as principal, agent, or accessory, is guilty of such offense or liable for such offense, and every person who falsely, fraudulently, forcibly, or willfully induces, causes, coerces, requires, permits, or directs another to violate any provision of this code is likewise guilty of such offense or liable for such offense. 
    1704. Offenses by persons controlling vehicles. It is unlawful for the owner or any other person employing or otherwise directing the driver of any vehicle to require or knowingly to permit the operation of such vehicle upon a highway in any manner contrary to law or this code. 
    1706. Juveniles - convicted - arrested and incarcerated - provisions for confinement. 
1.  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a child, as defined in section 19-1-103 (18), C.R.S., convicted of a misdemeanor traffic offense under this Code, violating the conditions of probation imposed under this Code, or found in contempt of court in connection with a violation or alleged violation under this article shall not be confined in a jail, lockup, or other place used for the confinement of adult offenders if the court with jurisdiction is located in a county in which there is a juvenile detention facility operated by or under contract with the department of human services that shall receive and provide care for such child or if the jail is located within forty miles of such facility. The court imposing penalties under this section may confine a child for a determinate period of time in a juvenile detention facility operated by or under contract with the department of human services. 
    1708. Burden of proof - appeals. 
1.  The burden of proof shall be upon the people, and the court shall enter judgment in favor of the defendant unless the people prove the liability of the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt. 
2.  Appeals from courts of record shall be in accordance with Rule 37 of the Colorado Rules of Criminal Procedure. 
    1709. Penalty assessment notice for traffic offenses - violations of provisions by officer - driver's license. Whenever a penalty assessment notice for a traffic infraction is issued the penalty assessment notice which shall be served upon the defendant by the peace officer shall contain the name and address of the defendant, the license number of the vehicle involved, if any, the number of the defendant's driver's license, if any, a citation of the statute alleged to have been violated, a brief description of the traffic infraction, the date and approximate location thereof, the amount of the penalty prescribed for such traffic infraction, the amount of the surcharge thereon pursuant to section 24-4.2-104 (1), C.R.S., the number of points, if any, prescribed for such traffic infraction pursuant to section 42-2-127, and the date the penalty assessment notice is served on the defendant; shall direct the defendant to appear in a specified court at a specified time and place in the event such penalty and surcharge thereon is not paid; shall be signed by the peace officer; and shall contain a place for the defendant to elect to execute a signed acknowledgment of liability and an agreement to pay the penalty prescribed and surcharge thereon within twenty days, as well as such other information as may be required by law to constitute such penalty assessment notice to be a summons and complaint, should the prescribed penalty and surcharge thereon not be paid within the time allowed in section 42-4-1701. 
    1711. Compliance with promise to appear. A written promise to appear in court may be complied with by an appearance by counsel. 
    1712. Procedure prescribed not exclusive. The foregoing provisions of this Code shall govern all police officers in making arrests without a warrant or issuing citations for violations of this Code, for offenses or infractions committed in their presence, but the procedure prescribed in this Code shall not otherwise be exclusive of any other method prescribed by law or ordinance for the arrest and prosecution of a person for an offense or infraction of like grade. 
    1713. Conviction record inadmissible in civil action. Except as provided in sections 42-2-201 to 42-2-208, C.R.S., no record of the conviction of any person for any violation of this Code shall be admissible as evidence in any court in any civil action. 
    1714. Traffic violation not to affect credibility of witness. The conviction of a person upon a charge of violating any provision of this Code or other traffic regulation less than a felony shall not affect or impair the credibility of such person as a witness in any civil or criminal proceeding. 
    1715. Convictions, judgments, and charges recorded - public inspection. 
1.  Every judge of a court not of record and every clerk of a court of record shall keep a full record of every case in which a person is charged with any violation of this Code or any other law regulating the operation of vehicles on highways. 
2.  Within ten days after the entry of a judgment, conviction, or forfeiture of bail of a person upon a charge of violating any provision of this Code or other law regulating the operation of vehicles on highways, the judge or clerk of the court in which the entry of a judgment was made or the conviction was had or bail was forfeited shall prepare and immediately forward to the motor vehicle division of the department of revenue an abstract of the record of said court covering every case in which said person had a judgment entered against him or her, was so convicted, or forfeited bail, which abstract must be certified by the person so required to prepare the same to be true and correct. 
3.  Said abstract must be made upon a form furnished by the department of revenue and shall include the name, address, and driver's license number of the party charged, the registration number of the vehicle involved, the nature of the offense, the date of hearing, the plea, the judgment or whether bail forfeited, and the amount of the fine or forfeiture as the case may be. 
    1716. Notice to appear or pay fine - failure to appear - penalty. 
1.  For the purposes of this part 17, tender by an arresting officer of the summons or penalty assessment notice shall constitute notice to the violator to appear in court at the time specified on such summons or to pay the required fine and surcharge thereon. 
2.  Except as otherwise provided in subsection 3 of this section, a person commits a traffic offense if the person fails to appear to answer any offense other than a traffic infraction charged under this part 17. 
3.  a. (i) Except as otherwise provided in subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph a., a person who is a parent or legal guardian of a minor under the age of eighteen years and who is required to appear in court with the minor pursuant to the provisions of this part 17 including but not limited to section 1706(2)(b), shall appear in court at the location and on the date stated in the penalty assessment notice or in the summons and complaint or as instructed by the court. 
(ii)  The provisions of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph a concerning the appearance of a parent or legal guardian shall not apply in a case where the minor under the age of eighteen years or the parent of the minor demonstrates to the court by clear and convincing evidence that the minor is an emancipated minor. 
(iii)  For purposes of this subsection 3, "emancipated minor" means a minor under the age of eighteen years who has no legal guardian and whose parents have entirely surrendered the right to the care, custody, and earnings of the minor, no longer are under any duty to support or maintain the minor, and have made no provision for the support of the minor. 
b.  A person who violates any provision of paragraph a of subparagraph (i) of this subsection 3 commits a class 1 petty offense and shall be punished pursuant to section 18-1.3-503, C.R.S. 
    1717. Conviction - attendance at driver improvement school. 
1.  Except as otherwise provided in subsection 2 of this section, whenever a person has been convicted of violating any provision of this Code or other law regulating the operation of vehicles on streets or highways, the court, in addition to the penalty provided for the violation or as a condition of either the probation or the suspension of all or any portion of any fine or sentence of imprisonment for a violation other than a traffic infraction, may require the defendant, at the defendant's own expense, if any, to attend and satisfactorily complete a course of instruction at any designated driver improvement school located and operating in the county of the defendant's residence and providing instruction in the traffic laws of this state, instruction in recognition of hazardous traffic situations, and instruction in traffic accident prevention. Such school shall be approved by the court. 
2.  Whenever a minor under eighteen years of age has been convicted of violating any provision of this Code or other law regulating the operation of vehicles on streets or highways, the court may require the minor to attend and satisfactorily complete a course of instruction at any designated driver improvement school providing instruction in the traffic laws of this state, instruction in recognition of hazardous traffic situations, and instruction in traffic accident prevention. The court may impose the driver improvement school requirement in addition to the penalty provided for the violation or as a condition of either the probation or the suspension of all or any portion of any fine or sentence of imprisonment for the violation. The minor, or the minor's parent or parents who appear in court with the minor in accordance with section 1716.3, of this Code, shall pay the cost of attending the designated driver improvement school. The court shall make available information on scholarships and other financial assistance available to help minors or their parents offset the costs of driver improvement school. Such school shall be approved by the court. 
    1718. Surcharges - 
A.  A surcharge equal to the greater of ten dollars or ten percent of the fine imposed for violation of all municipal ordinances, except parking violations, is levied on each Municipal Court action resulting in a conviction or in a deferred judgment and sentence, which municipal ordinance violation is charged pursuant to City of Burlington ordinances. All calculated surcharge amounts resulting in dollars and cents shall be rounded up to the nearest whole dollar. If a portion of the fine is suspended, a proportionate amount of this surcharge levied shall also be suspended, but in no event shall the surcharge be reduced to an amount less than ten dollars. If the suspension of the fine is thereafter revoked, the surcharge shall be reimposed on the total amount of the fine imposed. Such surcharges shall be paid to the clerk of the court by the defendant. 
B.  The moneys shall be deposited in the general fund of the city and are intended to be allocated for the following purposes, including, but not limited to, purchase of equipment, training programs, and to domestic violence programs within the community. 
C.  Section 1212, Parking-Weight Restrictions, is hereby added to the Model Traffic Code as adopted by the City of Burlington. 
    1212 Parking - Weight Restrictions - No trucks, truck tractors, semi-trailers, commercial vehicles or motor vehicles exceeding 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight shall be parked on any street in the City of Burlington; except such parking is permitted only for the purpose of loading and unloading passengers or freight without delay, and only when such loading does not obstruct, impede or endanger any traffic. 
D.  Section 1213 Parking - Size Restrictions, is hereby added to the Model Traffic Code as adopted by the City of Burlington. 
    1213 Parking-Size Restrictions - No truck type trailer, whatever its empty weight, that is greater than eight feet (8') in width or greater than eighteen feet (18') in length shall be parked on any street in the City of Burlington; except that such parking is permitted only for the purpose of loading or unloading freight and only when such loading or unloading does not obstruct, impeded or endanger any traffic. 
E.  Section 1214, Parking - Restrictions on Hazardous Wastes, is hereby added to the Model Traffic Code as adopted by the City of Burlington. 
    1214 Parking - Restrictions on Hazardous Wastes - No trucks, truck trailers, semitrailers, commercial vehicles or motor vehicles carrying, containing or transporting any hazardous substance (as defined in Section 42-20-103, C.R.S.) shall park in any residential district of the City of Burlington; except that such parking is permitted in any business district only for the purpose of loading or unloading hazardous substances without delay, and only when such loading and unloading does not obstruct, impede or endanger any traffic. 
(Ord. 706 §3, 1995: Ord. 537 §2, 1978) 
(Ord. No. 878, § 3, 1-9-2012) 
10.04.030 - Application. 
This chapter shall apply to every street, alley, sidewalk area, driveway, park, and to every other public way or public place or public parking area, either within or outside the corporate limits of this municipality, the use of which this municipality has jurisdiction and authority to regulate. The provisions of sections 1401, 1402, 1409(3), 1413, 1211, and 1903 of the adopted Model Traffic Code, respectively concerning reckless driving, careless driving, compulsory insurance, eluding a police officer, limitations on backing and stopping for school buses, shall apply not only to public places and ways but also throughout this municipality. 
(Ord. 706 §5, 1995: Ord. 573 §4, 1978) 
(Ord. No. 878, § 4, 1-9-2012) 
10.04.040 - Certification. 
The city clerk shall certify to the passage of this ordinance [and] make not less than three copies of the adopted code available for inspection by the public during regular business hours. 
(Ord. 706 §9, 1995: Ord. 573 §8, 1978) 
(Ord. No. 878, § 5, 1-9-2012) 
10.04.050 - Penalties. 
A. The following penalties, herewith set forth in full, shall apply to this chapter. Any person who violates any of the provisions stated or adopted in this chapter commits a noncriminal municipal offense except any of the following violations which shall constitute a Class B municipal offense: 
1.  MTC 1101 (1) Speeding and (2) If the alleged violator is accused of exceeding the prima facia speed limit by more than nineteen (19) miles per hour; 
2.  MTC 1101 (3) Special Hazards (if the alleged violation has caused, or contributed to the cause of, an accident resulting in appreciable damage to property of another or an injury or the death to any person); 
3.  MTC 1105 Speed Contest; 
4.  MTC 1401 Reckless Driving; 
5.  MTC 1402 Careless Driving (if the violation has caused, or contributed to the cause of, an accident resulting in appreciable damage to property of another or an injury or death to any person); 
6.  MTC 1409 (3) Compulsory Insurance; 
7.  MTC 1413 Eluding or Attempting to Elude a Police Officer; 
8.  MTC 1903 Stopping For School Buses; and 
9.  Any other offense contained in the Model Traffic Code resulting in an accident causing personal injury or substantial property damage. 
B.  If a person receives a penalty assessment notice for a violation and such person pays the fine for the violation on or before the date the payment is due, the points assessed for violation are reduced as follows: 
1.  For a violation having an assessment of three or more points under Section 42-2-127(5), C.R.S., as amended, the points are reduced by two points; 
2.  For a violation having an assessment of two points under Section 42-2-127(5), C.R.S., as amended, the points are reduced by one point. 
(Ord. 706 §4, 1995: Ord. 624 §9(part), 1987: Ord. 573 §3, 1978) 
(Ord. No. 878, § 6, 1-9-2012) 
10.04.060 - Recognition of State Highway No. 4. 
By Ordinance No. 354 adopted by the city on June 5, 1961, the city recognized a portion of State Highway No. 4 (US No. 24) within the city as a connecting link in the state highway system and made certain agreements in connection therewith. The aforementioned ordinance shall not be repealed by the adoption of these provisions, and the provisions of Ordinance No. 354 shall be in effect and take precedence over any provisions hereafter stated in this chapter. 
(Prior code §18.1) 
10.04.070 - Through streets. 
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles shall stop at every intersection before entering any of the following streets or parts of streets: 
A.  Fourteenth Street from its intersection with Rose Avenue to its intersection with Webster Avenue; 
B.  Martin Street from its intersection with Fourteenth Street to and including its intersection with Thirteenth Street; 
C.  Senter Street from and including its intersection with Fifteenth Street to and including its intersection with Thirteenth Street; 
D.  Eighth Street from its intersection with Rose Avenue to its intersection with Webster Avenue; 
E.  All state and federal highways within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Prior code §18.4-3) 
10.04.080 - Maximum speed regulations. 
A. The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets within the city, except that upon the basis of engineering and traffic investigation, the speed limit in certain areas shall be as follows: 
1.  The maximum speed limit upon State Highway No. 4 (US No. 24) along Rose Avenue shall be forty-five miles per hour. 
2.  The maximum speed limit in the business district shall be twenty miles per hour. 
3.  The maximum speed limit in the residential district shall be twenty-five miles per hour. 
B.  It shall be prima facie unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so declared in this chapter when signs are in place giving notice thereof. 
(Prior code §18.5-1) 
10.04.090 - Traffic regulations on Highway No. 51. 
A. No commercial activity or encroachment shall be permitted within the right-of-way boundaries of Highway No. 51 within the city and the width from curb to curb of the streets constituting such highway shall be a minimum of forty-six feet. 
B.  On any portion of such highway within the city no person shall violate any of the provisions of Chapter 13, CRS 1963, nor any of the laws amending the same, nor any of the rules or regulations issued pursuant thereto. 
C.  Parking on such streets or portions thereof is prohibited at certain places as specified in 13-5-73 CRS 1963 as amended; parking when and where permitted shall be parallel unless otherwise specifically provided by other sections of the ordinances of this city; traffic control devices on such streets shall conform to the uniform standards as adopted by the State Department of Highways; upon the basis of engineering and traffic investigations and determinations made by the State Department of Highways in behalf of the city, it is declared that when standard signs are erected giving notice thereof, the reasonable and true prima facie speed limit on such highway within the city shall be thirty miles per hour. 
D.  There shall be no parking whatsoever on any roadway or contiguous shoulder of such highway within the city during the times and at the places where snow removal operations are in progress. 
E.  Any violation of this section shall be punishable in the police court of the city by penalty as provided by the section of the municipal code of the city regulating the use of public streets. Any police officer of the city is authorized and required to enforce the provisions of this section and the court shall have jurisdiction to hear and try any person charged with its violation and if such person is guilty, to punish such person as provided in this code. 
F.  All traffic and parking regulations hereafter adopted which pertain to the streets and roadways which form a part of the state highway system and constitute a connecting link thereof, shall be submitted to the Department of Highways for approval in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 120, Article 13, Section 35(8), CRS 1963, before they become effective. 
(Ord. 403 §§1-6, 1966) 
10.04.100 - Traffic regulations on Highway No. 4. 
A. The public necessity and convenience requires that a portion of State Highway No. 4 (Interstate No. 70), which lies in the city, be constructed in accordance with plans and specifications of Project No. I 70-5 (13) 449 of the Department of Highways, State of Colorado. 
B.  Such portion of the highway is hereby dedicated to the people of the state of Colorado as a connecting link in and as a part of Colorado State Highway No. 4 (Interstate No. 70); recognizing that such highway has priority over local intersecting streets. 
C.  The city recognizes the right of the Department of Highways, State of Colorado and its contractor or contractors, to proceed at once or at any time in the future, to construct the connecting link of Colorado State Highway No. 4 (Interstate No. 70) in the city. 
D.  No commercial activity or encroachment shall be permitted within the right-of-way boundaries of such highway. 
E.  On any portion of the highway within the city no person shall violate any of the provisions of Chapter 13, CRS 1963, nor any of the laws amending the same, of any of the rules or regulations issued pursuant thereto. 
F.  Only emergency parking shall be permitted at certain places as specified in 13-5-73 CRS 1963 as amended; parking when and where permitted shall be parallel. Traffic control devices on such streets shall conform to the uniform standards as adopted by the State Department of Highways; upon the basis of engineering and traffic investigations and determinations made by the State Department of Highways in behalf of the city, it is declared that when standard signs are erected giving notice thereof, the reasonable and true prima facie speed limit on the portion of such highway within the city shall be seventy miles per hour. 
G.  There shall be no parking whatsoever on any roadway or contiguous shoulder of such highway within the city during the times and at the places where snow removal operations are in progress. 
H.  Any violation of this section shall be punishable in the police court of the city by penalty as provided by this code, regulating the use of public streets. Any police officer of the city is authorized to enforce the provisions of this section and the court shall have jurisdiction to hear and try any person charged with its violation and if such person is guilty to punish such person as provided in this code. 
I.  All traffic and parking regulations hereafter adopted which pertain to the streets and roadways which form a part of the state highway system and constitute a connecting link thereof shall be submitted to the Department of Highways for approval in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 120, Article 13, Section 35(8), CRS 1963, before they shall become effective. 
(Ord. 404 §§1-9, 1966) 
10.04.110 - Validity. 
If any part or parts of this Ordinance are for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Ordinance. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed this Ordinance and each part or parts thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one part or parts might be declared invalid. The enactment of this Ordinance shall not affect the prosecution of any pending case in the Burlington Municipal Court and any repealed provisions shall remain in effect as to such pending cases. 
(Ord. No. 878, § 7, 1-9-2012) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 878, § 7, adopted Jan. 9, 2012, set out provisions intended for use as section 10.04.080. Inasmuch as section 10.04.080 currently exists in the Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as section 10.04.110. 
10.04.120 - Repeal. 
Any existing or parts of ordinances covering the same matters as embraced in this Ordinance are hereby repealed and all ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed, except that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any act done or committed in violation of any ordinance hereby repealed prior to the effective date of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 878, § 8, 1-9-2012) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 878, § 8, adopted Jan. 9, 2012, set out provisions intended for use as section 10.04.090. Inasmuch as section 10.04.090 currently exists in the Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as section 10.04.120. 
Chapter 10.08 - TRUCK LOADING AND UNLOADING 
Sections: 

10.08.010 - Parking procedures. 
All truck loading and unloading shall be made by parallel parking of trucks and they shall be parked in such a manner so as not to block the flow of traffic or unreasonably impede the flow of traffic. 
(Ord. 692 §1, 1994) 
10.08.020 - Alleys-Loading and unloading procedures-Time limits. 
If two or more trucks are in an alley for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise, drivers shall at all times be near their trucks and shall be parked in such manner so as not to block the flow of traffic or unreasonably impede the flow of traffic. The maximum amount of time for the loading and unloading of a truck in an alley shall be one hour. 
(Ord. 692 §2, 1994) 
Chapter 10.09 - TRUCK OR TRAILER PARKING 
Sections: 

10.09.010 - Truck or trailer parking prohibited. 
No truck or trailer shall be allowed to park or be parked on any city maintained street within the corporate limits of the city. Exceptions to this chapter shall be limited to immediate medical emergency or for the purpose of active loading or unloading of commerce or goods specifically at a business location/storefront, or any city owned truck or trailer; or city directed/contracted truck or trailer being used for city maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 871, § 1, 11-11-2010) 
10.09.020 - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.] 
    "Truck," as it pertains to this chapter, is any multiple axles vehicle that has a GVWR in excess of twenty-eight thousand (28,000) pounds. This may include farm trucks, motor homes, semi-tractors, etc. 
    "Trailer," as it pertains to this chapter, is any multiple axles trailer that has a GTWR in excess of twenty-eight thousand (28,000) pounds. This may include farm trailers, semi-trailers, box or flatbed trailers, etc. 
    "Business location/storefront," as it pertains to this chapter, is any business location in the city where retail or wholesale sales occur or the storage location for that or any other business. 
    "Active loading/unloading," as it pertains to this chapter, is the physical moving of items to or from a truck or trailer in which physical or mechanical means of loading and/or unloading are on-going and continual. 
(Ord. No. 871, § 2, 11-11-2010) 
Title 12 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
Chapters: 
Chapter 12.04 - CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR OF STREETS, SIDEWALKS, CURBS AND GUTTERS 
Sections: 

12.04.010 - Construction and repair. 
A.  Sidewalks Required. Sidewalks are required in the front of each residence, and where such residences are on the corner of two intersecting streets, then sidewalks are also required on the side yard that parallels a street. No new construction of a residence shall be accomplished without the property owner thereof, including as a part of such construction, the construction of a sidewalk; provided, however, where new construction is being accomplished in an established neighborhood that does not currently have sidewalks in front yards, such property owner can request a waiver of the requirement to construct sidewalks from city council, which waiver may be granted in city council's sole discretion. 
B.  Improvements Ordered by City Council. The city council may, on its own motion, order that any sidewalk, curb or gutter, or any portion thereof, be constructed, reconstructed or repaired, and any new street be constructed and may provide for the performance of such work and for the payment of the expense thereof. 
1.  Resolution of City Council. The order of the city council shall be by resolution duly adopted stating the location and nature of the improvement to be made. Said resolution shall provide that if the ordered improvement is not made by the owner within thirty days from the date of service of notice, the city may make them or cause the work to be done, and the city will assess the cost thereof against such property and the owner thereof. 
2.  Notice. Whenever such a resolution is adopted, the city clerk shall issue written notice thereof directed to the property owner and serve such notice by mailing it by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the property owner at his/her last known address. For the purpose of determining the name and last known address of any such property owner, the city clerk shall be entitled to rely upon the assessment rolls for general taxes in the office of the county assessor. 
3.  Protests. Within fifteen days after such notice is received, any property owner affected by the ordered improvement may file with the city clerk a written protest against making the ordered improvement. If no protest is filed within such period, the property owner will be deemed to have waived any objection to making the ordered improvement. If a protest is filed, the city council shall hear and consider it at its next regularly-scheduled meeting following the filing, and the protesting property owner may appear before the city council and present any arguments and relevant evidence or statements of witnesses he/she wish to produce. 
4.  Action on Protests. After hearing and considering any and all protests, the city council may (1) make any changes or deletions in the ordered improvement that it feels necessary or in the public interest; or (2) determine how to proceed with the improvement as ordered. 
5.  Proceeding with Ordered Improvement. When the city council determined to proceed with ordered improvements, whether amended or as originally ordered, the city council may grant a reasonable extension of time for the property owner to make the ordered improvement. If the property owner fails to make the ordered improvement within the thirty-day period or any extension thereof granted by the city council, then the city council may order the performance of the work by city employees or by independent contractors, or any combination thereof. 
6.  Assessment. a. Assessment roll. Upon completion of any ordered improvement by the city, the city clerk shall prepare and submit to the city council a statement showing the total cost of the improvement accomplished, including an additional amount not to exceed fifteen percent of the total cost of the improvement for clerical, inspection, collection and other incidental expense, together with an assessment roll showing a description of the property affected thereby, the name and last known address of the owner of such property, and the amount of the cost chargeable against such property. 
b.  Notice of assessment. The city clerk shall issue written notice to each property owner of property named on the assessment roll stating that: 
i.  The improvement has been completed; 
ii.  The assessment roll is on file in the city clerk's office and may be inspected by any interested person; 
iii.  The amount of the assessment against the property owner's property; 
iv.  The assessment roll will be submitted to the city council at its next regularly-scheduled meeting; 
v.  At such meeting, the city council will hear and decide any complaints and objections to the assessment before passage of an ordinance levying the assessment against the property. 
    The city clerk shall mail such notice to each property owner by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. 
c.  Levy of assessment. At the meeting designated in the notice, the city council shall hear and determine any complaints and objections made and, in its discretion, may revise, correct, confirm or set aside any assessment or charge contained in the assessment roll submitted to it. After having made such determination, the city council, by ordinance, shall levy the assessments contained in the assessment roll or as modified, and the findings and decisions of the city council shall be a final determination of the regularity and the correctness of the proceedings and of each assessment levied. 
d.  Payment of assessments. All assessment shall be due and payable without demand within thirty days from the effective date of the assessing ordinance or such other longer period as determined by the city council that is reasonable in relation to the total cost of such improvements. If any payment is not paid when due, the city clerk shall certify the full amount of such assessment to the treasurer of Kit Carson County, Colorado, who shall extend such assessment upon the tax roll of the county and collect the same in the same manner as other taxes assessed against the property. 
e.  Assessment of Lien. All assessments made pursuant to subsection B of this section shall constitute a perpetual lien in the several amounts assessed against each tract or parcel of land from the effective date of the assessing ordinance until paid, and this lien shall be superior to all other liens, claims and encumbrances except general taxes. 
C.  Permit Required. It is unlawful for any person, other than a city employee in the course of his or her employment, to make or cause or permit to be made any construction or repair of a sidewalk, curb or gutter without first obtaining a permit therefor, or to make any such construction or repair in any manner which does not comply with the permit issued therefor. Any person desiring a permit for such purpose(s) shall make application therefor to the city administrator or his or her designee, together with any fee assessed therefor as adopted by the city council from time to time. The application shall state the purpose of the requested construction or repair, its size, and the limit of time for which the permit is requested. No such permit shall be issued until the city administrator or his or her designee has approved it. 
(Ord. 795 §1(part), 2001) 
12.04.015 - City financing-Improvements of less than five thousand dollars. 
    Any city resident or business owner who owns or operates a business within city limits that intends to accomplish construction or repair of sidewalks, curbs or gutters, or similar public improvements within city limits may apply for city financing in an amount not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). Application shall be made by completing an application form available at city hall and filing it with the city administrator. 
A.  Terms Available. The city may advance an amount equal to the expected cost of any such improvement in an amount not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) subject to available funds. Interest shall accrue on any such advance at the statutory interest rate in effect pursuant to C.R.S. §5-12-102(4)(b) as of the date of the advance unless otherwise agreed by the city. Repayment shall be accomplished by the applicant within twenty-four (24) months of the advance in equal monthly installments, including interest, unless otherwise agreed by the city. 
B.  Security. Any advance made by the city pursuant to this section shall be represented by a promissory note signed by the applicant payable to the city in the amount of the advance, together with the interest rate specified in Section 12.04.015(A) above. The promissory note shall be secured by collateral offered by the applicant in a value at least equal to the amount of the requested advance, which collateral shall be acceptable to the city. The city reserves the right to accept or reject any such collateral offered, and no advance shall be made pursuant to this section without the city's acceptance of adequate collateral in the city's sole discretion. 
C.  Default. In the event the applicant fails to repay the city for any advance made pursuant to this section in accordance with the terms of such advance, the city shall exercise all of its rights and remedies in order to collect the unpaid amount. 
(Ord. 815 §1, 2003) 
12.04.020 - Street and sidewalk obstructions prohibited. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this code, it is unlawful for any person to obstruct a street or sidewalk with any debris, lumber, sand, gravel, dirt, abandoned or wrecked automobile, or other material or substance without first obtaining a permit from the city administrator or his/her designee. Such permits may be granted only where the obstruction is necessary for the construction, alteration or repair of the adjoining property, and such permitted obstruction shall be limited to as short a time as is reasonably possible. Each day that such an unlawful obstruction is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. 795 §1(part), 2001) 
12.04.030 - Removal of snow and ice from sidewalks. 
    It is unlawful for any owner or occupant of any lot, block or parcel of land within the city, or for any agent in charge of such property, to allow any snow or ice to accumulate or remain upon any sidewalk alongside such property longer than twenty-four hours from the time of the last accretion of such snow or ice. 
(Ord. 795 §1(part), 2001) 
12.04.040 - Riding of skateboards on streets and sidewalks. 
A.  Signs. When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall ride a skateboard upon a sidewalk. 
B.  Yielding Right of Way. Whenever any person is riding a skateboard upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing any such pedestrian. 
C.  No Attachment to Vehicles. No person riding upon any skateboard shall attach the skateboard or himself/herself to any vehicle upon any street or roadway. 
D.  Penalty. Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be punished for each violation by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. 795 §1(part), 2001) 
Chapter 12.08 - CURB AND SIDEWALK SPECIFICATIONS 
Sections: 

12.08.010 - Specifications for sidewalks. 
    Sidewalks on all streets except 14th Avenue shall be four feet wide and shall be laid with the inner line one foot from the property line; provided, however, that sidewalks may be constructed at the curb line when the city council grants special permission therefor. The base concrete for sidewalks shall be Portland cement to five parts of clean, coarse gravel. The wearing surface shall be one-half inch thick and mixed in the proportion of one part of Portland cement to two parts of sharp screened sand. The wearing surface must be applied while the base concrete is still damp and finished by floating with steel trowel. Sidewalks shall be cut through their entire depth into blocks approximately five feet long. Expansion joints of one-half inch wide shall be provided not more than thirty feet apart. All sidewalks shall slope one inch in their width away from the property toward the street. 
(Ord. 795 §1(part), 2001) 
12.08.020 - Specifications for curbs. 
    All curbs shall be six inches wide and eighteen inches deep and shall be constructed of concrete mixed in the same proportions, finished in the same manner, and with expansion joints as provided in Section 12.08.010 for sidewalks. The outerline of the curb shall be located on a line established by the city administrator or his/her designee, and all curbs shall be curved at street and alley intersections. Private driveways through curbs can be constructed only by receiving special permission from the city council. 
(Ord. 795 §1(part), 2001) 
Chapter 12.12 - EXCAVATIONS 
Sections: 

12.12.010 - Excavations--Permit required. 
    It is unlawful for any person, other than officer or employee of the city in the course of his/her employment, to make or cause or permit to be made any excavation or opening in or under the surface of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place without first obtaining a permit therefor, or to make any such excavation in any manner which does not comply with the permit issued therefor. 
(Ord. 795 §1(part), 2001) 
12.12.020 - Application for permit. 
    Any person desiring a permit to excavate in any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place shall make application therefor to the city administrator or his/her designee. The application shall state the purpose for the excavation, its size, and the limit of time for which the permit is requested. No such permit shall be issued until it has been approved by the city administrator or his/her designee. 
(Ord. 795 §1(part), 2001) 
12.12.030 - Restoration of street. 
    All restoration of surfaces of streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public places shall be done by the person obtaining the permit, and the surface shall be restored to its original condition in such manner that there can be no settling thereof. The filling of excavations and restoration of the surface shall be done under the supervision of the city administrator or his/her designee, and such city employee shall have the authority to prescribe the method to be used. 
(Ord. 795 §1(part), 2001) 
Chapter 12.16 - MISCELLANEOUS STREET AND SIDEWALK USE REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

12.16.010 - Planting of trees. 
    The planting of trees along the streets of the city is encouraged. Such trees shall be planted a distance of no less than eight feet from the property line along all streets, except that along 14th Street between Lowell Avenue and South Railroad Avenue, trees shall be planted a distance of no less than twelve feet from the property line unless authorized by permit issued by the city administrator for planting within any right-of-way or easement. 
(Ord. 795 §1(part), 2001) 
12.16.020 - Burning of leaves prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to burn or set fire to any leaves, papers, trash or other combustible materials within the limits of any street within the city. 
(Ord. 795 §1(part), 2001) 
Chapter 12.18 - PUBLIC PARKS REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 890, §§ 1-9, adopted Sept. 30, 2013, set out provisions to the Code but did not specify manner of inclusion. At the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Ch. 12.18, §§ 12.18.010-12.18.090. 

12.18.010 - Definitions. 
    Unless otherwise specified or the context otherwise requires, any terms used herein shall have the meanings respectively, ascribed to them. Definitions for the ordinance include the following: 
1.  Enforcement Authority: The City Manager, Chief of Police and their respective designees. 
2.  License: Any private reservation for use of park lands and facilities. 
3.  Motor Vehicle: Any wheeled conveyance, whether self-propelled, drawn or towed. 
4.  Park Amenity(ies): Any building, structure, bridge, park improvement, amenity, equipment or other such public property and appurtenances in a park. 
5.  Privilege: Any opportunity to enroll and participate in a scheduled recreation program, attend or observe a scheduled recreation program, volunteer for a scheduled recreation program or otherwise involve oneself in a scheduled recreation program held in a City park or City facility. 
6.  Public Agency Personnel: Any full-time, part-time or volunteer personnel charged with the responsibility for overseeing organizing, maintaining or assisting the agency in the care and custody of the property, whether on duty or off duty. 
7.  Public Park: Any property or recreational facility owned or used by the City for recreational purposes and designated for such purposes by the City Council. 
8.  Public Property/Facilities: Any land and facility (ies) owned by a public agency including, but not limited to, the City, school district, library and fire district. 
(Ord. No. 890, § 1, 9-30-2013) 
12.18.020 - Time public parks open and closed to public. 
    The operating hours at all City Parks shall be 5:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m. The general public is prohibited from using the parks of the City of Burlington during other hours, except with the written permission or a permit from the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 890, § 2, 9-30-2013) 
12.18.030 - Overnight camping permitted with permit only. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to camp on public property without the written permission of the governing body charged with the care and custody of such property. The Use of electricity and water from the City Parks are also by permit only. 
(Ord. No. 890, § 3, 9-30-2013) 
12.18.040 - Open burning prohibited on public property. 
    No bonfire or other open burnings will be permitted on public property. It shall be permissible for park patrons to barbecue so long as the fire is contained within an apparatus designated for cooking/grilling and is used as directed. 
(Ord. No. 890, § 4, 9-30-2013) 
Cross reference- Nuisances declared, § 8.08.040. 
Cross reference- Burning rubbish and garbage prohibited, § 8.12.030. 
Cross reference- Burning of leaves prohibited, § 12.16.020. 
12.18.050 - Hunting prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt, shoot, kill, trap, injure, pursue or molest in any way any bird or animal on or within a City park or other public property without the written permission of the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 890, § 5, 9-30-2013) 
Cross reference- Discharge of firearms, § 9.16.020. 
12.18.060 - Go-carts, ATVs, mini-bikes, golf carts prohibited in public parks. 
    It shall be unlawful for all go-carts, all-terrain vehicles (ATVs), golf carts, mini-bikes and other such electric or gas powered personal conveyance machines or other vehicles commonly known or described to fit the definition to be in the parks without the written permission of the City Manager or while being used for official use by any department of the city of Burlington. 
(Ord. No. 890, § 6, 9-30-2013) 
12.18.070 - Animal regulations in public parks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
1.  Allow any horse, horses, mule, mules, ass, asses, goat, goats, sheep, swine, cow or cattle to be in the parks of the City of Burlington without the written permission of the City manager. 
2.  Allow dogs to enter public parks without a proper license issued by the City of Burlington or other appropriate issuing Agency. (per MO 6.04.010) 
3.  Allow dogs to enter public parks without being under the control of their owner (on a leash) per MO 6.04.050). 
4.  Allow the waste products of any animal, as listed above, to remain. 
(Ord. No. 890, § 7, 9-30-2013) 
Cross reference- Keeping of animals prohibited, § 6.08.010. 
Cross reference- Animals not to run at large, § 6.08.020. 
12.18.080 - Marijuana, alcoholic beverages not permitted. 
    No person shall possess or consume any marijuana or alcoholic beverage in any City of Burlington Park nor carry, transport, or otherwise bring any marijuana or alcoholic beverage into any City of Burlington Park. Exceptions for alcoholic beverages shall be during the time periods authorized by the City Council in its approval in the form of a resolution and only when served or dispensed by a licensed concessionaire. 
(Ord. No. 890, § 8, 9-30-2013) 
Cross reference- Carrying open containers of liquors, § 9.08.080. 
12.18.090 - Penalty. 
    A person who is found to have committed a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and who has no prior offenses within a year shall be assessed a fine of not less than seventy five dollars ( $75.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00). No more than fifty dollars ($50.00) of the fine may be waived, reduced, suspended or deferred. 
(Ord. No. 890, § 9, 9-30-2013) 
Title 13 - PUBLIC SERVICES 
Chapters: 
Chapter 13.02 - ELECTRIC, WATER, SEWER, AND TRASH DEPOSITS AND PENALTIES 

13.02.010 - Deposits Required. 
Residential Deposit: A deposit of one hundred dollars ($100.00) is required of all residential customers before services can be provided at any location. A twenty dollar ($20.00) activation fee will be added to the first bill for the location. If the city has a bad debt on file from a customer, an additional deposit of one hundred dollars ($100.00) will be collected for a total upfront $200 deposit. Deposits are refundable up to a maximum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) The final bill will be taken out of the deposit before a refund is issued to the customer. 
    Commercial Utility Deposit: A commercial business is based on the amount of usage in a tier formation. Small business is a business that has an average of utilities under one thousand dollars($1,000.00) per month. The deposit for a small business is five hundred dollars ($500.00). Medium business has an average of utilities between one to five thousand dollars $1,000.00-$5,000.00) per month. The deposit for a medium business is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). A large business has an average of utilities over five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and above per month. A large business is a one thousand five hundred dollar ($1,500.00) deposit. Deposits are refundable up to a maximum of one thousand five hundred dollar ($1,500.00) after the final bill has been taken out of the deposit. 
( Ord. No. 925, 1-9-2017 ) 
13.02.020 - Activation fees required. 
A twenty dollar ($20.00) activation fee is required when a current customer moves and requests service at a new location or when a new customer sets up services. This will appear on the first bill at the new location. 
( Ord. No. 925, 1-9-2017 ) 
13.02.030 - Penalties for non-payment/reconnections. 
After the fifteenth day of the month, if account is not paid in full, a ten percent penalty shall be added to the account balance. Reminder notices will be mailed at that time. Any statement remaining unpaid by the last working date before the shutoff date specified in the reminder notice shall cause the meters to be disconnected forthwith. To reconnect services, all the late bills and penalties shall be paid in full together with an additional reconnect fee of seventy dollars ($70.00) during working hours. For after-hours connect, seventy dollars ($70.00) will be added to the past due balance and reconnect fee. Fifty dollars ($50.00) of the reconnect fee will be added to the customer's deposit until the deposit has reached the maximum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for residential or one thousand five hundred ($1,500.00) for commercial customers. 
( Ord. No. 925, 1-9-2017 ) 
13.020.040 - Payment of bills. 
Customers may pay their bill by cash, check or credit card at City Hall or by dropping payments in the drop box provided at 415 15th Street. Customers may request that their monthly statement be automatically withdrawn from their bank. To establish automatic payment, the customer will need to go to xpressbillpay.com or call 1-800-766-2350 to establish automatic processing. 
    Final Bill/Collection: To discontinue service, the customer is responsible to notify City office personnel, with the date of disconnect and the customer's forwarding address. When the customer no longer has utility service, the deposit will be the responsibility of the customer. Any amount due that the deposit does not cover will be responsible to be paid to the City of Burlington by the customer. If the amount goes unpaid for 60 days or more, the account will be turned over to a collection agency. 
( Ord. No. 925, 1-9-2017 ) 
13.02.050 - Obtaining service by fraud or subterfuge. 
Obtaining service by fraud or subterfuge which includes but is not limited to, an application for service at a location in the name of another party by a customer whose account is past due and who continues to reside at the premises. For non-payment of any sum due, if payment arrangements have not otherwise been made, then balance will be transferred to current customer and will be displayed on the regular monthly bill. 
( Ord. No. 925, 1-9-2017 ) 
Chapter 13.04 - WATER USE REGULATIONS[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
* Prior ordinance history: Ords. 709, 718 and 754. 

13.04.010 - Application for water. 
Application for the use of water shall be made to the city clerk by the owner or agent of the property to be benefited, designating the location of the property and stating the purpose for which the water may be required. 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005) 
13.04.020 - Tap fee. 
At the time of filing a commercial application, the applicant shall pay a tapping fee of one thousand seven hundred fifty dollars ($1,750.00) per EQR unit. Additions to the building shall pay a tapping fee applicable to the addition. At the time of filing a residential application, the applicant shall pay a tapping fee of one thousand three hundred fifty dollars ($1,350.00) per EQR unit. 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005) 
(Ord. No. 854, § 1, 3-9-09) 
13.04.030 - EQR unit basis for tap fees. 
The following schedule for EQR (equivalent residential) units shall be the basis for water tap fees: 
Customer Classification EQR A. A single-family residence, permanent trailer, condominium unit, if billed individually (not to have more than one kitchen): 1.0 B. Multifamily residential units, duplex, apartments, condominiums, when in one building and billed collectively:    1. Buffet apartment .6    2. Up to and including two bedrooms and not more than one and one-half bathrooms .8    3. Three bedrooms and over 1.0    4. Each coin-operated washing machine .5    5. Mobile home (trailer) in court .8 C. Transient rental units, hotels, motels or rental units in residence:   Basic fee, includes manager's quarters: 1.0    1. Each additional rental room without cooking facilities .2    2. Each additional rental room with cooking facilities .3    3. Each coin-operated washing machine .5 D. Bars, restaurants:    1. For business with less than twenty-five seating capacity 1.0    2. For the second twenty-five seating capacity or part thereof .6    3. For each additional twenty-five seating capacity (after the first fifty) E. Service stations without wash rack: 2.0   Each additional wash rack: 1.0 F. Commercial or public buildings, such as stores, offices and similar having no process water or waste loads:    1. Minimum for each building or customer up to one thousand square feet building area 1.0    2. Extra unit basis for each building or customer in excess of one thousand square feet building area to be evaluated individually and set by the city G. Industrial-warehouses, having no industrial wastes or process waters (sanitary sewer only):    1. Minimum for each building up to two thousand square feet building area 1.0    2. Extra unit basis for building in excess of two thousand square feet building area to be evaluated individually and to be set by the city H. Churches, nonprofit organizations' halls (no residence or regular eating facilities): 1.0 I. Schools, public or private:    1. Basic rate, per pupil capacity, zero to fifty 2.0    2. Each additional fifty students or fraction thereof 1.0    3. Multiply above basic rate by 1.2 factor, if school has gymnasium and showers    4. Multiply above basic rate by 1.2, if school has cafeteria  
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005) 
13.04.040 - Size of service tap. 
No service tap shall be more than three-fourths inches in diameter; provided, that the city council may grant special permission for larger taps where the water supply and service facilities are sufficient to permit such taps. Where a larger tap is permitted, the city council shall fix the tapping charge therefor. 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005) 
13.04.050 - Metering of water. 
All water sold by the city shall be metered by meters which may be installed either in a curb box or inside of the building at the option of the city administrator. All water meters shall be owned and kept in repair by the city. 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005) 
13.04.060 - Service line regulations. 
Not more than one building shall be permitted to use a water service line. All service lines shall be constructed in accordance with city standards of copper or polyethylene pipe. No line will be bedded or backfilled until inspected by the city. The tap on the city water shall be made with an approved watertight saddle by a plumber approved by the city. No bleeding of the water lines is permitted. Maintenance of water service lines shall be the responsibility of individual customers, not the city, and all service lines shall be installed at a depth at least forty (40) inches below the surface of the ground. Each service line shall contain a stop and waste cock where the water may be turned off. 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005) 
13.04.070 - Waste of water prohibited. 
Consumers shall prevent unnecessary waste of water and keep all water outlets closed when not in actual use. Hydrants, urinals, water closets, bathtubs and other fixtures must not be left running for any purpose other than the use for which they were intended. In addition to the penalty provided in this chapter for code violations, the water supply may be turned off where any such waste occurs. 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005) 
13.04.080 - No use during fire alarm or emergency. 
During all alarms of fire or emergency, the use of hose and all outlets where a constant flow of water is maintained is positively forbidden. The mayor shall have the power to declare the existence of an emergency pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005) 
13.04.090 - Water rates. 
A.  As of January 1, 2019, all water sold by the city shall be sold at the following rates: 
1.  Residential. 
a.  Customer charge: Thirty-seven dollars and fifty-five cents ($37.55). 
b.  First five thousand (5,000) gallons or less, will be charged two dollars ($2.00); and 
c.  Each additional one thousand (1,000) gallons will be charged two dollars ($2.00). 
2.  Commercial. 
a.  Customer charge: thierty-eight dollars and twenty cents ($38.20). 
b.  First five thousand (5,000) gallons or less two dollars ($2.00); and 
c.  Each additional one thousand (1,000) gallons will be charged two dollars ($2.00). 
B.  As of January 1, 2020, all water sold by the city shall be sold at the following rates: 
1.  Residential. 
a.  Customer charge: Forty-three dollars and fifty-five cents ($43.55). 
b.  First five thousand (5,000) gallons or less, will be charged two dollars ($2.00); and 
c.  Each additional one thousand (1,000) gallons will be charged two dollars ($2.00). 
2.  Commercial. 
a.  Customer charge: fifty-five dollars ($55.00). 
b.  First five thousand (5,000) gallons or less two dollars ($2.00); and 
c.  Each additional one thousand (1,000) gallons will be charged two dollars ($2.00). 
C.  For the next two years, the rates shall increase by a rate of five dollars ($5.00) per year for the first five thousand gallons or less, per month. 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005) 
(Ord. No. 853, § 1, 8-25-08; Ord. No. 886, §§ 1, 2, 5-28-2013; Ord. No. 924, 1-9-2017 ; Ord. No. 935 , § 1, 11-26-2018; Ord. No. 936 , § 1, 11-26-2018) 
13.04.100-13.04.130 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 925, adopted Jan. 12, 2017 , repealed former §§ 13.04.100-13.04.130 in their entirety. Subject matter and legislative history of these former sections are listed below. 
Section Subject Legislative History 13.04.100 Water bills-Payment-Penalty. Ord. No. 829, § 1, 2005 13.04.110 Delinquent water charges must be paid Ord. No. 829, § 1, 2005 13.04.130 Charge for turning water on. Ord. No. 829, § 1, 2005  
13.04.140 - Regulations part of contract. 
All regulations contained in this chapter shall be considered a part of the contract of every person taking water from the waterworks of the city, and every person taking water shall be considered as having expressly consented to be bound thereby. 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005) 
13.04.150 - Independent water supply prohibited. 
No person may develop or use any independent water supply including, but not limited to, the drilling or construction of a private well, for the withdrawal of groundwater for any purpose within the city limits of the city of Burlington. 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005) 
13.04.160 - Outdoor use of water for users of water supplied by the city during summer months. 
A. The use of water supplied by the City of Burlington for outdoor purposes, including the watering of lawns and gardens, washing cars, etc. shall be restricted during the summer months of high consumption, as follows: 
1.  Restricted Period. Water restrictions set forth in this section shall be in effect from June 1 through August 31 during the hours of 9:00 a.m. until 9:00 p.m. ("restricted period"), commencing June 1, 2002. Water may be used for outdoor purposes by all users of water supplied by the City of Burlington on July 31 and daily during the restricted period from 9:00 p.m. until 9:00 a.m. on the following day. 
2.  Even Numbered Addresses. Except for large irrigators as defined in paragraph 4. below, for those residences and businesses who use water supplied by the City of Burlington and whose street address ends in an even number (i.e., 2, 4, 6, 8, etc.), water can be used for outdoor purposes such as lawn and garden watering, car washing, etc. only on those days that are even-numbered days (i.e., the 2nd, 4th, 6th day of each month, etc.) during the restricted period. 
3.  Odd Numbered Addresses. Except for large irrigators as defined in paragraph 4. below, for those residences and businesses who use water supplied by the City of Burlington and whose street address ends in an odd number (i.e., 1, 3, 5, 7, etc.), water can be used for outdoor purposes such as lawn and garden watering, car washing, etc. only on those days that are odd-numbered days (i.e., the 1st, 3rd, 5th, 7th day of each month, etc.) during the restricted period. 
4.  Large Irrigators. Large irrigators shall be determined from time to time by the city council, which determination shall be confirmed in writing to any party deemed to be a large irrigator. Large irrigators may only use water supplied by the City of Burlington between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. during the restricted period. 
5.  Exception for New Lawns. New lawns that are not yet established shall be exempt from the watering restrictions set forth in this section if the owner obtains an exemption permit at City Hall, which permit shall be prominently displayed at the address for which the permit is obtained. Permits may be obtained for a thirty-day period, and only one permit may be obtained by any owner for the same property during any calendar year. 
B.  For any violation of this section, the violator may be issued a written citation summoning the violator into the municipal court to answer for the violation. 
(Ord. No. 874, §§ 1, 2, 7-11-2011) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 874, adopted July 11, 2011, did not specifically amend the Code and has been included herein as § 13.04.160 at the discretion of the editor. 
Chapter 13.08 - SEWER SERVICE REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

13.08.010 - Permit required. 
It is unlawful for any person to open, uncover or in any manner make connection with any sewer main or line of the city, or to the lay drain or sewer pipes on any premises or in any street or alley in the city without first obtaining a written permit therefor. 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005: Ord. 709 §2(part), 1995) 
13.08.020 - Application. 
The application for a permit to make connection with any sewer main or line of the city, or to lay drain or sewer pipes within the city limits shall be in writing and shall contain the following information: 
A.  Name and address of applicant; 
B.  Name and address of owner of the premises where such connection is to be made; and where the drain or line is to be laid; 
C.  Location of the proposed connection, drain or sewer pipes; 
D.  Statement as to the type of connection and type of materials to be discharged into the sewer; 
E.  Statement as to whether such connection is to be made to the storm sewer or the sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005: Ord. 709 §2(part), 1995) 
13.08.030 - Issuance of permit. 
If the proposed connection does not violate any provision of this chapter and does not violate any other laws of the city, the city clerk shall issue a permit for such connection. Such permit shall contain all information contained in such application and shall specify the type and kind of grease and sand traps to be used. 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005: Ord. 709 §2(part), 1995) 
13.08.040 - Tap fee. 
At the time of filing a commercial application, the applicant shall pay a tapping fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per EQR unit. Additions to buildings shall pay a tapping fee applicable to the addition. At the time of filing a residential application, applicants shall pay a tapping fee of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per EQR unit. 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005: Ord. 709 §2(part), 1995) 
(Ord. No. 854, § 2, 3-9-09) 
13.08.050 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 925, adopted Jan. 12, 2017 , repealed former § 13.08.050 in its entirety which pertained to sewer service charges and derived from Ord. 709 § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 718 § 2, 1996; Ord. 829 § 1(part), 2005; Ord. No. 853, § 2, 8-25-08. 
13.08.060 - EQR unit basis for service charges and tap fees. 
The following schedule of EQR (equivalent residential) units shall be the basis for sewer service charges and sewer tap fees: 
Customer Classification EQR A. Single-family residence, permanent trailer, condominium unit, if billed individually (not to have more than one kitchen): 1.0 B. Multifamily residential units, duplex, apartments, condominiums, when one building and billed collectively:    1. Buffet apartment .6    2. Up to and including two bedrooms and not more than one and one-half bathrooms .8    3. Three bedrooms and over 1.0    4. Each coin-operated washing machine .5    5. Mobile home (trailer) in court .8 C. Transient rental units, hotels, motels or rental units in residence:   Basic fee, includes manager's quarters: 1.0    1. Each additional rental room without cooking facilities .2    2. Each additional rental room with cooking facilities .3    3. Each coin-operated washing machine .5    4. Each internal motel laundry machine by load capacity:    12.01 to 21.0 capacity .7    21.1 to 30.0 capacity 1    31.1 to 41.0 capacity 1.3    41.1 50 51.0 capacity 1.6    51.1 to 61.0 capacity 2    5. Swimming pool for each gallon of capacity .00004 D. Bars, restaurants:    1. For business with less than twenty-five seating capacity 1.0    2. For the second twenty-five seating capacity or part thereof .6    3. For each additional twenty-five seating capacity (after the first fifty) E. Service stations without wash rack: 2.0   Each additional wash rack: 1.0 F. Commercial or public buildings, such as stores, offices and similar having no process water or waste loads:    1. Minimum for each building or customer up to one thousand square feet building area 1.0    2. Extra unit basis for each building or customer in excess of one thousand square feet building area to be evaluated individually and set by the city G. Industrial-warehouses, having industrial wastes or process waters:    1. Minimum for each building up to two thousand square feet building area 3.0    2. Extra unit basis for building in excess of two thousand square feet building area to be evaluated individually and to be set by the city H. Churches, nonprofit organizations' halls (no residence or regular eating facilities): 1.0 I. Schools, public or private:    1. Basic rate, per pupil capacity, zero to fifty 2.0    2. Each additional fifty students or fraction thereof 1.0    3. Multiply above basic rate by 1.2 factor, if school has gymnasium and showers    4. Multiply above basic rate by 1.2, if school has cafeteria  
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005: Ord. 709 §2(part), 1995) 
(Ord. No. 854, § 4, 3-9-09) 
13.08.070 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 925, adopted Jan. 12, 2017, repealed former § 13.08.070 in its entirety which pertained to failure to pay sewer charges and derived from Ord. 709 § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 829 § 1(part), 2005. 
13.08.080 - Adoption of rules and regulations governing sewers. 
The city council shall make and enforce such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary for the safe, efficient and economical management of the city sewer system. Such rules and regulations, when not repugnant to this code or any other ordinances of the city and laws of the state, shall have the same force and effect as ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005: Ord. 709 §2(part), 1995) 
13.08.090 - Construction of sewers. 
A.  Any user of the city sewer system must construct his or her own sewer line to meet that of the city's sewer line. When the city sewer system is not installed in the utility easement adjacent to the user's property, then the user of the sewer system must construct the city sewer line to his or her property. All connections to the city's sewer system must be made by a licensed plumber, subject to the supervision and inspection of the city, and in compliance with the state plumbing code. 
B.  All service lines shall be constructed in accordance with city standards of VCP or heavy PVC pipe. No line shall be bedded or backfilled until inspected by the city. Maintenance of sewer service lines shall be the responsibility of the individual user. Each building shall have a separate service line, unless otherwise approved by the city. 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005: Ord. 709 §2(part), 1995) 
(Ord. No. 855, § 1, 11-10-08) 
13.08.100 - Discharge of unacceptable wastes into sewer. 
The discharge of unacceptable wastes into the city sewer system, whether directly or indirectly, is prohibited, and where investigation reveals the presence in the system of unacceptable wastes emanating from any lot, land, building or premises, the owner, lessor, renter or occupant of such lot, land, building or premises shall be required, at his or her own expense, to treat, neutralize or in other ways prepare the noxious substance therein to the satisfaction of the city administrator in order to convert the same into acceptable wastes. 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005: Ord. 709 §2(part), 1995) 
13.08.110 - Use of grease, oil and sand interceptors. 
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city administrator, they are necessary for the proper handling of any liquid waste containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable waste, sand or other harmful ingredients, except with respect to private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city administrator and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005: Ord. 709 §2(part), 1995) 
13.08.120 - Control manhole required. 
When required by the city administrator, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial waste shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation and sampling of the waste. Such manholes, when required, shall be accessible, safely located and constructed in accordance with the plans approved by the city administrator. The manholes shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005: Ord. 709 §2(part), 1995) 
13.08.130 - Abandonment of connection. 
No person shall abandon any building connection without first obtaining a written permit therefor. Such building connection shall be effectively sealed with a vitrified clay stopper inserted in the bell of the sewer extending to the property line, which stopper shall be jointed as directed by the city administrator. 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005: Ord. 709 §2(part), 1995) 
13.08.140 - Interference with city employees prohibited-Digging up streets for purposes of sewer connections. 
No person shall in any way interfere with the employees of the city in the discharge of their duties in the tapping of any sewer pipe, main or lateral. No person shall dig up or cause to be dug up any street or alley in the city for the purpose of connecting with the sewer system of the city without first obtaining a permit, and no person having a permit shall dig up any portion of any street or alley of the city for the purpose of connecting with the sewer system of the city and fail or neglect to place the street or alley in its original condition. 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005: Ord. 709 §2(part), 1995) 
13.08.150 - Deposit of unsanitary wastes on property. 
No person shall deposit or permit to be deposited any human or animal excrement wastes in any unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the city or within any area within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005: Ord. 709 §2(part), 1995) 
13.08.160 - Deposit of untreated industrial waste into natural outlets. 
No person shall discharge into any natural outlet within the city, or any area within the jurisdiction of the city, any sanitary sewer industrial waste or other polluted waste, except where suitable treatment has been provided. 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005: Ord. 709 §2(part), 1995) 
13.08.170 - Damaging, tampering with sewers. 
No person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage or destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the city's sanitary sewer system. 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005: Ord. 709 §2(part), 1995) 
13.08.180 - Discontinuance of sewer service. 
In addition to the remedies provided in this section, the city may, without notice, discontinue sanitary sewer service to any premises for which the sanitary sewer system charges are delinquent for a period of ten (10) days. The city may, without notice, discontinue the sanitary sewer service to any premises discharging unacceptable wastes into the sanitary sewer system. 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005: Ord. 709 §2(part), 1995) 
13.08.190 - Connection with sanitary sewer required-Exception for private system. 
A.  Except where otherwise provided, no person shall maintain within the city any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended for the disposal of sewage. 
B.  Where the city sanitary sewer is not available within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, a building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of the department of public health of the state. Such private sewage disposal system shall be constructed, maintained and operated at all times in a sanitary manner. 
C.  At such time as the city sanitary sewer becomes available to property served by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the city sanitary sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the private sewage disposal system previously servicing the property shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005: Ord. 709 §2(part), 1995) 
Chapter 13.12 - ELECTRICAL SERVICE REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

13.12.010 - Electric department created. 
There is created and established an electric department of the city which shall have control of the operation and maintenance of the electric plant and works for the manufacture, generation, transmission and distribution of electricity, and the distribution and sale of electrical energy. 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005: Ord. 757 §2(part), 1998) 
13.12.020 - City administrator-Powers. 
The city administrator shall have the immediate control and management of all things pertaining to the electric department, subject to the approval and confirmation of the city council. The council shall have the power to prescribe such other and further rates, rules and regulations as it may deem necessary. 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005: Ord. 757 §2(part), 1998) 
13.12.030 - Application for service. 
Application for electrical service shall be made to the city clerk on forms provided for that purpose. 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005: Ord. 757 §2(part), 1998) 
13.12.040 - Charges for electrical service connections. 
When application for service is made, the applicant shall pay for temporary electrical service based on actual costs incurred and permanent electrical service connections in accordance with the following schedule: 
A.  Electrical service connection: 
1. Residential, initial service connection for overhead service $1,000.00 2. Residential, initial service connection for underground service 1,500.00 3. Residential, subsequent service connection following shutoff or threatened shutoff in the case of delinquency 20.00 4. Commercial initial service to be determined by city council after application 5. Commercial, subsequent service connections 30.00 6. Underground, initial service connection to be determined by city council  
B.  Cash deposit: not to exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the estimated amount of annual billings as determined by the city clerk. 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005: Ord. 757 §2(part), 1998) 
(Ord. No. 854, § 3, 3-9-09) 
13.12.050 - Meters and service drops. 
A.  The electric department will furnish, install, own and maintain the equipment to properly meter the service required. Standard overhead service drops from the supply lines of the electric department to the premises of the consumer will be installed. If an underground service is requested, the consumer shall provide, own and maintain it, although the service will be installed in accordance with prevailing requirements of the electric department. The service entrance wiring shall be brought to a point satisfactory to the electric department that may be reached by the electric department's supply lines without service drop trespass upon other property. 
B.  The meter loop wiring shall be such that each class of service shall be measured in accordance with existing rate schedules for each class of service desired. 
C.  The electric department will not assume any responsibility beyond the point of delivery at the meter, or with respect to the consumer's wiring, or for damages resulting from defective wiring. Service may be discontinued after due notice to the consumer, if wiring is considered unsafe and will not be reconnected until the unsafe condition has been corrected. 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005: Ord. 757 §2(part), 1998) 
13.12.060 - Space for meters. 
The consumer will provide, at his or her expense and in connection with his or her wiring, a suitable mounting space or enclosure for installation of the metering equipment in accordance with the prevailing requirements of the electric department. 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005: Ord. 757 §2(part), 1998) 
13.12.070 - Consumer wiring. 
The consumer shall provide, at his or her expense, all inside wiring necessary for the proper utilization of electrical service, and all service entrance wiring and switches shall be installed in accordance with the prevailing requirements of the electric department. 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005: Ord. 757 §2(part), 1998) 
13.12.080 - Rates. 
The schedule of rates set out in Sections 13.12.090 through 13.12.130 of this chapter for providing electric energy by the city are fixed and shall remain in effect until repealed or amended. 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005: Ord. 757 §2(part), 1998) 
13.12.090 - Residential electricity. 
A.  Residential service is available for single-family dwelling units and individually metered multifamily dwelling units at any location within the area served by the city. Single-family dwelling units and individually metered multifamily dwelling units shall mean those buildings or units used solely as residences and not used in part for any other purpose. This rate is applicable to existing and new residential customers. Service will be delivered through a single meter per dwelling unit at one point of delivery. 
B.  Type of service: single-phase, sixty (60) hertz, at available secondary voltage. 
C.  Residential and domestic rates: 
1.  Service charge-$10.00 per month 
2.  Purchased power base charge-$0.0817 per kWh 
3.  Burlington charge-$0.0616 per kWh 
4.  Purchased power cost adjustment (per month)-See Section 13.12.160 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005: Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003; Ord. 757 §2(part), 1998) 
(Ord. No. 853, § 3, 8-25-2008; Ord. No. 867, § 1, 1-20-2010; Ord. No. 867-A, § 1, 1-25-2010; Ord. No. 887, § 1, 5-28-2013) 
13.12.100 - Commercial electricity. 
A. Commercial electricity service is available to small commercial enterprises, public buildings and small power consumers having installed less than four hundred (400) amp service and/or an annual consumption of thirty-six thousand (36,000) kWh or less. Each metering point shall be billed separately under the appropriate rate. 
B.  Type of service: three or single phase, sixty (60) hertz, at available secondary voltage. 
C.  Commercial rates: 
1.  Service charge-$10.00 per month 
2.  Purchased power base charge-$0.0881 per kWh 
3.  Burlington charge-$0.0616 kWh 
4.  Purchased power cost adjustment (per month)-See Section 13.12.160 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005: Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003; Ord. 757 §2(part), 1998) 
(Ord. No. 853, § 3, 8-25-2008; Ord. No. 867, § 1, 1-20-2010; Ord. No. 867-A, § 1, 1-25-2010; Ord. No. 887, § 2, 5-28-2013) 
13.12.110 - Large power electricity. 
A. Large power electricity is available to a large commercial enterprise, public buildings and large power consumers having installed four hundred (400) amp service or larger and/or an annual consumption exceeding thirty-six thousand (36,000) kWh. Each metering point shall be billed separately under the appropriate rate. 
B.  Type of service: three or single phase, sixty (60) hertz, at available secondary voltage. 
C.  Rates: 
1.  Service charge-$10.00 per month 
2.  Purchased power and other power charges-$0.0924 per kWh 
3.  Burlington charge-$9.6370 per kW 
4.  Purchased power cost adjustment (per month)-See Section 13.12.160 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005: Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003; Ord. 757 §2(part), 1998) 
(Ord. No. 853, § 3, 8-25-2008; Ord. No. 867, § 1, 1-20-2010; Ord. No. 867-A, § 1, 1-25-2010; Ord. No. 887, § 3, 5-28-2013) 
13.12.120 - Rural electricity. 
A. Rural electrical rates shall apply to all consumers using electricity at establishments located outside of the corporate limits of the city. The definition of a residential use as contained in Section 13.12.090 of this chapter, the definition of a commercial use as contained in Section 13.12.100 of this chapter, the definition of a large power use as contained in Section 13.12.110 of this chapter, and the definition of irrigation use as contained in Section 13.12.130 of this chapter shall apply to this section, except that the places of use shall be located outside of the corporate limits. 
B.  Rural electrical rates: same as residential, commercial and large power. 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005: Ord. 757 §2(part), 1998) 
13.12.130 - Irrigation electricity. 
A. Irrigation electricity is applicable to irrigation installations at a fixed location in excess of twenty-five (25) horsepower service. 
B.  Type of service: three or single phase, sixty (60) hertz, at available secondary voltage. 
C.  Rates: 
1.  Meter charge (one time charge at time of new installation)-$300.00 
2.  Service charge-$10.00 per month 
3.  Purchased power base charge-$0.1028 per kWh 
4.  Burlington charge-$0.0535 per kWh 
5.  Purchased power cost adjustment (per month)-See Section 13.12.160 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005: Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003; Ord. 757 §2(part), 1998) 
(Ord. No. 853, § 3, 8-25-2008; Ord. No. 867, § 1, 1-20-2010; Ord. No. 867-A, § 1, 1-25-2010; Ord. No. 887, § 4, 5-28-2013) 
13.12.131 - City electricity. 
  
1.  Service charge-$10.00 per month 
2.  Purchased power base charge-$0.0866 per kWh 
3.  Burlington charge-$0.0583 per kWh 
4.  Purchased power cost adjustment (per month)-See Section 13.12.160" 
(Ord. No. 867, § 1, 1-20-2010; Ord. No. 867-A, § 1, 1-25-2010; Ord. No. 887, § 5, 5-28-2013) 
13.12.140 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 925, adopted Jan. 12, 2017 , repealed former § 13.12.140 in its entirety which pertained to payment of electric bills and derived from Ord. No. 757, § 2, 1998; Ord. No. 829, § 1, 2005; Ord. No. 915, 6-13-2016 ; Ord. No. 918, 8-29-2016 . 
13.12.150 - Inspections. 
The electric department shall have the right to enter upon the premises of any consumer of city electricity at all reasonable times for the purpose of inspecting, repairing, replacing or removing department-owned equipment, or inspecting wiring or appliances which are suspected of being unsafe. 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005: Ord. 757 §2(part), 1998) 
13.12.160 - Purchased power cost adjustment. 
All electrical energy sold by the city shall be subject to a monthly purchased power cost adjustment equal to one hundred (100) percent of the purchased power cost charged to the city by its suppliers of wholesale electrical energy minus unadjusted revenue based on the purchased power base charge listed in this chapter. 
(Ord. 829 §1(part), 2005: Ord. 814 §1, 2003: Ord. 757 §2(part), 1998) 
(Ord. No. 867, § 1, 1-20-2010; Ord. No. 867-A, § 1, 1-25-2010) 
Chapter 13.14 - NET ENERGY METERING RULES 

13.14.010 - Definitions. 
A.  As used in these Regulations, the following words and phrases shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    "Net Energy Billing" means a billing and metering practice under which a customer-generator is billed on the basis of net energy over the billing period. 
    "Avoided Costs" means the incremental costs to the City's Electric Utility of electric energy or capacity or both which, but for the purchase from the Net Energy Metering Facility, such utility would generate itself or purchase from another source. 
    "Billing Period" means same billing period applicable under the customer's applicable standard rate schedule. 
    "City" means the City of Burlington Colorado. 
    "Commercial Customer" means a customer served under the City Electric Utility's rate schedules applicable to commercial service. 
    "Council" means the City Council of the City of Burlington, Colorado. 
    "Electric Utility" means the electric utility that engages in the business of supplying electric energy to the ultimate customer or any customer class within the City of Burlington. The electric utility falls under the jurisdiction of the Council in order to be required to comply with the provisions set forth herein. 
    "Fuel Cell Facility" means a facility that converts the chemical energy of a fuel directly to direct current electricity without intermediate combustion or thermal cycles. 
    "Hydroelectric Facility" means a facility in which electricity is generated by the mechanical energy of naturally moving water transferred by a rotating turbine to a generator, where it is converted to electric energy. 
    "Interconnection Costs" means the reasonable costs of connection, switching, metering, transmission, distribution, safety provisions and administrative costs incurred by the Electric Utility directly related to the installation and maintenance of the physical facilities necessary to permit interconnected operations with a Net Energy Metering Facility, to the extent the costs are in excess of the corresponding costs which the Electric Utility would have incurred if it had not engaged in interconnected operations, but instead generated an equivalent amount of electric energy itself or purchased an equivalent amount of electric energy or capacity from other sources. Interconnection costs do not include any costs included in the calculation of avoided costs. 
    "Micro Turbine Facility" means a facility that uses a small combustion turbine to produce electricity. 
    "Net Energy Metering" means the measurement of the difference between electricity supplied by an Electric Utility and the electricity generated by a net metering customer and fed back to the Electric Utility over the applicable billing period. 
    "Net Energy Metering Facility" means a facility for the production of electrical energy that: 
1.  Uses solar, hydroelectric, or wind resources to generate electricity including, but not limited to, fuel cells and micro turbines that generate electricity if the fuel source is entirely derived from renewable resources; 
2.  Has a generating capacity of not more than ten (10) kilowatts for Residential Customers or twenty-five (25) kilowatts for Commercial Customers 
3.  Is located in the City of Burlington; 
4.  Can operate in parallel with an Electric Utility's existing distribution facilities; 
5.  Is intended primarily to offset part or all of the net-metering customer requirements for electricity; and 
6.  Meets all applicable safety and performance standards. 
    "Parallel Operation" means the operation of on-site generation by a customer while the customer is connected to and synchronized with the utility's distribution system. 
    "Residential Customer" means a customer served under a utility's standard rate schedule applicable to residential service. 
    "Solar Facility" means a facility in which electricity is generated through the collection, transfer and/or storage of the sun's heat or light. 
    "State Electrical Board (SEB)" under the Colorado Department of Regulatory Agencies (DORA), Division of Registrations, sets rules and regulations for all renewable energy projects in Colorado. 
    "Wind Facility" means a facility in which an electric generator is powered by a wind-driven turbine. 
(Ord. No. 888, 6-24-2013) 
13.14.020 - General provisions; scope and applicability. 
A.  The purpose of the City of Burlington's Net Energy Metering Rules are to establish the City Council's rules, policies and procedures for net energy metering and interconnection in the City of Burlington, including eligibility for participating in net energy metering, a bill crediting mechanism for participants, net metering-related equipment requirements, a standard contract requirement, and safety and performance standards. These rules shall be cited as the "City of Burlington, Colorado Net Energy Metering Rules." 
B.  These Rules shall apply to the City electric utility, as defined in these Rules, that provides electric service to customers in the City of Burlington. 
C.  The Net Metering Rules are not intended to, and do not affect or replace any Council-approved regulation, policy, procedure, rule or service application of the city's Electric Utility, which address items other than those covered in these Rules. 
(Ord. No. 888, 6-24-2013) 
13.14.030 - Electric utility requirements. 
A.  The maximum amount of Net Metering on the City's electric utilities system shall be no greater than 95 KW coincident with the Utility's peak load. 
B.  The City's Electric Utility, subject to the jurisdiction of the Council, that offers residential or commercial electrical service, or both, shall allow any of its customers to establish Net Energy Metering Facilities to be interconnected with the Electric Utility using a standard meter capable of registering the flow of electricity in two directions. A two-channel meter or other type meter(s) that is capable of determining the net energy can be utilized, as well. 
C.  If the meter that is currently installed on the Net Energy Metering Facility is incapable of registering the flow of electricity in two directions, an additional meter or meters may be installed by the Electric Utility so long as collectively the meters are capable of registering the flow of electricity in two directions. 
D.  The cost of the meter shall not be borne by the net metering customer, unless the additional meter(s) is not required by the Electric Utility, but instead requested by the net metering customer. A customer charge for any installations where the meter will not register in both directions may be assessed by the utility in conformity with subsection 13.14.040 B. below. 
E.  If an additional meter or meters are installed, as described in subsection 13.14.030 D. above, the net energy metering calculation shall yield the same result as when a single meter is used. 
(Ord. No. 888, 6-24-2013) 
13.14.040 - Metering requirements. 
A.  The metering equipment installed for net energy metering shall be capable of accurately measuring the flow of electricity in two directions. 
B.  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 13.14.080 below, the cost of the meter is the responsibility of the Electric Utility, but the utility will be allowed to assess a onetime customer charge to cover the installation costs. The city may also assess a customer charge for any additional meter installations if the additional installations are requested by the net metering customer. Metering equipment shall be installed to both accurately measure the electricity applied by the Electric Utility to each net-metering customer and also to accurately measure the electricity generated by each net-metering customer that is fed back to the Electric Utility over the applicable billing period. 
C.  A meter or meters operating in both forward and reverse registration modes shall be considered to be accurate when a meter test discloses that its average registration is in the range of 98% to 102%; inclusive, of current average registration. A test to determine compliance with this accuracy requirement shall be made by the Electric Utility either before or at the time the Net Energy Metering Facility is placed in operation in accordance with these Rules. The costs associated with the test may be included in the customer charge, as set out in subsection 13.14.040 B. or it may be a separate customer charge, to be assessed to the net metering customer prior to the initiation of net energy metering service. 
D.  The Electric Utility will regularly test its meters and maintain their accuracy of registration in accordance with good practice that shall be consistent with the use of service, elapsed time, nature of the load metered, and these rules. The utility also will make a special test of the Customer's meter upon the written request of the Customer. The first such test in any twelve-month period shall be performed at the expense of the utility. Any subsequent tests performed at the request of the Customer in the same twelve-month period shall be performed at the expense of the Customer, provided the meter is found to register within the range prescribed in subsection 13.14.040 C. above. Tests that disclose meter registration to be outside such range shall be performed at the expense of the Electric Utility. 
E.  To the extent that a faulty meter has resulted in a net metering customer receiving insufficient credits or payments, pursuant to subsection 13.14.060 B. and subsection 13.14.060 C. below, the Electric Utility shall make the appropriate credits or payments in the next billing cycle. If the faulty meter has resulted in the net metering customer receiving excess credits or payments, pursuant to subsection 13.14.060 B. and subsection 13.14.060 C. below, then the utility shall reduce any future credits or payments by the excess amount in the next billing cycle. 
(Ord. No. 888, 6-24-2013) 
13.14.050 - New or additional charges. 
A.  Any new or additional charge that would increase a net metering customer's costs beyond those of other customers in the rate class shall be filed by the Electric Utility with the Council for approval. The filing shall be supported by cost/benefit analyses. 
B.  Following notice and opportunity for public comment, the Council may authorize an Electric Utility to assess a net metering customer a greater fee or customer charge, of any type, if the Electric Utility's direct costs of interconnection and administration of net-metering outweigh the distribution system, environmental and public policy benefits of allocating the costs among the Electric Utility's entire customer base. 
C.  The City Electric Utility shall be reimbursed by the net metering customer for interconnection costs at the time the costs are incurred. Upon petition by any party involved and for good cause shown, the City may allow for reimbursement of the interconnection costs over a reasonable period of time and upon such conditions as the City may determine; provided, however, that no other customers of the utility shall bear any of the costs of interconnection. 
(Ord. No. 888, 6-24-2013) 
13.14.060 - Billing for net metering. 
A.  On a monthly basis, the net metering customer shall be billed the charges applicable under the currently effective standard rate schedule and any appropriate rider schedules. Under net metering, only the kilowatt-hour (kWh) units of a customer's bill are affected. 
B.  If the kWhs supplied by the Electric Utility exceeds the kWhs generated by the Net Energy Metering Facility and are fed back to the Electric Utility during the billing period, the Customer shall be billed for such excess ("Net") kWh supplied by the Electric Utility in accordance with the rates and charges of the currently effective standard rate and appropriate rider schedules under which the Customer is provided electric service. 
C.  Where the electricity generated by the net metering customer exceeds the electricity supplied by the Electric Utility, the net metering customer shall be credited, during the next billing period, for the excess kilowatt hours generated in the same manner as Section VI(B) above. For the final month in which the net metering customer takes service from the Electric Utility, the Electric Utility shall issue a check to the net metering customer for the balance of any credit due in excess of amounts owed by the customer to the Electric Utility. The payment for any remaining credits shall be at the Electric Utility's avoided cost. That avoided cost shall be clearly identified in the Electric Utility's net metering tariff, as set out below in section 13.14.090, below. 
(Ord. No. 888, 6-24-2013) 
13.14.070 - Initial interconnection of Net Energy Metering Facility. 
A.  The Net Energy Metering Facility, at the net metering customer's expense, shall meet all safety and performance standards established by local and national electric codes including the National Electric Code (NEC), the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), the National Electric Safety Code (NESC), and Underwriters Laboratories (UL) and any other relevant standards specified by the City. The Net Energy Metering Facility must also comply with the Permit and inspection requirements of the Colorado State Electrical Board Rules and Regulations, and demonstrate such compliance to the City of Burlington Electric Utility. 
B.  The Net Energy Metering Facility, at the net metering customer's expense, shall meet all reasonable safety and performance standards that are necessary to assure safe and reliable operation of the Net Energy Metering Facility when connected to the Electric Utility's system and that have been adopted by the Electric Utility and approved by the Council pursuant to these rules. 
C.  A Net Energy Metering Facility shall be capable of safely operating in parallel prior to commencing the delivery of power into the utility system at a single point of interconnection. 
D.  At least 90 days prior to the date the net metering customer intends to interconnect with the Electric Utility, the customer shall notify the Utility of its intentions ("Notification Date"), and provide engineering plans and drawings describing the Net Metering Facility for the utility's review, and showing it is capable of safely operating in parallel with the utility's local system at a single point of interconnection. The Electric Utility shall begin a review of the proposed Net Metering Facility at this time. 
E.  At least seventy-five days prior to the date the net metering customer intends to interconnect with the Electric Utility (i.e., 15 days after the Notification Date) the Utility shall provide the customer with a Standard Interconnection Agreement as described in §VII, and also with its performance and safety standards applicable to the Net Energy Metering Facility. 
F.  At least sixty days prior to the date the net metering customer intends to interconnect with the Electric Utility, the utility shall provide the customer with the written results of its review including detailed explanations of any items that may prevent safe parallel operation of the facility with the utility's local system. The Electric Utility will also provide the customer with proposed corrections to such items. 
G.  At least 45 days prior to the date the net metering customer intends to interconnect with the Electric Utility the customer will return a signed Interconnection Agreement to the utility and provide evidence that all utility proposed corrections to the facility have been satisfactorily remedied. 
H.  A Net Energy Metering Facility shall have a visibly open, lockable, manual disconnection switch that is accessible by the Electric Utility and clearly labeled, unless this requirement is waived by the Electric Utility. 
I.  If the Electric Utility's existing facilities are not adequate to interconnect with the Net Energy Metering Facility, any changes will be performed in accordance with the Electric Utility's policies regarding extension of facilities. 
(Ord. No. 888, 6-24-2013) 
13.14.080 - Standard interconnection agreement. 
A.  The City has developed a Standard Interconnection Agreement for Net Metering Facilities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of the Council. The Standard Interconnection Agreement shall be consistent with the provisions of these rules and shall describe any and all interconnection expenses, and other customer charges in conformity with sections 13.14.040 and 13.14.050 above, for which the net metering customer shall be responsible. 
B.  The Electric Utility shall provide a copy of the Council-approved Standard Interconnection Agreement to the customer as indicated in subsection 13.14.070 D. above. The customer shall submit a Standard Interconnection Agreement to the Electric Utility at least forty-five days prior to the date the customer intends to interconnect the net metering facilities to the utility's facilities as indicated in subsection 13.14.070 F. above. 
C.  If the Standard Interconnection Agreement is mailed by the customer, the date of notification shall be the third day following the mailing of the Standard Interconnection Agreement. The burden to prove the date upon which the notification was mailed to the Electric Utility shall be on the customer. 
(Ord. No. 888, 6-24-2013) 
13.14.090 - Net metering tariff. 
A.  The City shall prepare a Net Metering Tariff in standard tariff format. 
B.  The on-peak seasonal avoided cost rate shall be based on the on-peak seasonal rate established in purchased power charges from the City's wholesale power supplier(s). If such a rate does not exist, the avoided cost rate will be the highest monthly energy charge ($/kWh) from the most recent twelve-months of purchased power invoices. 
C.  Net Metering is available to any residential or commercial customer who has installed a Net Energy Metering Facility ("Facility") having a generating capacity of no more than 10 kW and 25 kW respectively, and has signed a Standard Interconnection Agreement for Net Metering Facilities with the City. Such facilities must be located on the customer's premise and intended primarily to offset some or all of the customer's energy usage at that location. Customers may not take service under this tariff and simultaneously take service under the provisions of any other alternative source generation or co-generation tariff. The provisions of the customer's standard rate schedule are modified only as specified herein. 
D.  Net Monthly Bill - On a monthly basis, the Net Metering Customer ("Customer") shall be billed the charges applicable under the currently effective standard rate schedule and any appropriate rider schedules. Under net metering only the kilowatt hour ("kWh") units of the Customer's bill are affected. 
1.  Net Delivery to Customer: If the kWh supplied by the Electric Utility exceeds the kWh generated by the Facility and delivered to the Electric Utility in a month, the Customer shall be billed for such excess ("Net") kWh supplied by the Electric Utility in accordance with the rates and charges of the currently effective standard rate and appropriate rider schedules under which the Customer is provided electric service, unless it is determined that the customer's pattern of usage is sufficiently different from other customers' on that rate schedule to warrant the design of a rate schedule applicable to that net metering customer. 
2.  Net Delivery to Electric Utility: If the kWh generated by the Facility and delivered to the Electric Utility in a month exceeds the kWh supplied by the Electric Utility, such Net kWh shall be credited against the kWh supplied to the Customer by the Electric Utility in subsequent billing periods. If, after any current month billing, a balance of Net kWh delivered to the Electric Utility exists, such balance shall be similarly credited in subsequent billing periods until such balance is depleted. If any portion of such balance remains after the billing for the final month in which the Customer takes service from the Electric Utility, the Electric Utility shall issue a check to the Customer for the remainder of such balance of any credit due the Customer. The payment for any remaining credits shall be in accordance with subsection 13.14.090 D.3. below. 
3.  Electric Utility's Avoided Cost: The rate per kWh to be paid for Net Deliveries to the Electric Utility, pursuant to subsection 13.14.090 D.2. above, shall be the Electric Utility's estimated avoided cost for the appropriate time period from the Electric Utility's most recent wholesale Purchased Power Costs. 
4.  The payment shall be based on the average of the on-peak and off-peak, seasonal avoided cost rate, as provided in the City's Net Metering Rules. 
E.  Metering equipment shall be installed to both accurately measure the electricity supplied by Electric Utility to the Customer and also to accurately measure the electricity generated by the Customer that is fed back to Electric Utility during the applicable billing period. The cost of the meter is the responsibility of the Electric Utility, but the Electric Utility will assess a customer charge to cover the cost associated with initial testing of both the Customer's meter and interconnection, initial meter installation and any future meter testing in accordance with the City's Net Energy Metering Rules (the "Rules"). The Electric Utility will also assess a customer charge for any additional meter installations if the additional installations are requested by the Customer. 
    Any additional work required by the Electric Utility other than what has been identified as the "Customer Charge" in the Rules will require the charge to be borne by the Customer to be calculated based on the specific case. In normal cases the charge will be as follows: 
1.  Residential-$50.00 
2.  Commercial-$75.00 
(Ord. No. 888, 6-24-2013) 
13.14.100 - Waiver. 
A.  Upon request of any person subject to these Rules or upon its own motion, the City may, for good cause, waive any requirement of these Rules that is not required by the Act or inconsistent with the purposes of these Rules. 
(Ord. No. 888, 6-24-2013) 
Chapter 13.16 - QUALIFYING COGENERATION AND SMALL POWER PRODUCTION 
Sections: 

13.16.010 - Statement of compliance. 
The city of Burlington undertakes to comply with all lawful regulations of the FERC codified in Subpart C of 18CFR Part 292 dealing with arrangements with qualifying cogeneration and small power production facilities under Section 210 of PURPA. 
(Ord. 602 §1, 1984) 
13.16.020 - Filing of ordinance. 
The city administrator/city clerk and the city attorney are jointly and severally authorized and directed to file with the FERC a copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter reflecting the city's compliance with 18CFR Section 292.401(c). 
(Ord. 602 §2, 1984) 
Chapter 13.20 - BACKFLOW AND CROSS-CONNECTIONS 
Sections: 

13.20.010 - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
    "Air gap" means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of the vessel. An approved air-gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically, above the flood level rim of the vessel; and, in no case less than one inch. When an air-gap is used at the service connection to prevent the contamination or pollution of the public potable water system, an emergency by-pass shall be installed around the air-gap system and an approved reduced pressure principle device shall be installed in the by-pass system. 
    "Approved" means accepted by the utility as meeting the applicable specification stated or cited in this chapter, or as suitable for the proposed use. 
    "Auxiliary water supply" means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the city's approved public potable water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's public potable water supply or any natural source(s) such as a well, spring, river, stream, pond, lake, etc. or "used waters" or "industrial fluids." These waters may be polluted or contaminated or may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the utility does not have sanitary control. 
    "Backflow preventer" means a device or means designed to prevent backflow created by backpressure or backsiphonage. 
    "Back pressure" means backflow caused by a pump, elevated tank, boiler or means that could create an elevated pressure within the nonpotable system greater than the supply pressure. 
    "Backsiphonage" means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other than its intended source caused by negative or subatmospheric pressure in the potable water supply system. 
    "Certified tester" means a person who has passed an approved testing course and who is listed by the city as a certified tester. 
    "Check valve" means a self-closing device which is designed to permit the flow of fluids in one direction and to close if there is a reversal of flow. 
    "City" means city of Burlington, county of Kit Carson, state of Colorado. 
    "City administrator" means the administrator of municipal utilities of the city or his/her duly authorized representative. 
    "Colorado Department of Health Cross Connection Control Manual" means a manual that has been published by the state addressing cross-connection control practices which will be used as a guidance document for the utility in implementing a cross-connection control program as outlined in Sections 13.20.020 through 13.20.200. 
    "Contamination" means an impairment of the quality of the potable water by sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or other materials to a degree which creates an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. 
    "Critical level" means the critical level C-L or C/L marking on a backflow prevention device or vacuum breaker which is a point conforming to approved standards and established by the testing laboratory (usually stamped on the device by the manufacturer), which determines the minimum elevation above the flood-level rim of the fixture, highest point of usage, or receptacle served at which the device may be installed. When a backflow prevention device does not bear a critical level marking, the bottom of the vacuum breaker, combination valve, or the bottom of any such approved devise shall constitute the critical level. 
    "Cross-connection" means any physical arrangement whereby a public water supply is connected, directly or indirectly, with any other water supply system, sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture, or other device which contains, or may contain, contaminated water, sewage, or other waste or liquid of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water supply as a result of backflow. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices, four-way valve connections, and other temporary or permanent devices through which, or because of which, backflow could occur are considered to be cross-connections. 
    "Cross-connections, controlled" means a connection between a potable water system and a nonpotable water system with an approved backflow prevention device properly installed that will continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
    "Double check valve assembly" means an assembly of two independently operating approved check valves with tightly closing shut-off valves on each side of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of each check valve. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications and approval of a recognized and utility-approved testing establishment for backflow prevention devices. To be approved, these devices must be readily accessible for in-line maintenance and testing and be installed where no part of the device will be submerged. 
    "Flood-level rim" means the edge of the receptacle from which liquid overflows. 
    Hazard, Degree of. "Degree of hazard" means the term is derived from an evaluation of the potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable water system. 
    Hazard, Health. "Health hazard" means any condition, device, or practice in the water supply system and its operation which could create, or in the judgment of the city administrator may create, a danger to the health and well-being of the water consumer. An example of a health hazard is a structural defect, including cross-connections, in a water supply system, or a direct connection of a potable water supply line to a sanitary sewer. 
    Hazard, Plumbing. "Plumbing hazard" means a plumbing type cross-connection in a consumer's potable water system that has not been properly protected by a vacuum breaker, air-gap separation or backflow prevention device. Unprotected plumbing type cross-connections are considered to be a health hazard. 
    Hazard, Pollutional. "Pollutional hazard" means an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or to the potability of the public or the consumer's potable water system but which would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances, but would not be dangerous to health. 
    Hazard, System. "System hazard" means an actual or potential threat of severe damage to the physical properties of the public potable water system or the consumer's potable water system or of a pollution or contamination which would have a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system. 
    "Industrial fluids system" means any system containing a fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically, or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, system, pollutional or plumbing hazard if introduced into an approved water supply. This may include, but not be limited to: polluted or contaminated waters; all types of process waters and "used waters" originated from the public potable water system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality; chemicals in fluid form; plating acids and alkalies, circulated cooling waters connected to any open cooling tower and/or cooling towers that are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances; contaminated natural waters such as from wells, springs, streams, rivers, lakes, dams, ponds, retention pits, irrigation canals or systems, etc.; oils, gases, glycerine, paraffins, caustic and acid solutions and other liquids and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other purposes or for fire-fighting purposes. 
    "Nonpotable water" means water that is not safe for human consumption or that is of questionable quality. 
    "Pollution" means the presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological or biological) in the water that may degrade the water quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair its usefulness. 
    "Potable water" means water free from impurities in amounts sufficient to cause disease or harmful physiological effects. The bacteriological, chemical, and radiological quality shall conform with State of Colorado Primary Drinking Water Regulations. 
    "Reduced pressure principle device" means an assembly of two independently operating approved check valves with an automatically operating deferential relief valve between the two check valves, tightly closing shut-off valves on either side of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of the check and relief valves. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications and approval of the recognized and utility approved testing agency for backflow prevention assemblies. The device shall operate to maintain the pressure in the zone between the two check valves at a level less than the pressure on the public water supply side of the devices. At cessation of normal flow the pressure between the two check valves shall be less than the pressure on the public water supply side of the device. In case of leakage of either of the check valves the differential relief valve shall operate to maintain the reduced pressure in the zone between the check valves by discharging to the atmosphere. To be approved, these devices must be readily accessible for in-line maintenance and testing and be installed in a location where no part of the device will be submerged and the relief valve will be provided an air gap as described in the definition for "air gap" found in this section. 
    "Submerged inlet" means a water pipe or extension thereto from a public water supply terminating below the flood level rim in a tank, vessel, fixture or appliance which may contain water of questionable quality, waste or other contaminant and which is unprotected against backflow. 
    "Utility" means the city of Burlington water utility, and is vested with the authority and responsibility for the enactment and enforcement of this chapter. 
    "Vacuum" means any pressure less than that exerted by the atmosphere. 
    "Vacuum breaker, atmospheric nonpressure type" means a vacuum breaker consisting of an air inlet opening and a nonloaded check disk valve designed to prevent backsiphonage only. The device shall not be subjected to continuous static line pressure or backpressure or be installed where it would be under pressure for more than twelve hours in any twenty-four-hour period. 
    Vacuum Breaker, Pressure Type. "Pressure type vacuum breaker" means a vacuum breaker consisting of a spring-loaded check valve, an air inlet opening, a shut-off valve on each side of the device, and two appropriately located test cocks designed to prevent backsiphonage only. The device shall not be subjected to backpressure. 
    "Water-service connection" means the terminal end of the city's service connection from the public potable water system; i.e. where the city loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the customer's stop box or shut-off valve or meter, whichever comes first from the utility water main. If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the service connection shall mean the downstream end of the meter. There shall be no unprotected takeoffs from the service line ahead of any meter or backflow prevention device located at the point of delivery to the customer's water system. Service connection shall also include water service connection from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency water service connections from the public potable water system. For customers outside the city limits "water service connection" means the terminal end of the city's service connection from the public potable water system to the customer's corporation stop. 
(Ord. 638(part), 1989) 
13.20.020 - Establishment of cross-connections control program. 
    The city administrator or his/her designated agent is vested with the authority and responsibility for implementing an effective cross-connection control program in accordance with this chapter and for enforcement thereof. If in the judgement of the city administrator an approved backflow prevention device is required at the city's water service connection to any customer's premises for the safety of the water system, the city administrator shall give notice in writing to the customer to install such an approved backflow prevention device at each service connection to his/her premises. 
(Ord. 638(part), 1989) 
13.20.030 - Inspections and testing procedures. 
    The city administrator shall have the authority and the access to inspect any system owned and maintained by a utility customer to determine whether the system should have a backflow prevention device and to determine the extent and degree of hazard. It shall be the duty of the utility at any premises where backflow prevention devices are installed to have certified inspections and operational tests made upon installations and at least once per year thereafter. In the instances where the city administrator deems the hazard to be great enough, he/she may require certified tests at more frequent intervals. These inspections and tests shall be performed by certified utility personnel, or by a certified tester under contract to the utility for the purpose of testing devices. The city administrator also reserves the right to inspect installed backflow prevention device(s) at any time and without prior notification to ensure the device(s) are in proper working order. The device(s) shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced whenever the devices are found to be defective. Records of such tests, repairs, and overhaul, including materials and parts changed, shall be kept and reported immediately to the city administrator. 
(Ord. 638(part), 1989) 
13.20.040 - Water system generally. 
    The water system shall be considered to be made up of two parts: the utility systems and the customer system. The utility system shall consist of the source facilities of the water system under the complete control of the utility, up to the point where the customer's system begins. The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage and delivery of water to the distribution system. The distribution system shall include the network of conduits used for the delivery of water from the source to the customer's system. The customer's system shall include those parts of the facilities beyond the termination of the utility distribution system which are utilized in conveying utility-delivered domestic water to points of use. 
(Ord. 638(part), 1989) 
13.20.050 - General policy. 
A.  No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained unless the water supply is protected as required by Colorado Revised Statutes and Regulations of the Colorado Department of Health and as required by this title. Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued by the utility if a backflow prevention device required by this chapter is not installed within a time period specified by the city administrator, or if it is found that a backflow prevention device has been removed, by-passed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises. Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected. The customer's system shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the city administrator to determine whether cross-connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of these regulations exist. When such a condition becomes known, the city administrator shall, at his/her option, deny, or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing for a physical break in the service line until the customer has corrected the condition(s) or shall specify a date for compliance, in conformance with state and city statutes relating to plumbing and water supplies and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
B.  When, as a result of inspection by authorized representatives of the utility, a condition involving violation of this chapter resulting in a health or sanitary hazard is determined to exist, the city administrator shall have the option of immediate discontinuance of service to the premises until the customer-user has corrected the condition in conformance with this chapter, or he may specify a date for compliance after which time he may discontinue service until the customer has corrected the condition. 
(Ord. 638(part), 1989) 
13.20.060 - Premises requiring the installation of backflow prevention devices. 
    An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed at or near the property line or immediately inside the structure being served; but in all cases before the first branch line leading off the service line wherever the following conditions exist: 
A.  In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply which is not or may not be of safe bacteriological or chemical quality and which is not acceptable as an additional source by the director for municipal utilities, the city water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing a backflow prevention device in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard. 
B.  In the case of premises on which any industrial fluids or any other objectionable substance is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the city water system, the city system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing a backflow prevention device in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the utility system which have been subject to deterioration in quality. 
C.  In the case of premises having (a) internal cross-connections that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled, or (b) intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross-connections exist, the city water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing a backflow prevention device in the service line. 
D.  If the backflow prevention device is located such that the meter becomes contaminated, it is the responsibility of the customer to bear the cost of decontamination. All backflow prevention devices shall be located and installed according to the manufacturer's specifications and in accordance with this chapter. The city administrator shall review and approve all plans as to the location and installation of backflow prevention device(s) so as to prevent freezing and contamination of city-owned property, as well as to facilitate inspection and testing. 
(Ord. 638(part), 1989) 
13.20.070 - Type of backflow prevention device required. 
    The type of protective device required shall depend upon the degree of hazard which exists as follows: 
A.  In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply and it is not subject to any of the following rules, the city water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device. 
B.  In the case of any premises where there is water or substances that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health if introduced into the city water system, the city water system shall be protected by an approved double check valve assembly. 
C.  In the case of any premises where there is material dangerous to health which is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the city water system, the city water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device. Examples of premises where these conditions will exist include, but are not limited to, sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries and plating plants. 
D.  In the case of any premises where there are "uncontrolled" cross-connections either actual or potential, the city water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device at the service connection. 
E.  In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions it is impossible or impractical to make a complete in-plant cross-connection survey, the city water system shall be protected against backflow or back siphonage from the premises by the installation of a backflow prevention device in the service line. In this case, maximum protection will be required; that is, an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed in each service to the premises. 
F.  In the case of any premises where there is a grey water (used or untreated water) recycling system, the city water system shall be protected by a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. 
G.  In the case of any premises where a liquid-based solar system is installed, whether utilized for space or water heating, the city water system shall be protected against possible backflow or nonpotable substances into the potable water distribution system as follows: 
1.  In the cases where a toxic transfer medium is being used, the means of backflow protection and exchange of heat shall be accomplished by way of an approved double-walled heat exchanger. An exception to this requirement may be granted in the event of single-walled heat exchanger(s) receiving the water utility's approval, and used in conjunction with an expansion tank and an approved reduced pressure principle assembly. 
2.  In cases where a nontoxic transfer medium is being used, the means of backflow protection and exchange of heat shall be accomplished by way of an approved double-walled heat exchanger. An exception to this requirement may be granted in the event of single-walled exchanger(s) receiving the utility's approval, and used in conjunction with an expansion tank and an approved reduced pressure principle assembly. 
3.  In cases where a single fluid solar domestic hot water preheat system which utilized drain-down design for freeze protection is being used, drain lines shall be connected to an approved, properly trapped and vented receptor with a visible air gap of at least three times the diameter of the drain line with a fixed minimum air gap of one inch above the flood level of the receptor. 
4.  In cases where a solar system utilizes an approved fancoil unit to exchange heat from the hot air to preheat water for domestic uses, no backflow protectors will be required; however, if the fancoil unit utilizes drain-down freeze protection, the drain from exchange coil shall conform to the same requirements of aforementioned single fluid drain-down solar systems. 
(Ord. 638(part), 1989) 
13.20.080 - Installation requirements for air gaps used to prevent backflow. 
A.  An approved air gap separation shall mean the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe, conduit, or faucet which supplies (discharges) potable water to a vessel, tank, waste line, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of the vessel. 
B.  An air gap shall be installed on a water customer's service connection if the degree of hazard is high, and there is a potential risk of contamination to the public water supply. 
C.  An air gap separation shall be installed: 
1.  Downstream of the service connection water meter; 
2.  Such that no hose, piping arrangement, or other fixture may be attached to defeat the air gap separation. This includes any solid funnel arrangement installed to prevent splashing; 
3.  Where a drain is located and properly sized to adequately drain the maximum discharge from the potable supply line; 
4.  Where the potable water line is protected from freezing; 
5.  In such an arrangement that the potable water supply line is at a vertical distance of at least two inside pipe diameters (of the potable supply line) above the flood level of the receiving vessel, and in no case shall the air gap between the potable line and receiving vessel be less than one inch; 
6.  When the potable supply line discharge is within two inside pipe diameters of any wall or protrusion, the required vertical air gap between the potable supply discharge and receiving vessel shall be extended to a minimum of three inside pipe diameters of the potable supply line; 
7.  An air gap separation which is protecting the potable water distribution system shall be considered a backflow prevention device, and it shall be inspected at least annually, or more frequently if required by the utility. 
(Ord. 638(part), 1989) 
13.20.090 - Installation requirements for approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices. 
A.  An approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention (RP) device shall mean an assembly which contains two shut-off valves, two independently operating, internally loaded check valves, four test cocks and a relief valve which opens to atmosphere. All RP devices installed within the city potable water distribution system shall be laboratory tested and approved by the University of Southern California Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research and shall appear on the state of Colorado list of approved devices. 
B.  An RP device shall be installed on a water customer's service connection if the degree of hazard is high and there is a potential risk of contamination to the public water supply. An RP device may be installed on a low hazard connection where a potential risk of pollution exists. 
C.  A reduced pressure principle (RP) device shall be installed: 
1.  A minimum vertical distance of twelve inches or two inside pipe diameters of the device relief valve (whichever is greatest) above the floor or ground and in such a manner that the lowest part of the device shall not exceed thirty inches above the floor or ground level; 
2.  In an upright position, with the relief valve down; 
3.  With an appropriately sized strainer on devices sized two inches and smaller; 
4.  In a horizontal position, unless the plans and specifications for the installation have been reviewed and approved by the utility. In order for a vertical installation to be considered by the utility, the water flow through the device must be in an upward direction, and the relief valve opening on the device must be at a lower elevation than the lowest point of the upstream check valve, without any alteration to the factory assembly; 
5.  In such a manner that the side opposite the test cocks on the device shall have a minimum of twelve inches clearance between the device and any adjacent wall, fixture or ceiling; 
6.  In such a manner that the side containing the test cocks shall have a minimum of twenty-four inches clearance between the adjacent wall, other fixtures, floor, ground level or ceiling; 
7.  Without any bypass, unless the bypass line also contains an RP device of equal size; 
8.  With full port/quarter turn ball valves for the upstream and downstream shut-off valves or devices sized two inches or less; 
9.  With butterfly valves for the upstream and downstream shut-off valves on devices sized two and one-half inches and larger; 
10.  Immediately following the water service connection meter either above ground or at the point where the potable supply line enters the building or structure with no other connection between the backflow prevention device and the meter; 
11.  In such manner that no paint or other finishing material shall cover or be applied to the name plate containing the manufacturer's name, model number, serial number, size, etc., or the inside threads of any test cocks or fittings of the device which would affect the operational integrity of the device or impair any certified test of the device; 
12.  In such manner as to prevent vandalism to the device, or deterioration of the device due to atmospheric conditions; 
13.  In such a manner that the relief valve opening shall never have a water level under the device come within a vertical distance of two inside diameters of the relief valve opening; 
14.  With no other plumbing fixture or conduit fitting between the two shut-off valves of the device other than the factory manufactured assembly; 
15.  In such manner that the device would not be located either above or below a hazardous location, such as a chemical mixing tank or an electrical switch fuse box and access to the device would not present a hazard to the tester/inspector; 
16.  With no other plumbing fixture or piping branch between the water service meter and the backflow prevention device; 
17.  With an air gap at the relief valve opening discharge. The air gap at the relief valve shall meet all the requirements of the air gap stated in Section 13.20.080; 
18.  In such a manner than the RP can be properly drained to prevent damage from freezing. A stop and waste valve located upstream of the device and located in a pit shall not be allowed for this purpose; 
19.  With an electrical jumper connection attached upstream of the first test cock and downstream of the second shut-off valve. 
D.  RP devices which are not approved by the state of Colorado shall be tested on a sixty-day interval, and upon failure of any valve within the device, the backflow preventer shall be replaced within a period of ten business days with an approved RP device. 
E.  An RP device may be installed outside of a building. However, the following items must be addressed: 
1.  A reduced pressure principle device shall not be installed in pit or vault if the pit or vault is not provided with a drain to daylight. The drain shall be sized to carry the maximum possible discharge from the device under fouled conditions. The drain shall be provided with a twenty-four mesh noncorrodible screen at the discharge to prevent any material from entering the waste line and creating a plug. A sump pump shall not be utilized in lieu of a drain to daylight; 
2.  The handles of the shut-off valves may be removed or chained together to prevent unauthorized shut-off of the water service; 
3.  Installation of an RP device above ground in a small enclosure is acceptable provided that the enclosure has noncorrodible screened openings at the bottom which will provide the necessary drainage meeting the requirements of the air gap described in Section 13.20.080. 
F.  Repair Parts. 
1.  Only those replacement parts produced or specifically recommended by the manufacturer of the RP device shall be used in the repair of the backflow preventer. Any other parts utilized shall be considered a modification of the factory design, and the RP device shall be considered unapproved. 
2.  Any used part made of organic material shall not be allowed for the permanent repair of an RP device. This includes the re-use of parts such as organic seats from check valves which are reversed. Used parts installed for temporary emergency repair purposes shall be noted as such and shall be replaced within ten business days with new replacement parts. 
3.  Any replacement parts which have expired shelf life dates stamped on the box shall not be utilized as repair parts. 
(Ord. 638(part), 1989) 
13.20.100 - Installation requirements for approved double check valve assemblies. 
A.  An approved double check valve assembly (DCVA) shall mean an assembly which contains two shut-off valves, two independently operating, internally loaded check valves, and four test cocks. All DCVA's installed within the city potable water distribution system shall be laboratory tested and approved by the University of Southern California Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, and shall appear on the Colorado list of approved devices. 
B.  A double check valve assembly shall be installed on a water customer's service connection if the degree of hazard is low, and there is a potential risk of pollution to the public water supply. An RP device or air gap may be installed on a low hazard connection. 
C.  A double check valve assembly shall be installed: 
1.  A minimum vertical distance of twelve inches above the floor or ground and in such a manner that the lowest part of the device shall not exceed thirty inches above the flow or ground level; 
2.  In an upright position; 
3.  With an appropriately sized strainer on devices sized two inches and smaller; 
4.  In a horizontal position, unless the plans and specifications for the installation have been reviewed and approved by the utility; 
5.  In such a manner that the side opposite the test cocks on the device shall have a minimum of twelve inches clearance between the device and adjacent wall, fixtures or ceiling; 
6.  In such a manner that the side containing the test cocks shall have a minimum of twenty-four inches clearance between the adjacent wall, fixtures, floor, ground level, or ceiling; 
7.  Without any bypass, unless the bypass line also contains a double check valve assembly or reduced pressure principle device of equal size; 
8.  With full port/quarter turn ball valves for the upstream and downstream shut-off valves on devices sized two inches or less; 
9.  With butterfly valves for the upstream and downstream shut-off valves on devices larger than two inches; 
10.  Immediately following the water service connection meter either above ground or at the point where the potable supply line enters the building or structure with no other connection between the backflow prevention device and the meter; 
11.  In such a manner that no paint or other finishing material shall cover or be applied to the name plate containing the manufacturer's name, model number, serial number, size, etc., or the inside threads of any test cocks or fittings of the device which would affect the operational integrity of the device or impair any certified test of the device; 
12.  In such a manner as to prevent vandalism to the device, or deterioration of the device due to atmospheric conditions; 
13.  With no other plumbing fixture or conduit fitting between the two shut-off valves of the device other than the factory manufactured assembly; 
14.  In such a manner that the device would not be located either above or below a hazardous location, such as a chemical mixing tank or an electrical switch fuse box, and where access to the device would not present a hazard to the tester/inspector; 
15.  With no other plumbing fixture or piping branch between the water service meter and the backflow prevention device; 
16.  In such a manner that the DCVA can be properly drained to prevent damage from freezing. A stop and waste valve located upstream of the device and located in a pit shall not be allowed for this purpose; 
17.  With an electrical jumper connection attached upstream of the first test cock and downstream of the second shut-off valve. 
D.  DCVA's which are not approved by the state of Colorado shall be tested on a sixty day interval, and upon failure of any valve within the device, the backflow preventer shall be replaced within a period of ten business days with an approved DCVA. 
E.  A DCVA may be installed outside of a building. However, the following items must be addressed: 
1.  A DCVA may be installed in a pit or vault where provisions are made to prevent any portion of the device from becoming submerged. A drain to daylight is not required. If a drain is provided, however, the drain shall have a twenty-four mesh noncorrodible screen at the discharge to prevent any material from entering the waste line and creating a plug. A sump pump may be utilized in lieu of a drain to daylight. 
2.  The handles of the shut-off valves may be removed or chained together to prevent unauthorized shut-off of the water service. 
3.  Any pit or vault containing a DCVA shall meet each of the criteria outlined in Section 13.20.090. 
F.  Repair Parts. 
1.  Only those replacement parts produced or specifically recommended by the manufacturer of the DCVA shall be used in the repair of the backflow preventer. Any other parts utilized shall be considered a modification of the factory design, and the DCVA shall be considered unapproved. 
2.  Any used part made of organic material shall not be allowed for the permanent repair of a DCVA. This includes the re-use of parts such as organic seats from check valves which are reversed. Used parts installed for temporary emergency repair purposes must be so noted and shall be replaced with new parts within ten business days. 
3.  Any replacement parts which have expired shelf life dates stamped on the box shall not be utilized as repair parts. 
(Ord. 638(part), 1989) 
13.20.110 - Installation requirements for pressure vacuum breakers. (See also Section 13.20.190) 
A.  An approved pressure vacuum breaker (PVB) shall mean an assembly which contains an upstream and downstream shut-off valve, two properly located test cocks, one or two internally loaded check valves, and a spring loaded popet valve opening to atmosphere. All PVB's installed within the city potable water distribution system shall be laboratory tested and approved and shall appear on the Colorado list of approved devices. 
B.  A pressure vacuum breaker installed within a water customer's plumbing system shall not be considered a containment device, and the use of a pressure vacuum breaker in lieu of a containment device such as a reduced pressure principle device or a double check valve assembly at the service connection shall not be allowed except as described in Section 13.20.190. 
C.  A pressure vacuum break shall be installed: 
1.  With the critical level of the device a minimum of twelve inches above the highest point of downstream usage; 
2.  In an upright position; 
3.  In a location where the device shall not be subjected to backpressure; 
4.  At locations where the device may be subjected to continuous pressure; 
5.  In such a manner that the side containing the test cocks shall have a minimum of twenty-four inches clearance between the adjacent wall fixtures, floor, ground level, or ceiling; 
6.  Without any bypass, unless the bypass also contains a PVB, a DCVA or RP device of equal size; 
7.  With full port/quarter turn ball valves for the upstream and downstream shut-off valves on devices sized two inches or less; 
8.  In such a manner that no paint or other finishing material shall cover or be applied to the name plate containing the manufacturer's name, model number, serial number, size, etc., or the inside threads of any test cocks or fittings of the device which would affect the operational integrity of the device or impair any certified test of the device; 
9.  In such a manner as to prevent vandalism to the device, or deterioration of the device due to atmospheric conditions; 
10.  With no other plumbing fixture or conduit fitting between the two shut-off valves of the device other than the factory manufactured assembly; 
11.  In such a manner that the device would not be located either above or below a hazardous location, such as a chemical mixing tank or an electrical switch fuse box, and where access to the device would not present a hazard to the tester/inspector; 
12.  In such a manner that the PVB can be properly drained to prevent damage from freezing. A stop and waste valve located upstream of the device and located in a pit shall not be allowed for this purpose. 
D.  PVB devices which are not approved by the state of Colorado shall be tested on a sixty-day interval, and upon failure of any valve within the device, the backflow preventer shall be replaced within a period of ten business days with an approved PVB device. 
E.  Replacement Parts. 
1.  Only those replacement parts produced or specifically recommended by the manufacturer of the PVB device shall be used in the repair of the backflow preventer. Any other parts utilized shall be considered a modification of the factory design, and the PVB device shall be considered unapproved. 
2.  Any used part made of organic material shall not be allowed for the permanent repair of a PVB device. This includes the re-use of parts such as organic seats from check valves which are reversed. Used parts installed for temporary emergency repairs must be so noted and shall be replaced with new parts within ten business days. 
3.  Any replacement parts which have expired shelf life dates stamped on the box shall not be utilized as repair parts. 
(Ord. 638(part), 1989) 
13.20.120 - Installation requirements for double-check detector-check valve assemblies (special-application). 
A.  A double-check detector valve assembly shall consist of a large double check valve assembly with a smaller bypass line which consists of a double check valve assembly and a water meter. Each of the double check valve assemblies shall meet the requirements of a double check valve assembly as stated in Section 13.20.100. 
B.  The purpose of a double-check detector-check valve assembly shall be to detect leaks within a plumbing system, and to detect points of unauthorized water use such as illegal taps. 
C.  The following installation criteria shall apply for double-check detector-check valve installations in addition to those outlined in Section 13.20.100: 
1.  Double-check detector-check valve assemblies shall not be installed on fire sprinkler systems which are chemically charged. Such systems require the installation of a reduced pressure principle device. 
2.  The physical construction of the entire assembly including the bypass shall not be modified in any fashion. 
3.  Only those water meters specified by the manufacturer shall be utilized in the device. 
(Ord. 638(part), 1989) 
13.20.130 - Device testing equipment. 
A.  Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices shall be tested with a differential pressure gauge. 
B.  Double check valve assemblies shall be tested with a duplex gauge (two independent pressure gauges with increments of at least two pounds per square inch (psi), or may be tested by the sight tube method. 
C.  Pressure vacuum breakers shall be tested with a differential pressure gauge. 
D.  The acceptability of any testing gauge or apparatus shall be determined by the utility. 
E.  Any testing gauge, apparatus or scientific instrument utilized for the testing of backflow prevention devices shall be in calibration. The utility may periodically require testing equipment to be checked for calibration at the utility meter shop. 
(Ord. 638(part), 1989) 
13.20.140 - Standard for backflow prevention devices. 
    Any backflow prevention device required herein shall be of a model and size approved by the city administrator of municipal utilities. 
(Ord. 638(part), 1989) 
13.20.150 - Test and certification of backflow preventers. 
    The following testing laboratory has been qualified by the director of municipal utilities to test and certify backflow preventers: 
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control & Hydraulic Research 
University of Southern California 
BHE University Park, MC 0231 
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0231 
    Testing laboratories other than the laboratory listed above will be added to an approved list as they are qualified by the city administrator of municipal utilities. 
(Ord. 638(part), 1989) 
13.20.160 - Approved backflow preventers. 
    Backflow preventers which may be subjected to back pressure or back siphonage that have been fully tested and have been granted a certificate of approval by the qualified laboratory and are listed on the laboratory's current list of "approved devices," and which newly-installed devices have been inspected and installed to the satisfaction of the city administrator, shall be deemed in compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 638(part), 1989) 
13.20.170 - Existing cross-connection. 
    Within a reasonable time following the adoption of this chapter, existing cross-connections between a public water system and any secondary water system shall be eliminated or protected by means of an approved backflow preventer. The following shall install devices within six months: sewage treatment plants, hospitals, mortuaries and industrial establishments that manufacture materials that can exhibit health hazards. Other cross-connections shall be eliminated or protected within a time period as specified by the city administrator. 
(Ord. 638(part), 1989) 
13.20.180 - Existing devices. 
    Backflow prevention devices having been installed and integrated into the municipal water system on or prior to January 1, 1986, shall be inspected and tested by the utility in accordance with the standards of this chapter. 
A.  Compliant Devices. Devices meeting the standards hereof which are found to be properly installed, or consistent with the degree of hazard, and are tested and certified to be in proper working condition, will thereafter be periodically tested and maintained by the utility in conformance with this chapter. 
B.  Noncompliant Devices. Devices not meeting the standards hereof, installed incorrectly, or which are defective or not consistent with the degree of hazard shall be replaced with approved devices by the utility and thereafter shall be periodically tested and maintained by the utility in compliance with the standards set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 638(part), 1989) 
13.20.190 - Specific system requirements-Irrigation systems. 
    The following guidelines relating to backflow prevention devices for irrigation systems shall apply: 
A.  Where a cross-connection hazard is determined to be exceptionally low, (a correctly installed residential sprinkler system with a correctly installed atmospheric vacuum breaker, for example) a containment device may not be required by the city administrator. 
B.  Pressure vacuum breakers shall be installed at the beginning of each irrigation circuit and at a minimum of twelve inches above the highest irrigation head on the circuit. Individual irrigation circuits having quick coupling valves or other similar type heads that will permit pressure to be retained in the circuit shall have a pressure vacuum breaker installed as a minimum requirement for each circuit. Irrigation systems using the subsurface drip method shall have a pressure vacuum breaker on each circuit. A pressure vacuum breaker may not be installed where a double check valve assembly, reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device, or air gap separation is required. 
C.  A double check valve assembly may be installed to serve multiple irrigation circuits in lieu of vacuum breakers on each individual irrigation circuit. 
D.  A reduced pressure principle backflow preventer or air gap separation shall be required before any piping network in which nonpotable water, fertilizers, pesticides and other chemicals or toxic contaminants are injected or siphoned into the irrigation system. 
(Ord. 638(part), 1989) 
13.20.200 - Specific system requirements-Fire systems. 
A.  Water systems for fighting fire, derived from a supply that cannot be approved as safe or potable for human use shall be kept wholly separate from drinking water pipelines and equipment. In cases where the city's water system is used for both drinking and firefighting purposes, approved backflow prevention devices shall be installed to protect such individual drinking water lines as are not used for firefighting purposes. It is declared that it is the responsibility of the person or persons causing the introduction of the unapproved or unsafe water into the pipelines to see (i) that a procedure be developed and carried out to notify and protect users of this piping system during the emergency; (ii) that special precautions be taken to disinfect thoroughly and flush out all pipelines which may have become contaminated before they are again used to furnish drinking water. In the event the means of protection of water consumers is by disinfection of the auxiliary fire fighting supply, the installation and its use shall be thoroughly reliable. 
B.  When disinfection of the auxiliary supply itself is depended upon to render the water safe, the means of applying the disinfectant under this regulation shall be automatic with operation of the pump or pumps employed with the dangerous water in question. Adequate supplies of chlorine or its compounds must be kept on hand at all times. Chlorine dosing equipment shall be tested daily and kept in good operating condition. 
C.  The public water supply shall be protected against backflow from dual domestic fire systems by the installation of an approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle device where the hazard posed to the city water system is deemed by the director to be high; or by the installation of a double check valve assembly or double-check detector-check valve assembly where the hazard posed to the city water system is deemed by the director to be low. 
(Ord. 638(part), 1989) 
13.20.210 - Compliance procedures. 
A.  Installation of Required Devices. 
1.  Upon completion of inspection of the premises, the city administrator shall notify the owner in writing what type of device will be required to protect the city water system and shall provide specific guidelines for the installation. 
2.  The owner will be required to provide, at the owner's expense, the plumbing/construction necessary for the device to be installed (device set). Such plumbing/ construction will be required to meet all provisions set forth in Sections 13.20.020 through 13.20.200 and must be inspected and approved by the utility. 
3.  Upon completion of the device set by the owner and inspection by the utility, the utility will install the required backflow prevention device. The owner will be charged a one-time backflow prevention device fee. 
B.  Compliance Required. 
1.  The utility will take necessary action to ensure compliance with the Colorado Department of Health, Primary Drinking Water Regulations, Section 11.1.2, and the Colorado Revised Statutes, 25-1-114 (1973). 
2.  The owner of the premises is required to permit entry to the premises for inspection, testing and maintenance purposes at reasonable times. Failure to permit entry to the premises will result in the premises being regarded as a high hazard, and a reduced pressure principle device will be required to protect the city's water system. 
3.  The owner is required to provide all necessary plumbing/construction needed for the installation of the device. Failure to provide such required plumbing/construction will result in action being taken as provided for in Section 13.04.062. 
4.  The owner will be required to pay a one-time backflow prevention device fee upon installation of the device. Failure to pay the one-time fee will result in action being taken as provided for in Sections 13.20.020 through 13.20.200. 
13.20.220 - Violations and penalties. 
A.  The city administrator shall notify the owner or authorized agent of the owner, of the building or premises in which there is found a violation(s) of these regulations. The city administrator shall set a specific time for the owner to have the violation removed or corrected. If the owner fails to correct the violation(s) in the specific time, the city administrator may, if in his/her judgment an imminent health hazard exists, suspend water service to the building or premises. Additional fines or penalties may also be invoked following suspension of service. 
B.  Anyone who knowingly or willfully violates the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction shall be required to pay a fine of not more than three hundred dollars to be imprisoned in jail for a period of time not to exceed ninety days, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 638(part), 1989) 
Title 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
Chapters: 
Chapter 15.04 - BUILDING CODE ADOPTED 
Sections: 

15.04.020 - Fee for building permit. 
    No fee in addition to the building permit fee required by the zoning ordinance shall be charged by the city for any building permit. 
(Prior code §11.2) 
15.04.030 - Fire zones established. 
    For the purpose of applying the Uniform Building Code, all of the area within the corporate limits of the city is divided into two fire zones. Fire Zone 1 shall consist of all that part of the city included within the boundaries of Zoning Districts C-1 and L-1 as shown upon the official copy of the city zoning district map on file in the office of the city clerk. There shall be no Fire Zone 2. Fire Zone 3 shall consist of all that portion of the city not included within Fire Zone 1 as described in this section. 
(Prior code §11.3) 
Chapter 15.14 - MANUFACTURED HOUSING 
Sections: 

15.14.010 - Manufactured home defined. 
    For purposes of this chapter, a "manufactured home" within the city limits of the city of Burlington shall be defined as follows: 
A.  Is partially or entirely manufactured in a factory; 
B.  Is not less than twenty-four (24) feet wide and thirty-six (36) feet long; 
C.  Is installed on an approved permanent foundation; 
D.  Has brick, wood or cosmetically equivalent exterior siding and a pitched roof; and 
E.  Is certified pursuant to the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974. 
(Ord. 756 §1(part), 1998) 
15.14.020 - Manufactured homes permitted. 
    Manufactured homes shall be permitted within the city limits of the city of Burlington as long as they meet the minimum standards set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 756 §1(part), 1998) 
15.14.030 - Perimeter foundation requirements. 
    Each perimeter foundation for a manufactured home shall include, as a minimum, a stemwall of poured concrete at least four inches thick, masonry block, brick or rock/concrete sidewall. 
(Ord. 756 §1(part), 1998) 
Chapter 15.16 - MOBILE HOME PARKS 

15.16.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter the words and phrases set out in this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them: 
A.  "Park" means mobile home park. 
B.  "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, association or corporation. 
C.  "Mobile home" means a factory-assembled structure or structures equipped with the necessary service connections and made so as to be readily moveable as a unit or units on their own running gear and designed to be used as a dwelling unit(s) without permanent foundation and built to that portion of the Factory-built Housing Construction Code of the State of Colorado which applies to mobile homes. The phrase "without a permanent foundation" indicates that the support system is constructed with the intent that the mobile home placed thereon will be moved from time to time at the convenience of the owner. As defined in CRS 1973, Title 24, Article 32, Part 7, as amended. 
(Ord. 585 §1, 1981) 
15.16.020 - License and license fees. 
    It is unlawful for any person to maintain or operate within the city limits any mobile home unless such person first obtains a license therefor. 
(Ord. 585 §2, 1981) 
15.16.030 - Location. 
    All mobile home parks shall be located in compliance with the zoning ordinance now in effect or hereafter adopted. 
(Ord. 585 §4, 1981) 
15.16.040 - Application for license. 
A.  Applications for a mobile home park license shall be filed with the city clerk and issued by the city council upon approval of the application by the city council. Applications shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, and shall contain the following: 
1.  The name and address of the applicant; 
2.  The location and legal description of the mobile home park; 
3.  A complete plan of the park; 
4.  Plans and specifications of all buildings and other improvements constructed or to be constructed within the mobile home park; 
5.  Such further information as may be requested by the city council. 
B.  If the applicant is found to be of good moral character, and the proposed mobile home park will be in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances or statutes, the city council shall approve the application, and upon completion of the park according to the plans, shall issue the license. 
(Ord. 585 §5, 1981) 
15.16.050 - Mobile home park plan. 
    The mobile home park plan shall conform to the following minimum requirements: 
A.  The park shall be located on a well-drained site properly graded to insure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water. 
B.  The park shall not be located upon a tract of land containing an area of less than three acres. Mobile home spaces shall be a minimum of at least forty feet in width and clearly defined. In no event shall more than ten mobile home spaces be permitted per acre. Each mobile home space shall be a minimum of three thousand square feet in area. Mobile homes shall be so harbored on each space that there shall be at least a twenty-foot clearance between mobile homes. With respect to mobile homes parked end-to-end, the end-to-end clearance between mobile homes shall be not less than twenty feet. No mobile home shall be located closer than ten feet from any building within the park or from any property line bounding the park. 
C.  All mobile home spaces shall abut upon a public street, alley or highway or upon a driveway of not less than twenty feet in width which shall have unobstructed access to a public street, alley or highway. 
D.  All driveways shall be gravel or hard surfaced, well marked in the daytime and lighted at night. 
E.  Walkways shall be hard surfaced, well marked in the daytime and lighted at night. 
F.  An electrical outlet shall be provided each mobile home space. 
G.  One off-street parking space per mobile home space shall be provided. 
(Ord. 585 §6, 1981) 
15.16.060 - Water supply. 
    An adequate supply of pure water for drinking and domestic purposes shall be supplied to meet the requirements of the park. 
(Ord. 585 §7, 1981) 
15.16.070 - Sewage and refuse disposal. 
    Waste from mobile homes and other buildings within the park shall be discharged into the public sewer system. Mobile homes shall be provided with approved garbage and rubbish receptacles. 
(Ord. 585 §8, 1981) 
15.16.080 - Register of occupants. 
    Every licensee shall maintain a record of all mobile homes and occupants using the mobile home park. Such register shall be available to any authorized person inspecting the park. 
(Ord. 585 §9, 1981) 
15.16.090 - Supervision. 
A.  A responsible attendant or caretaker, owner or operator shall be in charge, its facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition and he shall be answerable with the licensee, for any violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The city administrator or his authorized agent shall have the authority to make inspections of mobile home parks, at reasonable times, for the purpose of determining whether this chapter is being complied with and shall have authority to inspect the record of the occupants, required herein. It is unlawful for any person to refuse access to a mobile home park to the city administrator for the purposes of inspection. 
(Ord. 585 §10, 1981) 
15.16.100 - Revocation of license. 
    The council, after notice to the licensee and a hearing, may revoke any license to maintain and operate a park when the licensee has violated any provision of this chapter. After such revocation, the license may be reissued by the council if the circumstances causing such violation have been remedied or corrected. 
(Ord. 585 §11, 1981) 
15.16.110 - Alterations and additions. 
    No person shall enlarge or extend any mobile home park without first making application for such enlargement or extension. Such application shall be made and issued in the same manner as provided in Section 15.16.040 in the case of an original application for license. However, if permitted, such enlargement or extension shall be treated as part of the original park and no additional annual license fee shall be charged therefor. 
(Ord. 585 §12, 1981) 
15.16.120 - Penalty. 
    It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter and such violations shall be punishable as is provided for in Chapter 1.16 of this code. 
(Ord. 585 §15, 1981) 
Title 16 - SUBDIVISIONS 
Chapter: 
Chapter 16.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

16.04.010 - Reference. 
    These regulations are adopted by the city pursuant to Sections 31-23-101 et seq. and 31-23- 201 et seq. CRS 1973. 
(Ord. 555 §1.1, 1979) 
16.04.020 - Purposes. 
    The purpose of this title is to provide for orderly development of the city and its environs by insuring, through prescribed rules and standards, functional arrangements of street layouts, open spaces, adequate community facilities and utilities, to provide for general conditions favorable for the health, safety and convenience of the community; and to provide for the continued improvement of the standard of living for the citizens by promoting new ideas and effective, efficient and attractive community design. 
(Ord. 555 §1.2, 1979) 
16.04.030 - Authority. 
    By authority of resolution of the planning commission adopted pursuant to the powers and jurisdictions vested through Sections 31-23-101 et seq. and 31-23-201 et seq. CRS 1973 and other applicable laws, statutes and regulations of the state, the planning commission does hereby exercise the power and authority to review, approve and disapprove plats for subdivision land within the legal boundaries of the municipality, and limited to control with reference to a major street plan and not otherwise, all land lying within three miles of the boundaries of the municipality. 
(Ord. 555 §1.3, 1979) 
16.04.040 - Jurisdiction. 
A.  These subdivision regulations shall apply to all subdivisions of land as defined in this chapter, located within the corporate limits of the municipality. 
B.  No land shall be subdivided within the corporate limits of the municipality until: 
1.  The subdivider or his agent submits a sketch plat of the parcel to the planning commission; 
2.  Obtain approval of the sketch plat, together with preliminary and final approval of the plat itself by the planning commission; and 
3.  The approved plat is filed with the city clerk and the county clerk and recorder of Kit Carson County, Colorado. 
C.  No certificate of zoning compliance shall be issued for any parcel or plat of land which was created by subdivision after the effective date of, and not in conformity with, the provisions of these subdivision regulations, and no excavation of land or construction of any public or private improvements shall take place or be commenced except in conformity with the regulations. 
D.  Areas within three miles of the corporate limits of the city shall not be subdivided until the planning commission reviews the plat with reference to the major street plan of the community. 
(Ord. 555 §1.4, 1979) 
16.04.050 - Conditions. 
    The developer has the duty of compliance with reasonable conditions established by the planning commission for design, dedication, improvement and restrictive use of land so as to conform to the physical and economical development of the municipality and to the safety and general welfare of the future plat owners in the subdivision and of the community. 
(Ord. 555 §1.5, 1979) 
16.04.060 - Resubdivision of land. 
A.  Procedure for Resubdivision. For any change in a map of an approved subdivision plat, if such change affects any street layout shown on such map, or area reserved thereon for public use, or any lot adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions, such parcel shall be approved by the planning commission by the same procedure, rules and regulations as for a subdivision. 
B.  Procedure for Subdivisions Where Future Resubdivision is Indicated. Whenever a parcel of land is subdivided and the subdivision plat shows one or more lots containing more than one acre of land and there are indications that such lots will eventually be resubdivided into small building sites, the planning commission may require that such parcel of land allow for the future opening of streets and the ultimate extension of adjacent streets. Easements providing for the future opening and extension of such streets may be made a requirement of the plat. 
(Ord. 555 §1.6, 1979) 
16.04.070 - Vacation of plats. 
A.  Subject to the following rules and regulations, any plat or any part of any plat may be vacated by the owner of the premises, at any time before the sale of any lot therein, by a written instrument, to which a copy of such plat shall be attached, declaring the same to be vacated. 
B.  Such an instrument may be approved by the planning commission in like manner as plats of subdivisions. The planning commission may reject any such instrument which abridges or destroys any public rights in any of its public uses, improvements, streets or alleys. 
C.  Any such instrument approved by the planning commission shall be executed, acknowledged, recorded and filed, in like manner as plats of subdivisions; and being duly recorded and filed shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the recording of the plat so vacated, and to divest all public rights in the streets, alleys and public grounds, and all dedications laid out or described in such plat. 
D.  When lots have been sold, the plat may be vacated in the manner herein provided by all the owners of lots in such plat joining in the execution of such writing. 
(Ord. 555 §1.7, 1979) 
16.04.080 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this title, certain terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall be construed as specified in this section. Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural the singular. 
A.  "Alleys" means minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting a street. 
B.  "Arterials" means those streets designed to carry traffic through the community. 
C.  "Collectors" means those streets which collect traffic from local streets and distribute such traffic to an arterial. 
D.  "Comprehensive plan" means the long range development plan adopted by the governing body of the city. 
E.  "Cul-de-sac" means a short dead-end street terminating in a vehicular turnaround area. 
F.  "Easement" means a right to land generally established in a real estate deed or on a recorded plat to permit the use of land by the public, a corporation or particular persons for specified uses. 
G.  "Local" means those streets which serve primarily adjacent land and dwellings. 
H.  "Lot" means a piece or parcel of land separated from other pieces or parcels by legal description, as in a subdivision, or by metes and bounds, for purposes of sale, lease or separate use. 
I.  "Planning area" means the statutory zoning jurisdiction of the city. 
J.  "Planning commission" means the planning commission of the city as appointed by the governing body as authorized by the city charter. 
K.  "Plat" means a map supporting materials of certain described land prepared in accordance with subdivision regulations as an instrument for recording of real estate interests with the county clerk and recorder of Kit Carson County, Colorado. 
L.  "Street" means a way for vehicular traffic and when used in this title without further explanation shall indicate platted street or right-of-way. 
M.  "Subdivider" means the owners, developers or agents of persons or corporations affecting the subdivision. 
N.  "Subdivision" means the division of a parcel of land into two or more lots or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership, building development or, if a new street is involved, any division of a parcel of land. The term includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided. 
(Ord. 555 §1.8, 1979) 
16.04.090 - Amendments. 
    Any provision of this title from time to time may be amended, supplemented, changed, modified or repealed by the governing body according to law; provided, however, that such amendments, supplements, changes, modifications or repealed provisions shall not become effective until after study and report by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 555 §7.1, 1979) 
16.04.100 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any subdivider who violates any of the provisions of this title shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall pay a penalty of not more than three hundred dollars or serve a jail sentence of not more than ninety days or be punished by both such fines and imprisonment. Each day that a violation of this title continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense, and shall be punishable as such. 
(Ord. 555 §8.1, 1979) 
16.04.110 - Interpretation. 
A.  Provisions are minimum requirements. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be regarded as the minimum requirement for the protection of the public health, safety, comfort, morals, convenience, prosperity and welfare. This title shall therefore be regarded as liberally construed to further its underlying purposes. 
B.  Application of Overlapping Regulations. Whenever both a provision of this title and any other provision of this title or any provision in any other law, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, contain any restriction covering any of the same subject matter, whichever restrictions are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements shall govern. 
C.  Existing Permits. This title is not intended to abrogate or annul any permits issued before the effective date of these regulations. 
(Ord. 555 §8.2, 1979) 
Chapter 16.08 - PLATTING AND REPLATTING PROCEDURES 

16.08.010 - General procedures. 
A.  Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed, before any contract is made for the sale of any part thereof, and before any permit for the erection of a structure in such proposed subdivision shall be granted, the subdividing owner, or his authorized agent, shall apply for and secure approval of such proposed subdivision in accordance with the following procedure which includes three steps: 
1.  Preapplication (sketch plan); 
2.  Preliminary plat; and 
3.  Final plat. 
B.  Official Submission Dates. For the purposes of these regulations, the date of the regular meeting of the planning commission at which the public hearing on final approval of the subdivision plat, including any adjourned date thereof, is closed, shall constitute the official submittal date of the plat at which the statutory period required for formal approval or disapproval of the plat shall commence to run. 
(Ord. 555 §2.1, 1979) 
16.08.020 - Preapplication-Sketch plan. 
A.  Before filing a preliminary plat the subdivider shall consult with the planning commission for advice regarding general requirements affecting the proposed development. A sketch of the proposed subdivision drawn on the topographic survey map shall be submitted. The subdivider shall also submit a location map showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to existing or platted streets and arterials and existing community facilities. 
B.  The planning commission shall inform the subdivider of the requirements pertaining to the proposed subdivision as such requirements are established by this title. 
C.  The preapplication procedure does not require formal application, fee or filing of plat. 
(Ord. 555 §2.2, 1979) 
16.08.030 - Preliminary plat. 
A.  The subdivider shall submit to the planning commission twelve copies of the preliminary plat and supplemental material specified with written application for conditional approval. Such complete submittal shall occur at least twenty-eight days prior to the regular meeting of the planning commission at which the request will be heard. 
B.  A plat review fee shall accompany the application for conditional approval at fifty dollars per subdivision, plus one dollar per lot. 
C.  Preliminary plats shall be a scale of one inch to one hundred feet or one inch to two hundred feet if most of the lots are one acre or larger on a reproducible medium of one or more sheets, and shall be prepared with the following information: 
1.  Proposed name of the subdivision; 
2.  Location and boundaries of the subdivision; 
3.  Name and addresses of the subdivider and the engineer or surveyor preparing the plat; 
4.  The date of preparation, scale and a symbol designating true north; 
5.  Total acreage contained in the subdivision and the total proposed density; 
6.  Present zoning in and adjacent to the subdivision; 
7.  Location of and dimensions for all existing streets, alleys, easements and areas to be reserved or dedicated for parks, schools or other public uses and the names of all such streets; 
8.  Location and dimensions for all existing streets, alleys, easements and watercourses within and adjacent to the subdivision and the names of all such streets; 
9.  Contour interval of two feet at one inch equals one hundred feet or five feet at one inch equals two hundred feet; 
10.  Designation of any area subject to inundation; 
11.  Preliminary drainage plan showing types and locations of storm drainage structures and proposed storm drainage structures; 
12.  Proposed improvements and grading concepts; 
13.  Location and size of all existing utilities on or adjacent to the site; and 
14.  Proposed sites, if any, for multifamily residential use, business areas, industrial areas, churches or other nonpublic uses other than one-family residential uses. 
D.  The planning commission shall, when required by law, furnish a copy of such plat for review and comments. 
E.  The subdivider shall indicate by a letter when improvements as required in this title will be provided. Any proposed restrictive covenants for the land involved shall accompany such letter. 
F.  In accordance with CRS 31-23-215, 1973, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the preliminary plat in the manner set forth herein. Notice of hearing shall be sent by registered mail to the applicant and to immediate adjacent owners not less than five days before the date fixed thereof and shall set forth the matter to be considered. Every preliminary plat shall contain the name and address of the applicant to whom notice of such hearing shall be sent. The applicant shall submit to the city the names and addresses of immediately adjacent property. 
G.  The planning commission shall consider the comments of other agencies and departments and the comments received during the public hearing before reaching their decision to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the plat. 
H.  Within thirty days after receiving the preliminary plat, the planning commission shall notify the subdivider of its approval, conditional approval or disapproval. If the plat is conditionally approved or disapproved, the reasons shall be noted in writing and, if possible, recommendations whereby the plat might gain approval. Approval of the preliminary plat shall be valid for no longer than one year. 
I.  Approval of the preliminary plat shall not constitute acceptance of the final plat. The approval of the preliminary plat shall terminate unless a final plat based thereon is submitted within one year from the date of approval of the preliminary plat. 
(Ord. 555 §2.3, 1979) 
16.08.040 - Final plat. 
A.  Upon approval of the preliminary plat, the final plat may be prepared. Only that part of the preliminary plat which is proposed by the developer for recording at any one time must be submitted in its final form. The final plat may reflect the entire preliminary plat or any logical part thereof. Submittal of any portion of the approved area shall be interpreted as satisfying the one year requirement. 
B.  Application for approval of the final plat shall be submitted twenty-eight days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered. 
C.  The final plat shall substantially conform to the approved preliminary plat and shall include all changes specified thereon. 
D.  The subdivider shall submit the original and four copies of the final plat and the required supplemental material to the planning commission. 
E.  After reviewing the final plat, the planning commission shall approve it, approve it subject to certain conditions or reject it. The planning commission shall then submit the final plat along with its recommendations in writing to the city council for final action. 
F.  The city council shall approve, disapprove or refer the plat back to the planning commission for further study. If the plat is disapproved or referred, the reasons shall be stated in writing and referred back to the subdivider within thirty days of presentation to the city council. 
G.  Following acceptance of the final plat by the city council, the plat shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the city clerk. The city clerk shall then record the plat in the office of the Kit Carson County Clerk and Recorder. The subdivider shall furnish to the city clerk the recording fee required by the office of the Kit Carson County Clerk and Recorder prior to recording of the plat. 
H.  The final plat shall be prepared as follows: the drawing shall be made at a scale of either one inch equals fifty feet or one inch equals one hundred feet, by the use of India ink or other equally substantial solution, on a reproducible medium with outer dimensions of twenty-four inches by thirty-six inches. Maps of two or more sheets shall be referenced to an index map placed on the first sheet. 
I.  The final plat shall contain the following information: 
1.  The proposed name of the subdivision under which it is being recorded; 
2.  The date of preparation, scale and a symbol designating true north; 
3.  Legal description of the property, together with a complete reference to the book and page of county records; 
4.  A complete description of primary control points to which all dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data on the plat shall be referred; these primary control points shall be determined prior to final approval; also, the monuments and ties to monuments shall actually exist in the field before final approval; 
5.  Names of all adjoining subdivisions with dotted lines of abutting lots; if the adjoining land is unplatted, it should be shown as such; 
6.  Location, dimensions and purposes of any easements and public use areas; 
7.  Filing boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, street centerlines, easements and other rights-of-way, and property lines or residential lots and other sites, with accurate dimensions, and bearings or curved data; 
8.  Names and right-of-way widths for each street and other right-of-way; 
9.  Number to identify each lot or site, and each block; 
10.  Location and description of monuments; 
11.  Statement of land ownership by the subdivider; 
12.  Statement by owner dedicating streets, rights-of-way and any sites for public uses; areas reserved for future public acquisition shall also be delineated on the plat; 
13.  A certificate by an attorney authorized to practice law in the state that the person or persons dedicating to the public ways and areas shown on the final plat are the owners thereof in fee simple, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances; 
14.  Certification by surveyor or engineer certifying to the accuracy or survey and plat and the signatures and seal of the registered land surveyor or of the registered engineer; 
15.  Certification for approval by the planning commission and by the city council with signature line for signature by the mayor; and 
16.  Certification of title. 
J.  The final plat shall be accompanied by the following: 
1.  Detailed construction plans of all required public improvements; 
2.  Protective covenants in form for recording. 
(Ord. 555 §2.4, 1979) 
Chapter 16.12 - MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS 
Sections: 

16.12.010 - General requirements. 
A.  All subdivision design shall conform to standards of the comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance. 
B.  Each lot in a subdivision shall abut a public street unless otherwise recommended by the planning commission and on exception by the city council. 
C.  All subdivision designs shall indicate that consideration was given for economic aspects of maintenance of safe, convenient, comfortable and attractive community facilities. 
D.  Where a residential subdivision borders a railroad right-of-way, either a parallel street, lots with increased setbacks or a landscaped buffer area shall be required. 
(Ord. 555 §3.1, 1979) 
16.12.020 - Streets. 
A.  Streets shall conform to the comprehensive street plan. 
B.  Streets shall be aligned to join with planned or existing streets, where desirable. 
C.  No subdivision shall prevent the extension of arterial and collector streets through and beyond the subdivision in a direction away from the center of the city. The subdivider may plan and design the collector streets not extended on the comprehensive plan subject to approval of the planning commission. 
D.  Street names and numbers shall be subject to the approval of the planning commission. 
(Ord. 555 §3.2, 1979) 
16.12.030 - Alleys and other easements. 
A.  Alleys. 
1.  Alleys, open at both ends, shall be provided in commercial, industrial and residential areas unless other provisions are made. 
2.  Alleys in residential subdivisions shall be required except in cases when the same are not necessary and not desirable to continue an existing pattern. 
B.  Easements. 
1.  Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse, and such further width or construction; or both, as will be adequate for the purpose. 
2.  The subdivider shall be responsible for adequate provisions to eliminate or control flood hazards associated with the subdivision. 
(Ord. 555 §3.3, 1979) 
16.12.040 - Blocks. 
    Pedestrian ways or crosswalks not less than ten feet in width may be required where deemed essential to provide access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers or other community facilities. Such pedestrian ways shall be dedicated to the public use unless other written agreement, deed restriction, etc., guarantees maintenance. To the extent practical subdivision design should give high priority to the convenience and safety of the pedestrian. 
(Ord. 555 §3.4, 1979) 
16.12.050 - Lots. 
A.  No lot in a subdivision shall have less area than required under applicable zoning requirements of the city. 
B.  Each lot shall provide vehicular access to a public street. 
(Ord. 555 §3.5, 1979) 
16.12.060 - Sidewalks. 
    All sidewalks shall be a minimum of thirty inches in width. 
(Ord. 555 §3.6, 1979) 
16.12.070 - Public sites, reservations and dedications. 
A.  A subdivider shall be required to dedicate rights-of-way for public street, drainage easements and utility easements as needed to serve the area being platted. 
B.  Reservation of sites for flood control purposes and other municipal uses shall be mutually agreed upon between the subdivider and the planning commission and city council. 
(Ord. 555 §3.7, 1979) 
Chapter 16.16 - IMPROVEMENTS 
Sections: 

16.16.010 - Monuments. 
    Monuments shall be placed at all block corners, angle points, points of curves in streets and at intermediate points as shall be required by the engineer. The monuments shall be of such material, size and length as may be approved by the engineer. 
(Ord. 555 §4.1, 1979) 
16.16.020 - Utility and street improvements. 
A.  Utility and street rights-of-way shall be provided in each new subdivision in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 16.12. 
B.  Improvements may be required by the planning commission in each subdivision. Actual improvements required shall be negotiated between the city council and each subdivider. 
C.  Procedure. No improvements shall be made until all required plans, profiles and specifications for the same have been submitted to and approved by the planning commission and city council. 
(Ord. 555 §4.2, 1979) 
Chapter 16.20 - DEDICATIONS 
Sections: 

16.20.010 - Dedication-Recordation. 
    Before final plat approval is given to the subdivider, the subdivider shall be required to dedicate to the public use all streets, alleys, buffer strips and parks as may be required by the planning commission. Acceptance of these dedicated lands shall be recorded in the minutes of the city council and on the subdivision plat. 
(Ord. 555 §5.1, 1979) 
Chapter 16.24 - VARIANCES 
Sections: 

16.24.010 - Unusual conditions. 
    The planning commission may recommend and the city council may grant variances from the provisions of this title but only after determining that: 
A.  There are unique circumstances or conditions affecting the property; 
B.  The variance is necessary for the reasonable and acceptable development of the property in question; and 
C.  The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to adjacent property. 
(Ord. 555 §6.1, 1979) 
Title 17 - ZONING 
Chapters: 
Chapter 17.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

17.04.010 - Short title. 
    This title may be cited and referred to as the "official zoning ordinance of the city of Burlington, Colorado" and for brevity is referred to in this title as "this title." 
(Ord. 535 §12.101, 1978) 
17.04.020 - Intent and purposes. 
    The regulations for the zoning districts as herein set forth are made in accordance with a comprehensive plan for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and general welfare of the community. They are designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; and to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements. They are made with responsible consideration, among other things, as to the character of each district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses and with a view of conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city. 
(Ord. 535 §12.102, 1978) 
17.04.030 - Administrative and enforcement official. 
    In order to provide for the administration and enforcement of this title, the city council shall designate an official who shall be referred to as the administrative official; the city council may, if it so desires, designate a deputy administrative official who shall be empowered to administer and enforce this title whenever the administrative official is unable, for whatever reason, to perform such duties. The function of administrating this title shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, reviewing proposed construction projects and other proposed land use activities to determine compliance with this title; interpreting words, phrases and concepts contained herein; obtaining factual material needed for making decisions which this title requires to be made; and performing other duties specifically or impliedly delegated to the administrative official by other sections of this title. The administrative official shall have the authority to notify owners and occupiers of land in the city, and to issue orders requiring compliance within specified times not longer than three months unless a longer time is specified by the board of adjustment and appeals. 
(Ord. 535 §12.103, 1978) 
17.04.040 - Code reference to specially defined words. 
    Chapter 17.08 contains a number of definitions for the purpose of interpreting this title. 
(Ord. 535 §12.104, 1978) 
17.04.050 - Zoning districts designated. 
A.  For the purpose of this title, the city may be divided into nine zoning districts designated as follows: 
1.  R-1 single-family residential; 
2.  R-2 multifamily residential; 
3.  R-3 transitional; 
4.  R-M mobile home community; 
5.  C-1 general business; 
6.  C-2 highway commercial; 
7.  I-1 light industrial; 
8.  I-2 heavy industrial; 
9.  PUD planned unit development. 
B.  This title attempts to classify all likely land uses into one or more of the zoning districts. If a particular land use is not permitted in a zoning district, a building which is designated for that land use is also prohibited. 
C.  Certain land uses are permitted in a particular district as a matter of right and certain other land uses are permitted only if the board of adjustment and appeals gives specific written approval. The first are referred to as "uses by right" and the second type is referred to as "uses by special review." If the use is identified as a use by special review, the use shall not be made prior to specific written authorization by the board of adjustment and appeals. The administrative official shall make the initial determination as to the land use description contained in this title which best identifies an actual land use or proposed land use. 
(Ord. 535 §12.105, 1978) 
17.04.060 - Zoning map. 
A.  The zoning map which accompanies the ordinance codified in this title, and any amendments thereof, is incorporated and declared to be a part of this title, and is designated as the Burlington zoning map and the districts set forth therein are approved and adopted and made a part of this title. 
B.  The boundaries of the zones or districts are established as shown on the Burlington zoning map and as such boundaries may be changed by amendment as hereinafter provided. This map shall indicate the latest amendment, shall be kept up to date and on file in the office of the city clerk for the use and benefit of the general public. 
C.  In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the city council may by resolution adopt a new official zoning map which shall supercede the prior official zoning map. The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original official zoning map or any subsequent amendment thereof. 
D.  Unless the prior official zoning map has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. 
(Ord. 535 §12.106, 1978) 
17.04.070 - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
    Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the districts set out in this chapter as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
A.  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets, highways, railroad right-of-way lines or such lines extended, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
B.  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
C.  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the center lines of streets, highways or railroads, or reservoirs, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by use of the scale shown on the zoning map. 
D.  Where a district boundary line divides a lot in single ownership, the district boundary lines shall be determined by the use of the scale or dimensions shown on the zoning map. 
E.  Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are in variance with those shown on the zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered previously in this chapter, the board of adjustment and appeals shall interpret the district boundaries. 
(Ord. 535 §12.107, 1978) 
17.04.080 - Zoning of annexed territory. 
    All territory which is annexed to the city shall be zoned concurrently with its annexation. 
(Ord. 535 §12.108, 1978) 
17.04.090 - Schedule of fees, charges and expenses. 
A.  The city council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses and a collection procedure for certificates of zoning compliance, appeals and other matters pertaining to this title. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the zoning compliance officer and the city clerk and may be altered or amended by only the city council. 
B.  Until all applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full, no actions shall be taken on any application or appeal. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1201, 1978) 
17.04.100 - Changes and amendments. 
    Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning practice justifies such action and after the consideration and approval by the planning and zoning commission, the city council may amend, supplement or change the boundaries or the regulations established by this title after public hearings as herein provided. 
A.  A proposed change may be initiated by the city council, the planning and zoning commission or by a petition signed and acknowledged by not less than fifty-one percent of the property owners residing within the area proposed to be changed. 
B.  The planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing to consider proposed changes or amendments to this title. At least fifteen days notice of the time and place of such hearings shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in such municipality. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1301, 1978) 
17.04.110 - Protest. 
    In case of a protest against such change signed by the owners of twenty percent or more, either of the area of the lots included in such proposed change, or of those immediately adjacent thereto, extending one hundred feet therefrom, or of those directly opposite thereto extending one hundred feet from the street frontage of such opposite lots, such amendment shall not become effective except by favorable vote of three-fourths of all the members of the city council. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1302, 1978) 
17.04.120 - Conflict with other regulations. 
    Whenever the regulations made under authority of this title require a greater width or size of yards or courts, or require a lower height of building, or less number of stories, or require a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied or impose other higher standards than are required in any other statute or local ordinance or regulation, the provisions of the regulations made under authority of this title shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute or local ordinance or regulation require a greater width or size of yards or courts or require a lower height of building or a less number of stories, or require a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied, or impose other higher standards than are required by the regulations made under authority of this title, the provisions of such statute or ordinance or regulation shall govern. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1401, 1978) 
17.04.130 - Minimum requirements. 
    In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals or general welfare. Wherever the requirements of this title are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions or covenants, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1501, 1978) 
Chapter 17.08 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 

17.08.010 - Interpretation of terms generally. 
    For the purpose of interpreting this title, certain terms are defined in this chapter. Except as defined herein, all other words used in this title shall have their customary dictionary meanings. 
A.  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
B.  Words used in the singular include the plural and words used in the plural include the singular. 
C.  The word "shall" is always mandatory. 
D.  The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel." 
E.  The word "building" includes the word "structure." 
F.  The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation, as well as an individual. 
G.  The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or buildings shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." 
H.  The word "map," "zoning map," "Burlington zoning map" or "official zoning map of Burlington" means the official zoning map of the city. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1901, 1978) 
17.08.015 - Accessory building. 
    "Accessory building" means a subordinate building or a portion of the main building, the use of which is incidental to that of the dominant use of the building or premises. See also Section 17.08.050. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(a), 1978) 
17.08.020 - Alley. 
    "Alley" means a public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(b), 1978) 
17.08.025 - Apartment. 
    "Apartment" means a part of a building consisting of a room or rooms intended, designed or used as a residence by an individual or a single family. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(c), 1978) 
17.08.030 - Basement. 
    "Basement" means a story having part but not more than one-half of its height below grade. A basement is counted as a story for the purpose of height regulations, if subdivided and used for business or dwelling purposes by other than a janitor employed on the premises. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(d), 1978) 
17.08.035 - Board. 
    "Board" means the board of adjustment and appeals of the city. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(e), 1978) 
17.08.040 - Boarding house. 
    "Boarding house" means a building other than a hotel, where for compensation and by prearrangement for a definite period meals or lodging and meals are provided for three or more persons, but not exceeding twenty persons. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(f), 1978) 
17.08.045 - Building. 
    "Building" means a structure that is completely enclosed by a roof and by solid exterior walls along whose outside faces can be traced an unbroken line for the complete circumference of the structure, which is permanently affixed to a lot or lots, and used or intended for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind. The connection of two buildings by means of an open porch, breezeway, passageway, carport or other such open structures, with or without a roof, shall not be deemed to make them one building. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(g), 1978) 
17.08.050 - Building, accessory. 
    "Accessory building" means a subordinate building, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of a principal building on the same lot. See also Section 17.08.015. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(h), 1978) 
17.08.055 - Building height. 
    "Building height" means the vertical distance from the established average sidewalk grade, street grade or finished grade at the building line, whichever is the highest, to the highest point of the building. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(i), 1978) 
17.08.060 - Building, principal. 
    "Principal building" means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(j), 1978) 
17.08.065 - Carport. 
    A carport, when covered or enclosed, shall be an accessory building. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(k), 1978) 
17.08.070 - Cellar. 
    "Cellar" means a portion of a building located partly or wholly underground having one- half or more of its floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(l), 1978) 
17.08.075 - City. 
    "City" means the city of Burlington, Colorado. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(m), 1978) 
17.08.080 - City council. 
    "City council" means the city council of the city of Burlington, Colorado. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(n), 1978) 
17.08.082 - Club, lodge. 
    "Club" or "lodge" means a building or land used for the activities of an association of persons for the promotion of some nonprofit common objective such as literature, science, politics, and good fellowship, and not accessory to, or operated as, or in connection with a tavern, eating place, or other place open to the public, which meets periodically and is limited to members, with not more than one-third of the gross floor area of the club or lodge used for residential occupancy. 
(Ord. 809 §1, 2002) 
17.08.085 - Commission. 
    "Commission" means the planning and zoning commission of the city. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(o), 1978) 
17.08.090 - Dwelling. 
    "Dwelling" means a building containing one or more dwelling units, but in case of a building having two or more portions divided by one or more party walls forming a complete separation, each such portion shall be considered to be a separate dwelling. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(p), 1978) 
17.08.095 - Dwelling, multifamily. 
    "Multifamily dwelling" means a dwelling used by or designated for three or more dwelling units, each independently containing cooking facilities. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(s), 1978) 
17.08.100 - Dwelling, single-family. 
    "Single-family dwelling" means a dwelling having one dwelling unit from ground to floor and having independent and outside access. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(q), 1978) 
17.08.105 - Dwelling, two-family. 
    "Two-family dwelling" means a dwelling having two dwelling units. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(r), 1978) 
17.08.110 - Dwelling unit. 
    "Dwelling unit" means a building, or portion thereof, providing complete and permanent living facilities for one family. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(t), 1978) 
17.08.115 - Factory-built housing unit. 
    "Factory-built housing unit" means any structure or component thereof, designed primarily for residential occupancy, either permanent or temporary, which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in a manufacturing facility for installation or assembly and installation, on a permanent foundation at a building site and built to the standards of the Factory-built Housing Construction Code of the State of Colorado as it applied to all factory-built housing (except mobile homes), as defined in CRS 1973, Title 24, Article 32, Part 7, as amended. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(u), 1978) 
17.08.120 - Family. 
    "Family" means one or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(v), 1978) 
17.08.125 - Fence. 
    "Fence" means a barrier, usually along a lot line, constructed of any material, usually as a boundary or means of protection, confinement, concealment or ornamentation. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(w), 1978) 
17.08.130 - Filling station. 
    "Filling station" means any building or premises used solely or principally for the storing, dispensing, sale or offering for sale at retail of any automobile fuels or oils. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(x), 1978) 
17.08.135 - Floor area. 
    "Floor area" means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating buildings. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(y), 1978) 
17.08.140 - Frontage. 
    "Frontage" means all the property abutting upon one side of a street between two lot lines measured along the right-of-way line. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(z), 1978) 
17.08.145 - Garage, private. 
    "Private garage" means a building used only for the housing of private motor vehicles, not used for repair, hire or sale. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(aa), 1978) 
17.08.150 - Garage, public. 
    "Public garage" means a garage other than a private garage. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(ab), 1978) 
17.08.155 - Home occupation. 
    "Home occupation" means any occupation or profession carried on by a member of the family residing on the premises, provided no commodity is sold thereon, no person is employed other than such member of the family; and no mechanical equipment is used for such as is not ordinarily used for domestic purposes. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(ac), 1978) 
17.08.160 - Hotel. 
    "Hotel" means a building used as abiding place for more than fifteen persons who are for compensation lodged with or without meals. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(ad), 1978) 
17.08.165 - Institutions. 
    "Institutions" means a building occupied by a nonprofit corporation or nonprofit establishment for public use. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(ae), 1978) 
17.08.170 - Junkyard. 
    "Junkyard" means a lot or part thereof used for the storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, including scrap metal or vehicles or machinery or parts thereof. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(af), 1978) 
17.08.175 - Lodging house. 
    "Lodging house" means a building where lodging only is provided for compensation to three or more, but not exceeding fifteen persons, in contradistinction to hotels opened to transients. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(ag), 1978) 
17.08.180 - Lot. 
    "Lot" means a parcel of land defined by metes and bounds or boundary lines in a recorded deed fronting on a street. In determining lot area on boundary lines, no part thereof within the limits of the street shall be included. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(ah), 1978) 
17.08.185 - Lot, corner. 
    "Corner lot" means a lot at the junction of and fronting on two or more intersecting streets. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(ai), 1978) 
17.08.190 - Lot depth. 
    "Lot depth" means the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(aj), 1978) 
17.08.195 - Lot, interior. 
    "Interior lot" means a lot other than a corner lot. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(ak), 1978) 
17.08.200 - Lot lines. 
    "Lot lines" means the lines bounding the lot. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(al), 1978) 
17.08.205 - Lot of record. 
    "Lot of record" means a lot which is a part of a plot, a map of which has been recorded in the office of the county recorder of Kit Carson County. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(am), 1978) 
17.08.210 - Lot, through. 
    "Through lot" means an interior lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(an), 1978) 
17.08.215 - Lot width. 
    "Lot width" means the horizontal distance between side lot lines measured at the street frontage. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(ao), 1978) 
17.08.220 - Mobile home. 
    "Mobile home" means a factory- assembled structure or structures equipped with the necessary service connections and made so as to be readily moveable as a unit or units on its own running gear and designed to be used as a dwelling unit without permanent foundation and built to that portion of the Factory-built Housing Construction Code of the State of Colorado which applies to mobile homes. The phrase "without a permanent foundation" indicates that the support system is constructed with the intent that the mobile home placed thereon will be moved from time to time at the convenience of the owner. Mobile home shall be as defined in CRS 1973, Title 24, Article 32, Part 7, as amended. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(ap), 1978) 
17.08.225 - Nonconforming use. 
    "Nonconforming use" means the use of any premises contrary to the provisions of this title for the district in which the premises are located. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(aq), 1978) 
17.08.230 - Parking lot. 
    "Parking lot" means a parcel of land devoted to unenclosed parking spaces. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(ar), 1978) 
17.08.235 - Parking space. 
    "Parking space" means the storage space for one motor vehicle which space is not less than ten feet by twenty feet, plus the necessary access space. It shall not be located within any required yard. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(as), 1978) 
17.08.240 - Patio. 
    A patio, when covered or enclosed, shall be an accessory building. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(at), 1978) 
17.08.245 - Place. 
    "Place" means an open unoccupied space other than a street or alley permanently reserved as the principal means of access to abutting property. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(au), 1978) 
17.08.250 - Restaurant. 
    "Restaurant" means a building other than a hotel or boarding house where for compensation food is prepared and dispensed by prearrangement or otherwise to more than fifteen persons, and includes tea rooms, chicken dinner houses and all comparable eating houses not classed under boarding houses or hotels. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(av), 1978) 
17.08.255 - Sign. 
    "Sign" means any advertisement, announcement, direction or communication produced in whole or in part by the construction, erection, affixing or placing of a structure on any land or on any other structure, or produced by painting on or posting or placing any printing, letter printed, lettered, pictured, figured or colored material on any building, structure or surface. Signs placed or erected by governmental agencies or nonprofit civic associations for a public purpose in the public interest shall not be included herein, nor shall this include signs which are a part of the architectural design of a building. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(aw), 1978) 
17.08.260 - Sign, illuminated. 
    "Illuminated sign" means a sign designed to give forth artificial light or through transparent or translucent material from a source of light within such sign, including but not limited to neon and exposed lamp signs. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(ax), 1978) 
17.08.265 - Sign, nonilluminated. 
    "Nonilluminated sign" means a sign which is not illuminated. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(ay), 1978) 
17.08.270 - Story. 
    "Story" means that portion of a building other than a basement included between the structure of the floor next above it or, if there is no floor above it, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(az), 1978) 
17.08.275 - Story, half. 
    "Half story" means a space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of the roof decking and wall face not more than three feet above the top floor level, and in which space not more than two-thirds of the floor area is finished for use, a half- story containing independent apartment or living quarters shall be counted as a full story. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(ba), 1978) 
17.08.280 - Street. 
    "Street" means all property dedicated or intended for public or private street purposes or subject to public easements therefor. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(bb), 1978) 
17.08.285 - Street right-of-way line. 
    "Street right- of-way line" means lines separating private property from the street or alley existing or dedicated in public ownership. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(bc), 1978) 
17.08.290 - Structural alterations. 
    "Structural alterations" means any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(be), 1978) 
17.08.295 - Structure. 
    Anything constructed or erected, including a building which has permanent foundations on the ground, or anything attached to something having a permanent location on the ground. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(bd), 1978) 
17.08.300 - Tourist, trailer camp. 
    "Tourist camp" or "trailer camp" means an area containing one or more structures designed or intended to be used as temporary living facilities of two or more families and intended primarily for automobile transients, or providing spaces where two or more tents or auto trailers can be parked. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(bf), 1978) 
17.08.305 - Trailer. 
    "Trailer" means any vehicle or structure so designed and constructed in such manner as will permit occupancy thereof and sleeping quarters for one or more persons, or the conduct of any business or profession, occupation or trade, and so designed that it is, may be or was mounted on wheels and used as a convenience on highways or city streets, propelled or drawn by its own or other motive powers, and shall include, without limiting the general definition thereof, house trailers, mobile homes or any readily movable enclosure or vehicle which may be propelled and is so constructed as to permit occupancy for human habitat. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(bg), 1978) 
17.08.310 - Trailer park. 
    "Trailer park" means land used or intended to be used, leased or rented for occupancy by three or more trailers that are mounted on wheels or anchored in place by a foundation or other stationary support, to be used for living or commercial purposes of any kind, together with automobile parking space and incidental utility structures and facilities required and provided in connection therewith. This definition shall not include trailer sales or lots on which unoccupied trailers are parked for purposes of inspection or sale. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(bh), 1978) 
17.08.315 - Use. 
    "Use" means any activity, occupation, business or operation carried on or intended to be carried on in a building or structure or on a tract of land. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(bi), 1978) 
17.08.320 - Yard. 
    "Yard" means an open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this title. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the mean horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902 (bj), 1978) 
17.08.325 - Yard, front. 
    "Front yard" means a yard extending across the front of a lot between the side yard lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the main building or any projection thereof other than steps, unenclosed balconies and unenclosed porches. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(bk), 1978) 
17.08.330 - Yard, rear. 
    "Rear yard" means a yard extending across the rear of a lot measured between lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the main building or any projections other than steps, unenclosed balconies and unenclosed porches. On corner lots the rear yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension. On both corner lots and interior lots the rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(bl), 1978) 
17.08.335 - Yard, side. 
    "Side yard" means an open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building between the building and the side line of the lot extending from the front building line to the rear building line or to the rear line of the lot, where no rear yard is required. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1902(bm), 1978) 
Chapter 17.12 - BUILDING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF ZONING COMPLIANCE 
Sections: 

17.12.010 - Zoning compliance officer. 
A.  The position of zoning compliance officer is authorized. The city council shall designate a zoning compliance officer, hereinafter referred to as the officer, and may designate a deputy zoning compliance officer, who shall act in the absence of the official zoning compliance officer. 
B.  If the officer finds that any of the provisions of this title are being violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal additions, alterations or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this title to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. 
(Ord. 535 §12.601, 1978) 
17.12.020 - Certificate of zoning compliance. 
A.  A certificate of zoning compliance shall be required: 
1.  To erect or construct a building or structure; 
2.  To reconstruct, repair or alter an existing building or structure in such a manner as to change the exterior dimensions of such existing building or structure; 
3.  To change the use of any building or structure; 
4.  To change the use of any property in the city. 
B.  It shall be the duty of the officer to issue a certificate of zoning compliance if the proposed building or other structure and the proposed use conforms with all of the requirements set forth in subsection A of this section. 
C.  It is unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or partially altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of zoning compliance has been issued therefor by the officer or stating that the proposed use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this title. 
D.  No nonconforming structure or use shall be maintained, renewed, changed or extended until a certificate of zoning compliance has been issued by the administrative official. The certificate of zoning compliance shall state specifically wherein the nonconforming use differs from the provisions of this title. 
E.  No permit for erection, alteration, moving or repair of any building shall be issued until an application has been made for a certificate of zoning compliance, and the certificate shall be issued in conformity with the provisions of this title upon completion of the work. 
F.  A temporary certificate of zoning compliance may be issued by the officer for a period not exceeding six months during alteration or partial occupancy of a building pending its completion, provided that such temporary certificate may include such conditions and safeguards as will protect the safety of the occupants and the public. 
G.  The officer shall maintain a record of all certificates of zoning compliance and a copy shall be furnished upon request to any person. 
H.  Failure to obtain a certificate of zoning compliance shall be a violation of this title and punishable under Section 17.40.020. 
(Ord. 535 §12.602, 1978) 
17.12.030 - Application for certificate. 
    To obtain a certificate of zoning compliance, the applicant shall submit the required documents and pay the fees established herein: 
A.  An application on form prescribed by the officer, containing information sufficient to show compliance with the requirements of this title; 
B.  A plat drawn to scale showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact size and location on the lot of existing buildings and structures, the lines within which the proposed building or structure and driveways shall be located or altered, the existing and intended use of each building or part of a building, the existing and intended use of property and the present and proposed location of all utility and service connections, drainage courses and easements, parking lots, topography and such information with regard to the lot, neighboring lots, structures, manmade or natural features and their use within fifteen feet around the perimeter of the lot or any other information as may be necessary to determine compliance and provide for the enforcement of this title; 
C.  In areas which are not served with public water or sewer, a certified statement that the proposed water and sewer facilities will be installed to conform to the minimum requirements of the State Department of Health; 
D.  Every application for a certificate filed in behalf of any fraternal, charitable or civic organization or association shall be accompanied by a resolution of such organization or association authorizing the execution of the application. 
(Ord. 535 §12.603, 1978) 
17.12.040 - Expiration of certificate. 
    Any certificate issued shall become invalid unless the physical construction work authorized by it shall have been commenced within six months of its date of issue or if the physical construction work authorized by it is suspended or abandoned for a period of one year. A record of certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the officer. Prior to commencement of work authorized by a certificate of zoning compliance, a sign shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises identifying the certificate number in letters not less than six inches in height. 
(Ord. 535 §12.604, 1978) 
17.12.050 - Construction and use to be as provided in application, plans, permits and certificates. 
    Certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the administrative official authorize only the use, arrangement and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement or construction. Use, arrangement or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed violation of this title, and punishable as provided by Section 17.40.020. 
(Ord. 535 §12.605, 1978) 
17.12.060 - Remedies. 
    In case any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building or land is used in violation of this title, the zoning compliance officer, or other city authorities, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such violation. 
(Ord. 535 §12.606, 1978) 
Chapter 17.16 - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 
Sections: 

17.16.010 - Created. 
    There is created and established a board of adjustment and appeals consisting of the number of members from time to time specified by the council. Such members shall be appointed by the council for overlapping terms of three years. Each member shall be a taxpaying elector and in addition shall reside in the area comprising the city at the time of his appointment (see Charter Section 8.2). 
(Ord. 535 §12.901, 1978) 
17.16.020 - Hearings-Appeals-Notice. 
    Appeals to the board of adjustment and appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the city affected by any action of the zoning compliance officer. Such appeal shall be taken within thirty days after the final action by filing with the officer and with the board a written notice of appeal. Notice of the appeal shall state the grounds therefor and shall be filed with the officers from whom the appeal is taken. The officer shall forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment and appeals all of the papers constituting the records upon which the action appealed from was taken. The board of adjustment and appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal, shall give notice to the parties in interest and shall decide the same within a reasonable time after it is submitted. Any party may appear at the hearing, in person or by agent or attorney. 
(Ord. 535 §12.902, 1978) 
17.16.030 - Powers and duties. 
    The board of adjustment and appeals shall have the following powers and duties: 
A.  Administrative review: to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the administrative official in the enforcement of this title. 
B.  Special exception-Conditions governing applications-Procedures: to hear and decide only such special exceptions as the board of adjustment and appeals is specifically authorized to pass on by the terms of this title; to decide such questions as are involved in determining whether special exceptions should be granted; and to grant special exceptions with such conditions and safeguards as are appropriate under this title, or to deny special exceptions when not in harmony with the purpose and intent of this title. A special exception shall not be granted by the board of adjustment and appeals unless and until: 
1.  A written application for a special exception is submitted indicating the section of this title under which the special exception is sought and stating the grounds on which it is requested; 
2.  Notice of such application shall be given in the following manner at least fifteen days in advance of public hearing. The owner of the property for which special exception is sought or his agent shall be notified by mail. Notice of such hearings shall be posted on the property for which special exception is sought, at the city hall, and in one other public place at least fifteen days prior to the public hearing; 
3.  The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appeal in person, or by agent or attorney; 
4.  The board of adjustment and appeals may make a finding that it is empowered under the section of this title described in the application to grant the special exception, and that the granting of the special exception will not adversely affect the public interest; 
5.  Before any special exception shall issue, the board shall make written findings certifying compliance with the specific rules governing individual special exceptions and that satisfactory provision and arrangement has been made concerning the following, where applicable: 
a.  Ingress and egress to property and proposed structures thereon with particular reference to automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and control and access in case of fire or catastrophe, 
b.  Off-street parking and loading areas where required, with particular attention to the items in subdivision (a) of this subsection and the economic, noise, glare or odor effects of the special exception on adjoining properties and properties generally in the district, 
c.  Refuse and service areas, with particular reference to the items in subdivisions (a) and (b) of this subsection, 
d.  Utilities, with reference to location, availability and compatibility, 
e.  Screening and buffering with reference to type, dimensions and character, 
f.  Signs, if any, and proposed exterior lighting with reference to glare, traffic safety and economic effect, and compatibility and harmony with properties to the district, 
g.  Required yards and other open space, 
h.  General compatibility with adjacent properties and other property in the district. 
C.  Variances-Conditions covering applications-Procedures: to authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this title as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this title would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance from the terms of this title shall not be granted by the board of adjustment and appeals unless and until: 
1.  A written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating: 
a.  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, structures or buildings in the same district, 
b.  That literal interpretation of the provisions of this title would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this title, 
c.  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant, 
d.  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this title to other lands, structures or buildings in the same district. No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures or buildings in the same district, and no permitted or nonconforming use of lands, structures or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance; 
2.  Notice of public hearing shall be given as in subsection B(2) of this section; 
3.  The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person, or by agent or by attorney; 
4.  The board of adjustment and appeals may make findings that the requirements of subsection C(1) of this section have been met by the applicant for a variance; 
5.  The board of adjustment and appeals may further make a finding that the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance, and that the variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building or structure; 
6.  The board of adjustment and appeals may further make a finding that the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this title, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
D.  In granting any variance, the board of adjustment and appeals may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this title. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this title and punishable under Section 17.40.020. 
E.  Under no circumstances shall the board of adjustment and appeals grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this title in the district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this title in such district. 
F.  Board has powers of administrative official in appeals-Reversing decision of administrative official: in exercising the above-mentioned powers, the board of adjustment and appeals may, so long as such action is in conformity with the terms of this title, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have the powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken. 
G.  The concurring vote of the majority of the members of the board of adjustment and appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass, under this title, or to effect any variation in the application of this title. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1001, 1978) 
17.16.040 - Appeals from the board. 
    Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the board of adjustment and appeals; any taxpayer; or any officer, department, board or bureau of the city may, within fifteen days after the filing of any decision in the office of the board, but not thereafter, present to the district court a petition duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, and specifying the ground of illegality, whereupon such decision of the board of adjustment and appeals shall be subject to judicial review as provided by law. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1101, 1978) 
Chapter 17.20 - RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 
Sections: 
ARTICLE I. - RESIDENTIAL 

17.20.010 - Use regulations for R-1 district-Single-family residential. 
    Within the R-1 district, a building on premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
A.  Uses permitted by right: 
1.  Single-family dwellings; 
2.  Public recreational facilities; 
3.  Elderly group housing; 
4.  Churches, Sunday schools and other places of worship; 
5.  Public and parochial schools and hospitals; 
6.  Public works and public utility facilities, including, but not limited to such structures as transformer stations, pumping stations, water towers and telephone exchanges. 
B.  Uses permitted by special review: 
1.  Private recreational facilities; 
2.  Towers over fifty feet in height; 
3.  Day care centers; 
4.  Multifamily dwelling units providing permanent living accommodations for two or more dwelling units; 
5.  Special exceptions for uses in harmony with the intent and purpose of this title which are not injurious to the public interest, except that mobile home use shall not be considered; 
6.  Medical and dental offices and clinics; 
7.  Mortuaries and funeral parlors. 
(Ord. 651, 1990; Ord. 591 §1, 1982; Ord. 581 §1(part), 1981; Ord. 535 §12.201, 1978) 
17.20.020 - Use regulations for R-2 district-Multifamily residential. 
    Within the R-2 district, a building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
A.  Uses permitted by right: 
1.  The uses permitted by right in the R-2 district are the same as by right in the R-1 district; 
2.  Three or more family residential units. 
B.  Uses permitted by special review: 
1.  The uses permitted by special review in the R-2 district are the same as by special review in the R-1 district; 
2.  Special exceptions for uses in harmony with the intent and purpose of this title which are not injurious to the public interest, except that mobile home use shall not be considered. 
(Ord. 581 §1(part), 1981; Ord. 535 §12.202, 1978) 
17.20.030 - Use regulations for R-3 district-Transitional. 
    Within a R-3 district, a building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
A.  Uses permitted by right: 
1.  The uses permitted by right in the R-3 district are the same as by right in the R-2 district; 
2.  Libraries and community buildings. 
B.  Uses permitted by special review: 
1.  The uses permitted by special review in the R-3 district are the same as by special review in the R-2 district plus the following; 
2.  Office uses; 
3.  Shops for furnishing of personal services, including, but not limited to, such shops as barber shops, beauty parlors and shoe repair shops; 
4.  Mortuaries and funeral parlors; 
5.  Medical and dental offices and clinics; 
6.  Special exceptions for uses in harmony with the intent and purpose of this title which are not injurious to the public interest, except that mobile home use shall not be considered. 
(Ord. 581 §1(part), 1981; Ord. 535 §12.203, 1978) 
17.20.040 - Use regulations for R-M district-Mobile home community. 
    Since this form of single-family housing physically contrasts substantially with typical on-site constructed housing, it is necessary to submit the proposal first to the planning commission for review and recommendation to the city council. 
(Ord. 535 §12.204, 1978) 
17.20.050 - Home occupations in residential districts. 
    Customary incidental home occupations including, but not limited to, the offices of physicians, surgeons, dentists, musicians, artists, attorneys, home-owned and operated beauty shops or dressmaking establishments, when situated in the dwelling, and when not more than one person is employed other than the owner, shall be permitted provided that a zoning compliance permit is first obtained; said zoning compliance permit shall be issued if, and only if, there is on file in the office of the clerk a consent and agreement to such office, shop or establishment signed by seventy-five percent of all the owners of all the frontage within three hundred feet of the premises whereon such facility is to be operated, and not separated therefrom by more than one street or one alley. 
(Ord. 535 §12.205, 1978) 
17.20.060 - Accessory uses and buildings in residential districts. 
    Land in residential zoning districts may be used in ways and for purposes that are clearly incidental to the principal uses. Such incidental uses in residential districts include, by way of example, the cultivation of flowers, plants and vegetables and the maintenance and use of private swimming pools and tennis courts. In addition to the general types of accessory uses which the first sentence of this section is intended to authorize, the following specific accessory uses are authorized in any of the residential zoning districts: 
A.  Home occupations, operated within the limitations of Section 17.20.050; 
B.  One accessory structure not exceeding fifty feet in height; 
C.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to the above uses, not involving the conduct of a business, including a private garage. Any accessory building that is not a part of the main structure shall be located not less than sixty feet from the front lot line. 
(Ord. 535 §12.206, 1978) 
ARTICLE II. - COMMERCIAL 

17.20.070 - Use regulations for C-1 district-General business. 
    In the C-1 district, buildings, structures and land shall be used only for the following purposes: 
A.  Uses permitted by right: 
1.  Any use permitted without special exception in the R-1 district; 
2.  Retail businesses, such as hardware, paint and lumber stores, general merchandise stores, department stores, eating and drinking establishments, liquor stores, antique stores, jewelry stores, office supply stores, music shops, sporting goods stores, book, stationery, magazine, candy and tobacco shops, and florists, but not excluding similar retail outlets; 
3.  Business services, such as banks, credit unions, loan companies and other financial institutions, real estate and insurance agencies, utility offices, newspaper offices and professional offices; 
4.  Personal services, such as barber shops, beauty salons, photographic studios, launderettes, tailor, dressmaking, millinery and dry cleaning; 
5.  Repair services, such as radio, television and appliance shops, plumbing shops, carpenter shops, upholstery shops and shoe repair shops; 
6.  Medical clinics, excluding veterinary hospitals; 
7.  Hotels; 
8.  Public and private parking lots; 
9.  Restaurants, excluding drive-ins; 
10.  Theaters, excluding drive-ins; 
11.  Mortuary and funeral homes; 
12.  Billiard and pool halls; 
13.  Bakeries and creameries, where the products are sold exclusively at retail on the premises. 
B.  Uses Permitted by Special Review. Uses permitted by special review in the C-1 district are limited to the following: 
1.  Multifamily dwellings; 
2.  Automotive sales and services, such as filling or service stations, commercial or repair garages, new and used car dealers and automotive supplies, provided they are completely within an enclosed building or structure; 
3.  Farm equipment sales and services, including implement dealers, irrigation equipment and other farm machinery, provided they are completely within an enclosed building or structure; 
4.  Bakeries and creameries manufacturing prepared food and miscellaneous food products; 
5.  Wholesale trade, warehousing and commercial storage completely within an enclosed building or structure; 
6.  The open storage, parking or sale of vehicles, machinery and trailers, building materials and supplies, and wholesaling and warehousing goods; 
7.  Transportation depot; 
8.  Special exceptions for uses in harmony with the intent and purpose of this title which is not injurious to the public interest except that mobile home use shall not be considered. 
(Ord. 591 §1(part), 1982; Ord. 581 §1(part), 1981; Ord. 535 §12.207, 1978) 
17.20.080 - Use regulations for C-2 district-Highway commercial. 
    In the C-2 district, buildings, structures and land uses shall be used only for the following purposes: 
A.  Uses Permitted by Right. 
1.  A use permitted without special review in the C-1 district; 
2.  Automotive sales and services, such as filling or service stations, commercial or repair garages, new and used car dealers and automotive supplies; 
3.  Public or private parks and picnic areas, and clubs or lodges; 
4.  Automobile washing establishments; 
5.  Farm equipment sales and services, including implement dealers, irrigation equipment and other farm machinery; 
6.  Eating and drinking establishments, including drive-in restaurants; 
7.  Temporary trailer parks and campgrounds; 
8.  Public works and public utility facilities, including, but not limited to, such structures as transformer stations, pumping stations, water towers and telephone exchanges; 
9.  Open storage, parking or sale of vehicles, machinery, trailers, building materials and supplies. 
B.  Uses Permitted by Special Review. 
1.  Commercial recreation and entertainment, such as drive-in theaters, bowling alleys, dance halls, skating rinks and golf or baseball driving ranges; 
2.  Special exceptions for uses in harmony with the intent and purpose of this title which are not injurious to the public interest; provided, however, that any mobile home park may not be considered unless the provisions of Chapter 15.16 of the Burlington Municipal Code are complied with. 
(Ord. 731 §1, 1997: Ord. 704, 1995; Ord. 591 §1(part), 1982; Ord. 581 §1(part), 1981; Ord. 535 §12.208, 1978) 
17.20.090 - Accessory uses and buildings in commercial districts. 
    Accessory uses and buildings that are clearly incidental to the permitted use and that will not create a nuisance or hazard to life or property are permitted. 
(Ord. 535 §12.209, 1978) 
ARTICLE III. - INDUSTRIAL 

17.20.100 - Use regulations for I-1 district-Light industrial. 
    In the I-1 district, buildings, structures and other land uses shall be used for only the following purposes: 
A.  Uses Permitted by Right. 
1.  Garages for storage, repair and servicing of vehicles and machinery, completely within an enclosed building; 
2.  Transportation terminals completely within an enclosed building; 
3.  Auction houses, completely within an enclosed building; 
4.  Utility offices, installations and shops, completely within an enclosed building; 
5.  Wholesaling and warehousing establishments, completely within an enclosed building; 
6.  Manufacturing, wholesaling, warehousing and commercial storage completely within an enclosed building; 
7.  Building materials sales and manufacturing completely within an enclosed building; 
8.  Contractors office plants, offices and shops completely within an enclosed building; 
9.  Public works and public utility facilities, such as transformer stations, pumping stations, water towers and telephone exchanges; 
B.  Uses Permitted by Special Review. 
1.  Open storage, parking or sale of vehicles; raw materials; building materials; supplies; wholesaling; warehousing, or manufacturing goods; and contractors equipment; 
2.  Manufacturing, wholesaling or warehousing uses not otherwise specified; 
3.  Drive-in theaters; 
4.  Special exceptions for uses in harmony with the intent and purpose of this title which are not injurious to the public interest; provided, however, that any mobile home park may not be considered unless the provisions of Chapter 15.16 of the Burlington Municipal Code are complied with. 
(Ord. 731 §2, 1997: Ord. 698, 1995; Ord. 591 §1(part), 1982; Ord. 581 §1(part), 1981; Ord. 535 §12.210, 1978) 
(Ord. No. 899, 10-27-2014) 
17.20.110 - Use regulations for I-2 district-Heavy industrial. 
    In the I-2 district building structures and other land use shall be used for only the following purposes: 
A.  Uses permitted by right: 
1.  All uses designated as uses by right in the I-1 district; 
2.  Manufacturing and storage completely within an enclosed building; 
3.  Building materials, manufacturing and sales completely within an enclosed building; 
4.  Appliance and mechanical instruments manufacturing completely within an enclosed building; 
5.  Electronic equipment manufacture completely within an enclosed building; 
6.  Machine shops and sheet metal shops completely within an enclosed building; 
7.  Metal processing and fabricating completely within an enclosed building; 
8.  Furniture and cabinet manufacture completely within an enclosed building; 
9.  Transportation terminals; 
10.  Bottling, cold storage, ice or locker plants; 
11.  Public works and public utility facilities, such as transformer stations, pumping stations, water towers and telephone exchanges; 
12.  Food and beverage processing completely within an enclosed building. 
B.  Uses permitted by special review: 
1.  Facilities for the manufacture and storage of explosives; 
2.  Livestock sales barns; 
3.  Grain and feed elevators; 
4.  Outside storage or manufacturing; 
5.  Bulk storage or flammable liquids and gas facilities; 
6.  Fertilizer storage and manufacturing facilities; 
7.  Manufacturing uses not otherwise specified in this section shall not be permitted until the proposed use has been the subject of special review pursuant to Chapter 17.32, only if it is reasonably certain from the special review that all aspects of the proposed use will not produce effects such as industrial noise, smoke, vibration, odor, fumes, radiation or other environmental impacts, which: 
a.  Would be produced at such levels as to be in violation of any applicable law of the state, or 
b.  Would be produced at such levels as to be likely to be injurious to land uses or potential land uses on adjoining land, or 
c.  Would be capable, if produced or released through accident or natural calamity, of causing serious injury or death through explosion, radiation or other toxicity; 
8.  Expansion of or addition to any of the uses in subsection B of this section shall not be permitted until the proposed use has been the subject of special review pursuant to Chapter 17.32; 
9.  Special exceptions for uses in harmony with the intent and purpose of this title which are not injurious to the public interest except that mobile home use shall not be considered. 
(Ord. 591 §1(part), 1982; Ord. 581 §1(part), 1981; Ord. 535 §12.211, 1978) 
17.20.120 - Accessory uses in industrial districts. 
    Land in any particular industrial district may be used in ways and for purposes that are clearly incidental to the principal uses authorized in the district. Typical accessory uses in industrial districts include parking spaces and structures for the use of employees and customers, and for the loading and parking of delivery vehicles; radio towers not exceeding fifty feet in height; accessory buildings for the storage of supplies and materials used by employees; and accessory buildings for the housing of guards, night watchmen or maintenance personnel. 
(Ord. 535 §12.212, 1978) 
ARTICLE IV. - MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS 

17.20.130 - Minimum lot sizes. 
    To be eligible as a site for a land use otherwise permitted, a lot must be at least as indicated in this section, depending on the zoning district in which the lot is indicated: 
A.  Zoning District-Minimum Requirements for Lot Area. 
1.  R-1: six thousand square feet, or two times the ground floor area of the principal building, whichever is greater; 
2.  R-2, R-3: four thousand square feet each for the first three dwelling units, three thousand square feet each for the second three dwelling units, two thousand square feet for all dwelling units thereafter; 
3.  C-1: no specified minimum; 
4.  C-2: no specified minimum; 
5.  I-1: no specified minimum; 
6.  I-2: no specified minimum. 
B.  The size of a lot shall be increased beyond the size required to comply with subsection A of this section if such increase is necessary to allow compliance with the requirements of Sections 17.20.150, 17.20.160, 17.20.170 and 17.20.180. 
(Ord. 535 §12.301, 1978) 
17.20.140 - Building height limitations. 
    The height of a building shall be limited as follows, depending upon the zoning district in which the building is located: 
A.  Zoning District-Maximum Permitted Building Heights. 
1.  R-1, R-2, R-3: thirty-five feet except as provided in subsection B of this section; 
2.  C-1: forty-five feet; 
3.  C-2: forty-five feet; 
4.  I-1, I-2: no specified minimum. 
B.  If a lot in an R-3 zoning district is adjacent to one or more lots in an R-1 and R-2 zoning district, a building on the lot in the R-3 zoning district shall not exceed thirty-five feet in height unless the building is set back one hundred fifty feet from the adjacent lot or lots in the R-1 zoning district. 
(Ord. 535 §12.302, 1978) 
17.20.150 - Restriction on artificial lot coverage. 
    For purposes of this section, land area is deemed to be artificially covered if it is overlaid by buildings, patios with or without roofs, signs, driveways, tennis courts, swimming pools, carports, paved or graveled areas designed primarily for vehicle parking, areas covered by asphalt or concrete, or if the land area is covered by any other type of structure. Land area shall not be deemed artificially covered if it is used for growing grass, shrubs, trees, plants or flowers, or if covered by decorative gravels or wood chips, or if it is otherwise suitably landscaped. No more than seventy-five percent of the total area of a lot in a residential zoning district shall be artificially covered. No land area shall be artificially surfaced, regardless of the foregoing sentence, if the net result of such proposed artificial surface would unreasonably diminish or increase the drainage of such proposed artificial surface onto the adjoining landowners' property, it being the intent of this section to prohibit the elevating, lowering, modifying or changing of the natural drainage of land areas within the district. 
(Ord. 535 §12.303, 1978) 
17.20.160 - Yard requirements. 
A.  One of the objectives of this code is to require that the outside portions of lots shall be kept free of buildings and other structures. Those outside portions of lots are referred to in this code as required yards. The required front yard of a lot is the area between side lot lines, extending from the front lot line towards the interior of the lot for a distance referred to in Section 17.20.170 as the depth dimension. The required rear yard of a lot is the area between side lot lines, extending from the rear lot line towards the interior of the lot for a distance of the required depth dimension. The required side yards of a lot are the areas between the front property line and the rear property line, extending from the side lot lines towards the interior of the lot for the required depth dimensions. The depth dimensions for the required yards in the various zoning districts are set forth in Sections 17.20.170 and 17.20.180. All depth dimension measurements shall be along a straight line perpendicular to the lot line. 
B.  No building or any part thereof shall be placed in required yards, and no other structures shall be placed in a required yard, except as specifically authorized in Section 17.20.180. 
C.  That portion of a side yard which is overlapped by a front or rear yard shall nevertheless be deemed a side yard for purposes of limitations applicable to side yards; and that portion of a front or rear yard overlapped by a side yard shall be deemed a front or rear yard, as the case may be, for purposes of limitations applicable to front or rear yards, to a side or rear yard which is adjacent to a lot in a residential zoning district. The only structures permitted to these special side or rear yards are driveways, sidewalks, signs, retaining walls and fences. Accessory buildings are not permitted in these special side or rear yards, notwithstanding the provisions of Section 17.20.180. 
D.  The required side or rear yards for lots in industrial zoning districts which are adjacent to lots in either residential or commercial zoning districts shall be twice the height of the building on the lot in the industrial zoning district or fifty feet, whichever is greater. This special requirement shall apply only to a side or rear setback which is adjacent to a lot in a residential or commercial zoning district, and shall not apply if the adjoining lot is devoted to a use which is allowed by right only in an industrial zoning district. The only structures permitted in these special side or rear yards are driveways, sidewalks, signs, retaining walls and fences. Accessory buildings are not permitted in these special side or rear yards, notwithstanding the provisions of Section 17.20.180. 
(Ord. 535 §12.304, 1978) 
17.20.170 - Dimensions of required yards. 
    The depth dimensions of required yards shall be as set forth in this section unless a different dimension is provided for in Section 17.20.180: 
Zoning District Required Front Yard (feet) Required Rear Yard (feet) Required On Street (feet) Side Yard Interior (feet) R-1 30 5 15* 71/2** R-2 30 5 15* 71/2** R-3 30 5 15* 71/2** C-1 none *** **** **** C-2 none *** **** **** I-1 none (as described in 17.20.160) I-2 none (as described in 17.20.160)  
    *15 feet or 1 foot for every 3 feet or fraction thereof of building height, whichever is greater, shall be provided. 
    **71/2 feet or 1 foot for every 3 feet or fraction thereof of building height, whichever is greater, shall be provided. 
    ***No rear yard required except on the rear of a lot adjoining a residential zoning district, in which case a rear yard of not less than 5 feet shall be provided. 
    ****No side yard shall be required except on the side of a lot adjoining a residential district, in which case a side yard of not less than 71/2 feet or 1 foot for every 3 feet or fraction thereof of building height, whichever is greater, shall be provided. 
(Ord. 535 §12.305, 1978) 
17.20.180 - Structures permitted in required yards. 
    Structures are permitted in required yards as follows: 
A.  Required Front Yards. The only structures permitted in required front yards are driveways, sidewalks, signs, retaining walls and fences, except in the C-1, C-2, I-1 and I-2 zoning districts where parking lots are permitted. However, all regulations of this code pertaining to driveways, signs, retaining walls and fences, must be complied with. In addition, porches and patios attached to the primary building may extend into required front yards for up to ten feet, provided such porches or patios remain at least sixty- five percent open and unobstructed on three sides. The front yard depth requirements of this title for dwellings shall not apply to any lot where the average setback of existing buildings located wholly or partially within one hundred feet on either side of the proposed dwelling, and on the same side of the same block and use district, and fronting on the same street as such lot, is less than the minimum required front yard depth. In such case the setback on such lots may be less than the required setback, but not less than the average of the existing setbacks on the aforementioned lots, or a distance of ten feet from the street right-of-way line, whichever is greater. 
B.  Required Side Yards Adjacent to Public Streets. The only structures permitted in required side yards adjacent to public streets are driveways, accessory buildings, sidewalks, signs, retaining walls and fences. However, all regulations of this title pertaining to driveways, signs, retaining walls and fences must be complied with. Accessory buildings on the side of the lot abutting the side street shall not be closer to the lot line abutting on that side street than the distance specified for front yards of lots fronting on such side street. 
C.  Required Side Yards on Interior Lot Lines. Driveways, sidewalks, signs, retaining walls and fences are permitted in required side yards on interior lot lines provided all regulations of this title pertaining to those items are met. Patios, porches, accessory buildings, parking slabs, tennis courts and swimming pools may be placed in required interior side yards, up to five feet from the side lot line. For the purpose of side yard regulations, a two-family or multiple-family dwelling shall be considered as one building occupying one lot. 
D.  Required Rear Yards. Driveways, sidewalks, signs, retaining walls and fences are permitted in required rear yards provided all regulations of this title pertaining to those items are met. Patios and porches, whether or not covered by roofs, may be extended into required rear yards up to five feet of the rear property line, provided they remain at least sixty-five percent open and unobstructed on three sides. Parking slabs, tennis courts, swimming pools and accessory buildings may be extended into required rear yards up to five feet from the rear lot line. 
E.  Eaves, Etc. Eaves, chimneys, canopies, cornices, fire escapes and similar architectural features may extend into any required yard for up to twenty-four inches, notwithstanding any other provision in this title. 
(Ord. 535 §12.306, 1978) 
17.20.190 - Fences and walls. 
    Fences and walls are limited as follows: 
A.  Except as permitted in subsections B and C of this section, fences and walls which are located in required yards shall not exceed six feet in height measured from the ground level immediately adjacent to the fence or wall. A fence or wall which exceeds the six-foot limitation when measured on the one side thereof, but not when measured on both sides, is not in violation of this section. 
B.  In the I-1 and I-2 districts chainlink fences in required yards may exceed the six-foot limitation, provided the chainlink fence is kept open; if any other provision of this title requires the installation and maintenance of a solid fence for screening or other purposes, that requirement shall apply notwithstanding the foregoing provision for keeping a chainlink fence open. 
C.  A fence shall not be constructed so as to interfere with normal pedestrian traffic on sidewalks, or to cause vehicular traffic hazard at alleys, street intersections or private driveways. 
D.  A fence shall not be constructed within twenty feet of the curb line of an intersecting street which exceeds a maximum height of thirty inches above the grade of the curb line. 
E.  A fence constructed on the property line abutting an alley shall be constructed to provide for trash and garbage service and for utility service and meters on the owner's property. 
F.  A fence shall not be charged with electrical energy to produce electrical shock, however small. 
(Ord. 535 §12.307, 1978) 
Chapter 17.24 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS 
Sections: 

17.24.010 - Off-street parking. 
A.  Off-street automobile parking or storage space shall be provided on every lot on which any of the following uses are hereafter established in all districts except the C-1 downtown commercial district; or, provided that no parking space can be reasonably provided on the same lot, such space shall be provided on any lot a substantial portion of which is within five hundred feet of such uses. Each automobile parking space shall be not less than two hundred square feet in area exclusive of adequate access drives and maneuvering space. Such space shall be provided with vehicular access to a street or alley; such use shall be equal in number to at least the minimum requirements for the specific use set forth herein. 
B.  Use Classification-Parking Space Requirement. 
1.  Vehicle sales and repair: one space for each two employees at maximum employment on a single shift, plus two spaces for each three hundred square feet of repair and maintenance space. 
2.  Automobile service stations: two spaces for each gas pump plus three spaces for each grease rack or similar facility. 
3.  Bowling alleys: two spaces for each alley, plus one additional space for each two employees. 
4.  Churches: one space for each five seats. 
5.  Elementary schools and junior high schools, both public and private: one space for each classroom and administrative office. 
6.  Hospitals: one space for each two patient beds plus one space for each staff or visiting doctor, plus one space for each four employees. 
7.  Mortuary or funeral homes: one space for each four seats in the assembly room or chapel. 
8.  Motel, tourist homes or tourist courts: one space for each accommodation plus two additional spaces for employees. 
9.  Offices, professional, business or public, including banks: one space for each five hundred square feet of gross floor area. 
10.  Medical offices and clinics: eight spaces for each doctor practicing at the clinic, plus one space for each employee. 
11.  Places of public assembly, including private clubs and lodges, auditoriums, dancehalls, poolrooms, theaters, stadiums, gymnasiums, amusement parks, community centers and all similar places of public assembly: one space for each four seats provided for patron use, plus one space for each one hundred square feet of floor or ground area used for amusement or assembly, but not containing fixed seats. 
12.  Residential dwellings: one space for each dwelling unit. 
13.  Retail business: one space for each five hundred square feet. 
14.  Sanitariums, rest and convalescent homes, homes for the aged and similar institutions: one space for each six patient beds, plus one space for each staff or visiting doctor, plus one space for each four employees. 
15.  Senior high schools and colleges, both public and private: one space for each five students for which the school was designed plus one space for each classroom and administrative office. 
16.  Wholesaling and industrial uses: one space for each two employees at maximum employment on a single shift. 
(Ord. 535 §12.401, 1978) 
17.24.020 - Off-street loading and unloading space. 
A.  Every building or structure used for business, trade or industry hereafter erected shall provide space for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the street or public alley. Such space shall have access to an alley or, if there is no alley, to a street. For the purpose of this section, an off-street loading space shall have minimum dimensions of twelve feet by forty feet and an overhead clearance of fourteen feet in height above the alley or street grade. 
B.  Use Classification-Loading Space Requirements. 
1.  Retail business: one space for each five thousand square feet of floor area. 
2.  Wholesale and industry: one space for each ten thousand square feet of floor area. 
(Ord. 535 §12.402, 1978) 
17.24.030 - Lighting of off-street parking and loading space. 
    Lighting shall be arranged so as to minimize illumination onto adjoining residential property and so as to prevent glare directed at vehicles on streets and alleys. 
(Ord. 535 §12.403, 1978) 
Chapter 17.28 - LAWFUL NONCONFORMING LAND USES AND STRUCTURES 
Sections: 

17.28.010 - Intent. 
A.  Within the districts established by this title or amendments that may later be adopted there exist: 
1.  Lots; 
2.  Structures; 
3.  Uses of land and structures; and 
4.  Characteristics of use 
which were lawful before the ordinance codified in this title was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this title or future amendment. It is the intent of this title to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. It is further the intent of this title that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
B.  Nonconforming uses are declared by this title to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land or a nonconforming use of structure and land in combination shall not be extended, expanded or enlarged after passage of this title by attachment on a building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by the addition of other uses, of a nature which would be prohibited generally in the district involved. 
C.  To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this title shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which actual physical construction on the job site was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this title and upon which actual building construction has been carried on continuously, diligently and without unreasonable delay. Actual physical construction is defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where excavation or demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such excavation or demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be carried on continuously, diligently and without unreasonable delay. 
(Ord. 535 §12.501, 1978) 
17.28.020 - Nonconforming lots of record. 
    Where the owner of a lot of official record in any district at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title or his successor in title thereto does not own sufficient contiguous land to enable him to conform to the minimum lot- size requirements of this title, such lots may be used as a building site provided that such lot requirements are not reduced below the minimums specified in this title by more than twenty percent. If, however, the owner of two or more adjoining lots with insufficient land dimensions decides to build on or sell such lots, he must first combine such lots to comply with the dimensional requirements of this title. Any lot requiring dimensional variances below the twenty percent minimum set forth in this section shall be approved by the board of adjustment and appeals provided that further decreased dimensional requirements shall conform as close as possible to the required dimensions. 
(Ord. 535 §12.502, 1978) 
17.28.030 - Nonconforming uses of land. 
    After the effective date of this title, land or structures or the uses of land or structures that would be prohibited under the regulations for the district in which they are located shall be considered as nonconforming. It is the intent of this title to permit these nonconforming uses to continue provided they conform to the following provisions 
A.  No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this title in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located. 
B.  If no structural alterations are required for the proposed change, any nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises, may be changed to another nonconforming use provided that the board of adjustment and appeals makes the written finding that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. The board of adjustment and appeals may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the provisions of this title as a condition to permitting the proposed change. 
C.  When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, is abandoned for six consecutive months, or for eighteen months during any three year period, the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located. A presumption of abandonment shall arise where a structure, or structure and premises in combination, is subject to nonuse for six consecutive months, or for eighteen months during any three-year period, regardless of the intent to abandon; nonuse coupled with an intent to abandon shall not be required for purposes of interpreting this section. 
D.  No nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, which has been damaged to the extent of more than eighty percent of its fair market value immediately prior to damage, shall be rebuilt, altered or repaired except in conformity with the district regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(Ord. 535 §12.503, 1978) 
17.28.040 - Repairs and maintenance. 
A.  On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of twelve consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding ten percent of the current replacement cost of the nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of the structure as the case may be, provided that the cubic content existing when it became nonconforming shall not be increased. 
B.  If a nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs and maintenance, and is declared by the administrative official to be unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be restored, repaired or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
C.  Nothing in this title shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any public official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. 
(Ord. 535 §12.504, 1978) 
17.28.050 - Uses under special exception provisions not nonconforming uses. 
    Any use which is permitted as a special exception in a district under the terms of this title (other than a change through board of adjustment and appeals action from a nonconforming use to another use not generally permitted in the district) shall not be deemed a nonconforming use in such district, but shall without further action be considered a conforming use. 
(Ord. 535 §12.505, 1978) 
17.28.060 - Nonconforming use certificate. 
    A certificate of occupancy for nonconforming use shall be required for all nonconforming uses of land, buildings or structures created at the time of passage of the ordinance codified in this title. Applications for such certificate of occupancy for nonconforming uses shall be filed with the city clerk by the owner or lessee of the land or building or buildings occupied by such nonconforming use within six months from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title. It shall be the duty of the city clerk upon application therefor to issue a certificate of occupancy for nonconforming use. Failure to apply for such certificate of occupancy for nonconforming use shall be considered evidence that such nonconforming use did not exist at the time this title became effective and shall therefore disallow privileges granted to nonconforming uses under Section 17.28.010. 
(Ord. 535 §12.506, 1978) 
Chapter 17.32 - USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL REVIEW 
Sections: 

17.32.010 - Intent and review considerations. 
    Uses permitted by special review are generally those types which under desirable conditions are allowable in the district in which they are listed as "uses permitted by special review." The board of adjustment and appeals may authorize a certificate of zoning compliance and may prescribe and impose appropriate conditions and safeguards, including a specified time limit for the certificate of zoning compliance. Uses permitted by special review may be authorized only if they meet the following standards: 
A.  Fire Hazard. The use shall not include any activity involving the use or storage of flammable or explosive material unless protected by adequate fire-fighting and fire-suppression equipment and by such safety devices as are normally used in the handling of any such material. 
B.  Noise. The use shall not include noise which is objectionable due to volume, frequency or beat unless muffled or otherwise controlled. 
C.  Vibration. The use shall not include vibration which is discernible without instruments on any adjoining lot or property. 
D.  Air Pollution. The use shall not involve any pollution of air by fly ash, dust, vapors or other substances which are harmful to health, animals, vegetation or other property or which can cause soiling, discomfort or irritation. 
E.  Odors. The use shall not involve any malodorous gas or matter which is discernible on any adjoining lot or property. 
F.  Glare. The use shall not involve any direct or reflected glare that is visible from any adjoining property or from any public street, road or highway. 
G.  Traffic Hazard. The use shall not involve any activity substantially increasing the movement of traffic on public streets unless procedures are instituted to limit traffic hazards and congestion. 
H.  Overtaxing of Public Utilities and Facilities. The use shall not involve any activity substantially increasing the burden on any public utilities or facilities, unless provision is made for any necessary adjustments. 
I.  Character of Neighborhood. The use shall not involve any activity not in character with the majority of the uses in the neighborhood unless, by design, setback, nature of operation and other devices, the character of the neighborhood will be maintained. 
J.  General Welfare of the Community. The use shall not involve any activity which adversely affects the general welfare of the community. 
(Ord. 535 §12.701, 1978) 
17.32.020 - Preliminary application requirements. 
    Any person who desires a permit for a use permitted by special review in any of the zoning districts shall make written application to the administrative official. The preliminary application, when submitted, may be accepted by the administrative official only when it includes the following information: 
A.  A certified boundary survey or adequate legal description of the property; 
B.  Written authorization from the property owner agreeing to the submittal of the application if the owner is not the applicant; 
C.  Written plans for the proposed use defining in adequate detail the location of all proposed buildings, parking areas, access, building heights, landscaping concepts, signing and lighting concepts, the present and proposed location of all utility type service connections, drainage courses and easements, topography and such information with regard to the neighboring lots, structures, manmade or natural features and their use within fifteen feet around the perimeter of the lot or any other information as may be necessary to determine compliance and provide for the enforcement of this title; 
D.  Plans either written or graphic defining methods for disposal of sewage or other wastes, and methods of supplying water for use as well as fire protection; 
E.  A written statement regarding the applicant's approach to providing and improving, if applicable, public roads, parks and other related public improvements. 
(Ord. 535 §12.702, 1978) 
17.32.030 - Procedures. 
    Upon receipt of a complete preliminary application and filing fee the following actions shall be accomplished: 
A.  The board of adjustment and appeals upon tentative written approval of such preliminary application shall set the request for public hearing by publishing in a newspaper of general circulation within the district a description of the request and time, date and place for hearing at least fifteen days prior to the scheduled hearing date. On or before such hearing date such applicant shall submit all documents included in the preliminary application and in addition a completed application for certificate of zoning compliance as required under Section 17.12.030. Adjacent property owners abutting or across the street or alley from the subject site may be notified in writing of the proposed request and scheduled hearing time, date and place; current tax records shall be used to determine ownership. The administrative official may, at least five days prior to the hearing date, provide to the board of adjustment and appeals a report outlining findings and recommendations. 
B.  The board of adjustment and appeals may appoint a hearing officer or board of hearing officers to receive and consider such evidence and to make recommended findings of fact to the board of adjustment and appeals. 
C.  The board of adjustment and appeals shall hear and review all appeals and within thirty-five days of the final hearing shall rule on the appeal by a written resolution and do one of the following: 
1.  Issue an approval or denial; 
2.  Table the matter for a specified period of time with the consent of the applicant for further study and review. 
(Ord. 535 §12.703, 1978) 
Chapter 17.36 - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) 
Sections: 

17.36.010 - Intent. 
    It is the intent of this chapter to augment normal zoning requirements by achieving the following: 
A.  To encourage innovations in residential, commercial and industrial development and renewal so that the growing demands of the population may be met by greater variety in type, design and layout of buildings and by the conservation and more efficient use of open space ancillary to such building; 
B.  To encourage a more efficient use of land and of public services; 
C.  To encourage the building of new neighborhoods incorporating the best features of modern design; 
D.  To conserve the value of the land; 
E.  To provide a procedure which can relate the type, design and layout of residential, commercial and industrial development to the particular site, thereby encouraging preservation of the site's natural characteristics. 
(Ord. 535 §12.801, 1978) 
17.36.020 - Procedures. 
    All requests for planned unit development shall be processed under the procedures of Chapter 17.32. Upon approval by the board of adjustment and appeals the board shall direct the preparation by the city attorney of an approval document. The purpose of the document shall be to identify and describe in as much detail as possible all aspects of the PUD plan, as approved. All permits issued for the PUD shall substantially conform to the approval document. Deviations from the approval document can occur only after reapplication, following the same procedures for new applications. The approval documents shall be recorded in the real estate records of Kit Carson County. Any PUD plan shall comply with the Planned Unit Development Act of 1972, CRS Annotated, paragraph 31-23-101 et seq. (1973), as amended. 
(Ord. 535 §12.802, 1978) 
Chapter 17.40 - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 
Sections: 

17.40.010 - Complaints regarding violations. 
    Whenever a violation of this title occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint, stating fully the causes and basis thereof, shall be filed with the administrative official. He shall record properly such complaint, immediately investigate and take action thereon as provided in this title. 
(Ord. 535 §12.1601, 1978) 
17.40.020 - Penalties for violations. 
A.  Violation of the provisions of this title or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or special exceptions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this title or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than three hundred dollars or imprisoned for not more than thirty days, or both, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
B.  The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 
C.  Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. 624 §9(part), 1987: Ord. 535 §12.1701, 1978) 
Chapter 17.44 - VESTED PROPERTY RIGHTS 
Sections: 

17.44.010 - Site specific development plan. 
    "Site specific development plan" means for all developments, the final approval step, irrespective of its title, which occurs prior to the issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance; provided, however, that if the landowner wishes said approval to have the effect of creating vested rights pursuant to Article 68 of Title 24 of the Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended, the landowner must so request at least thirty days prior to the date said approval is to be considered. Failure to so request renders the approval not a "site specific development plan," and no vested rights shall be deemed to have been created. 
(Ord. 774 §1(part), 1999) 
17.44.020 - Vested property right. 
    "Vested property right" means the right to undertake and complete the development and use of property under the terms and conditions of a site specific development plan. 
(Ord. 774 §1(part), 1999) 
17.44.030 - Notice and hearing. 
    No site specific development plan shall be approved until after a public hearing, preceded by written notice of such hearing. Such notice may, at the city's option, be combined with the notice required by Colorado Revised Statutes Section 31-23-304, as amended, for zoning regulations, or with any other required notice. At such hearing, interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. 
(Ord. 774 §1(part), 1999) 
17.44.040 - Approval-Effective date. 
    A site specific development plan shall be deemed approved upon the effective date of the city council's approval action relating thereto, as defined in Section 18.01.010. 
(Ord. 774 §1(part), 1999) 
17.44.050 - Amendment-Effective date. 
    In the event amendment to a site specific development are proposed and approved, the effective date of such amendments, for purposes of duration of a vested property right, shall be the date of the approval of the original site specific development plan unless the city council specifically finds to the contrary and incorporates such finding in its approval of the amendment. 
(Ord. 774 §1(part), 1999) 
17.44.060 - Notice of approval. 
    Each map, plat, site plan, or other document constituting a site specific development plan shall contain the following language: 
"Approval of this plan may create a vested property right pursuant to Article 68 of Title 24 of Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended." 
    Failure to contain this statement shall invalidate the creation of the vested property right. In addition, a notice describing generally the type and intensity of use approved, the specific parcel or parcels of property affected, and stating that a vested property right has been created shall be published once, not more than fourteen days after approval of the site specific development plan, in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. 
(Ord. 774 §1(part), 1999) 
17.44.070 - Payment of costs. 
    In addition to any and all other fees and charges imposed by this code, the applicant for approval of a site specific development plan shall pay all costs occasioned to the city as a result of the site specific development plan review, including publication of notices, public hearing and review costs. 
(Ord. 774 §1(part), 1999) 
17.44.080 - Other provisions unaffected. 
    Approval of a site development plan shall not constitute an exemption from or waiver of any other provisions of this code pertaining to the development and use of property. 
(Ord. 774 §1(part), 1999) 
17.44.090 - Limitations. 
    Nothing in Title 18 is intended to create any vested property right, but only to implement the provisions of Article 68 of Title 24, Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended. In the event of the repeal of said article or a judicial determination that said article is invalid or unconstitutional, Title 18 shall be deemed to be repealed, and the provisions hereof no longer effective. 
(Ord. 774 §1(part), 1999) 
STATUTORY REFERENCES 
FOR 
COLORADO CITIES AND TOWNS 
    The statutory references listed below refer the code user to state statutes applicable to Colorado cities and towns. They are up to date through the First Regular Session of the 70th General Assembly (2015). 
General Provisions 
Classification of municipalities 
CRS § 31-1-201 et seq. 
Municipal home rule 
Const. Art. XX 
Ordinances generally 
CRS §§ 31-15-103 and 31-16-101 et seq. 
Codification of ordinances 
CRS § 31-16-201 et seq. 
Penalties for ordinance violations 
CRS § 31-16-101 
Vesting of municipal powers 
CRS § 31-15-101 et seq. 
Jails 
CRS § 31-15-401(1)(j) and (1)(k) 
Municipal Election Code 
CRS § 31-10-101 et seq. 
Fair Campaign Practices Act 
CRS § 1-45-101 et seq. 
Municipal initiatives, referenda, and referred measures 
CRS § 31-11-101 et seq. 
Administration and Personnel 
Organizational structure and officers of statutory cities 
CRS § 31-4-101 et seq. 
City council-city manager form of government 
CRS § 31-4-201 et seq. 
Organizational structure and officers of statutory towns 
CRS § 31-4-301 et seq. 
Requirements and compensation of officers 
CRS § 31-4-401 et seq. 
Officers' recall 
CRS § 31-4-501 et seq. 
Treasurer 
CRS § 31-20-301 et seq. 
Municipal courts 
CRS § 13-10-101 et seq. 
General administrative powers 
CRS § 31-15-201 
Fire, police and street departments 
CRS §§ 31-30-101 et seq., and 29-5-101 et seq. 
Colorado Disaster Emergency Act 
CRS § 24-33.5-701 et seq. 
Board of health 
CRS § 31-15-201(1)(c) 
Housing authority 
CRS § 29-4-201 et seq. 
Planning commission 
CRS § 31-23-201 et seq. 
Public meetings 
CRS § 24-6-401 et seq. 
Civil service 
CRS § 31-30-101 et seq. 
Revenue and Finance 
General financial powers 
CRS §§ 31-15-301, 31-15-302, and 31-15-901 
Fiscal procedures 
CRS §§ 31-20-201, 31-20-202 
Warrants 
CRS § 31-20-401 et seq. 
Budget and services 
CRS § 29-1-101 et seq. 
Local Government Uniform Accounting Law 
CRS § 29-1-501 et seq. 
Sales or use tax 
CRS § 29-2-101 et seq. 
Property tax 
CRS § 31-20-101 et seq. 
County and Municipality Development Revenue Bond Act 
CRS § 29-3-101 et seq. 
Bonds 
CRS § 31-21-101 et seq. 
Contracts for public improvements 
CRS § 31-15-712 
Rental and leasehold agreements 
CRS § 31-15-801 et seq. 
Purchasing 
CRS § 31-15-201(1)(e) 
Improvement districts in municipalities 
CRS §§ 31-25-500.2 et seq. and 31-25-601 et seq. 
Business Taxes, Licenses and Regulations 
Regulation of businesses 
CRS § 31-15-501 
Fermented malt beverages 
CRS § 12-46-101 et seq. 
Adult businesses 
CRS § 31-15-401(1)(p) 
Alcoholic beverages 
CRS § 12-47-101 et seq. 
Pawnbrokers 
CRS § 31-15-401(1)(n) and CRS § 12-56-101 et seq. 
Animals 
Authority to regulate and control animals 
CRS §§ 31-15-401(1)(i) and 31-15-401(1)(m) 
Health and Safety 
Authority to do all acts to promote the public health 
CRS § 31-15-401(1)(b) 
Building and fire regulations 
CRS § 31-15-601 et seq. 
Authority to declare and abate nuisances 
CRS § 31-15-401(1)(c) 
Noxious weeds 
CRS § 31-15-401(1)(d) 
Colorado Clean Indoor Air Act 
CRS § 25-14-201 et seq. 
Fireworks 
CRS §§ 31-15-601(1)(j) and 12-28-101 et seq. 
Hazardous substance incidents 
CRS § 29-22-101 et seq. 
Sanitary standards for jails 
CRS § 31-15-711.5 
Public Peace, Morals and Welfare 
State criminal code 
CRS title 18 
Police powers of municipalities 
CRS § 31-15-401 
Gambling 
CRS § 31-15-401(1)(o) 
Firearms and weapons 
CRS § 18-12-101 et seq. 
Local ordinances on firearms in vehicles 
CRS § 18-12-105.6 
Vehicles and Traffic 
Vehicles and traffic generally 
CRS title 42 
Municipal authority to regulate traffic 
CRS § 42-4-103 et seq. 
Driving while intoxicated 
CRS § 42-4-1301 et seq. 
Automated vehicle identification systems 
CRS § 42-4-110.5 
Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places 
Streets and alleys 
CRS § 31-15-702 et seq. 
Public works 
CRS § 31-15-711 et seq. 
Establishment of parks in cities 
CRS § 31-25-201 et seq. 
Establishment of parks in towns 
CRS § 31-25-301 et seq. 
Urban renewal 
CRS § 31-25-101 et seq. 
Public Mall Act of 1970 
CRS § 31-25-401 et seq. 
Public Services 
Municipal utilities 
CRS § 31-15-707 
Water and water systems 
CRS § 31-15-708 
Water rights and works 
CRS § 31-35-101 et seq. 
Sewers and sewer systems 
CRS § 31-15-709 
Water pollution control 
CRS § 31-15-710 
Miscellaneous public improvements 
CRS § 31-15-711 
Solid waste to energy systems 
CRS §§ 31-15-1001 et seq. 
Cemeteries 
CRS § 31-25-701 et seq. 
Underground conversion of utilities 
CRS § 29-8-101 et seq. 
Energy conservation measures 
CRS §§ 29-12.5-101 et seq. 
Buildings and Construction 
Building and fire regulations 
CRS § 31-15-601 et seq. 
City Housing Law 
CRS § 29-4-101 et seq. 
Subdivisions 
Subdivision regulations 
CRS § 31-23-214 et seq. 
Plats of cities and towns 
CRS § 31-23-101 et seq. 
Zoning 
Authority to enact zoning regulations 
CRS § 31-23-301 et seq. 
Environmental Protection 
Air pollution control 
CRS § 25-7-101 et seq. 
Water quality control 
CRS § 25-8-101 et seq. 
Water and wastewater treatment facility operators 
CRS § 25-9-101 et seq. 
Individual sewage disposal systems act 
CRS § 25-10-101 et seq. 
Radiation control 
CRS § 25-11-101 et seq. 
Noise abatement 
CRS § 25-12-101 et seq. 
Recreation land preservation 
CRS § 25-13-101 et seq. 
CROSS-REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table provides users with the current disposition of the sections of the prior municipal code. 
    Thus prior doe Section 2.2 currently appears in this code as 1.08.010. 
    The prior code section information was derived from the Burlington Colorado Municipal Code, published in 1963 by Banks Municipal Codes. 
Prior Code § Herein 7.9 Repealed by 588 7.10 Repealed by 588 7.11 Repealed by 588 8.1 Repealed by 497 8.2 Repealed by 497 8.3 Repealed by 497 8.4 Repealed by 497 8.5 Repealed by 497 8.5-1 Repealed by 497 8.5-2 Repealed by 497 8.5-3 Repealed by 497 8.5-4 Repealed by 497 8.5-5 Repealed by 497 9.1 2.16.010 9.2 2.16.020 9.3 2.16.030 9.4 2.16.040 9.5 2.16.050 9.6 2.16.060 9.7 2.16.070 9.8 2.16.080 9.9 2.16.090 9.10 2.16.100 9.11 2.16.110 9.12 2.16.120 10.1 3.04.010 10.2 Not codified 10.3 Not codified 10.4 Not codified 10.5 Not codified 10.6 3.16.010 10.7 3.04.020 10.8 3.04.030 10.9 3.04.040 10.10 3.04.050 10.11 3.04.060 11.1 Repealed by 617 11.2 15.04.020 11.3 15.04.030 11.4 Repealed by 617 11.5 Not codified 11.5-1 Not codified 11.5-2 Not codified 11.6 Repealed by 617 11.7 Not codified 11.7-1 Not codified 11.7-2 Not codified 12.1 Repealed by 535 12.2 Repealed by 535 12.3 Repealed by 535 12.4 Repealed by 535 12.4-1 Repealed by 535 12.4-2 Repealed by 535 12.4-3 Repealed by 535 12.4-4 Repealed by 535 12.5 Repealed by 535 12.5-1 Repealed by 535 12.5-2 Repealed by 535 12.5-3 Repealed by 535 12.5-4 Repealed by 535 12.6 Repealed by 535 12.7 Repealed by 535 12.8 Repealed by 535 12.9 Repealed by 535 12.10 Repealed by 535 12.11 Repealed by 535 12.12 Repealed by 535 12.13 Repealed by 535 12.14 Repealed by 535 12.15 Repealed by 535 13.1 5.04.010 13.1-1 5.04.020 13.1-2 5.04.030 13.2 Repealed by 627 13.2-1 Repealed by 627 13.2-2 Repealed by 627 13.2-3 Repealed by 627 13.2-4 Repealed by 627 13.2-5 Repealed by 627 13.2-6 Repealed by 627 13.2-7 Repealed by 627 13.2-8 Repealed by 627 13.3 Repealed by 689 13.3-1 Repealed by 689 13.4 Repealed by 627 14.1 Title 12 14.2 Title 12 14.3 Title 12 14.4 Title 12 14.5 Title 12 14.6 Title 12 14.7 Title 12 14.7-1 Title 12 14.7-2 Title 12 14.7-3 Title 12 14.7-4 Title 12 14.7-5 Title 12 14.7-6 Title 12 14.7-7 Title 12 14.7-8 Title 12 14.7-9 Title 12 14.7-10 Title 12 14.8 Title 12 14.9 Title 12 14.10 Title 12 15.1 8.12.010 15.2 8.12.020 15.3 8.12.030 15.4 8.12.040 15.5 8.12.050 15.6 8.12.060 15.7 8.12.070 15.8 8.12.080 15.9 8.12.090 15.10 8.12.100 15.11 8.12.110 15.12 Repealed by 600 15.13 Repealed by 600 16.1 9.16.010 16.2 9.16.020 16.3 9.03.010 16.4 9.03.020 16.5 9.12.010 16.6 9.12.020 16.7 9.12.030 16.8 9.12.040 16.9 9.08.010 16.10 Not codified 16.11 Not codified 16.12 9.08.020 16.13 9.08.030 16.14 9.08.040 16.15 9.08.050 16.16 9.08.060 16.17 9.20.010 16.18 9.20.020 16.19 9.08.070 17.1 6.08.010 17.2 Repealed by 382 17.3 6.08.020 17.4 Repealed by 382 17.5 6.08.030 17.6 6.04.010 17.6-1 6.04.020 17.6-2 6.04.030 17.7 6.04.040 17.8 6.04.050 17.9 6.04.060 17.10 6.04.070 17.11 6.04.080 17.12 6.04.090 18.1 10.04.060 18.2 Not codified 18.3 Not codified 18.4 10.04.070 18.5 10.04.080 18.6 Not codified 18.7 Not codified 18.8 Not codified 18.9 Not codified 18.10 Not codified 18.11 Not codified 18.12 Not codified 18.13 Not codified 18.14 Not codified 18.15 Not codified 18.16 Not codified 19.1 1.16.010 19.2 1.16.020 19.3 Not codified 19.4 1.16.030 19.5 1.16.040 19.6 Not codified 19.7 Not codified 19.8 1.16.050  
    As of Supplement No. 4, this table will no longer be updated. 
ORDINANCE LIST AND DISPOSITION TABLE 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 4, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Ordinance Number 1 Officers' bonds and salaries (Special) 2 Animals running at large (Repealed by 155) 3 Board of trustees meetings (Repealed by 1963 Code) 4 Misdemeanors defined and punishment (Repealed by 1963 Code) 5 Saloon and grocery licensing (Repealed by 1963 Code) 6 Hackmen, omnibus drivers, expressmen and similar occupations licensing (Repealed by 1963 Code) 7 Nuisances prohibited (Repealed by 1963 Code) 8 Dog tax (Repealed by 1963 Code) 9 Chimney building (Repealed by 1963 Code) 10 Alley vacation (Special) 11 Sidewalk construction and repair (Repealed by 1963 Code) 12 Amends §§1, 3, 6 of Ord. 5, saloon and grocery licensing (Repealed by 1963 Code) 13 Auctioneers, peddlers, pawnbrokers, shows and amusement licensing and tax (Repealed by 172) 14 Amends §27 of Ord. 4, misdemeanors (Repealed by 1963 Code) 15 Amends §1 of Ord. 3, board of trustees meetings (Repealed by 1963 Code) 16 Tax levy (Special) 17 Amends §1 of Ord. 12, officers' bonds and salaries (Special) 18 Amends §4 of Ord. 5, saloon and grocery licensing (Repealed by 1963 Code) 19 Billiard and pool table licensing (Repealed by 1963 Code) 20 Amends §1 of Ord. 8, dogs (Repealed by 1963 Code) 21 Amends §1 of Ord. 1, officers' bonds (Special) 22 Meat market licensing (Repealed by 39) 23 Sidewalk repair (Repealed by 1963 Code) 24 Contingent fund (Expired) 25 General fund (Special) 26 Sidewalk construction (Special) 27 Cemetery fund (Special) 28 Appropriation (Special) 29 Appropriation (Special) 30 Amends §2 of Ord. 19, billiard and pool table licensing (Repealed by 1963 Code) 31 Amends §4 of Ord. 5, Ord. 18, saloon and grocery licensing (Repealed by 1963 Code) 32 Telephone franchise (Special) 33 Appropriation (Special) 34 Appropriation (Special) 35 Street fund (Expired) 36 Poll tax (Expired) 37 Tax levy (Special) 38 Sidewalk construction (Special) 39 Repeals Ord. 22 (Repealer) 40 Crosswalk construction (Special) 41 Bowling alley licensing (Repealed by 1963 Code) 42 Slot machine, gambling prohibited (Repealed by 1963 Code) 43 Poll tax (Expired) 44 Contingent fund (Expired) 45 Gambling devices prohibited (Repealed by 1963 Code) 46 Sale of alcoholic beverages (Repealed by 1963 Code) 47 Tax levy (Special) 48 Transfer of funds (Special) 49 Appropriation (Special) 50 Street fund (Expired) 51 Transfer of funds (Special) 52 Telephone franchise (Special) 53 Amends §5 of Ord. 11, sidewalks (Repealed by 1963 Code) 54 Bowling, pool and billiard table licensing (Repealed by 1963 Code) 55 Amends Ord. 53, sidewalks (Repealed by 1963 Code) 56 Sidewalk construction (Special) 57 Sidewalk construction (Special) 58 Sidewalk use restrictions (Repealed by 328) 59 Electric light franchise (Special) 60 Amends §3 of Ord. 54, bowling, pool and billiard table licensing (Repealed by 1963 Code) 61 Telephone franchise (Special) 62 Amends portion of Ord. 17, town clerk salary (Special) 63 Tree planting (Repealed by 1963 Code) 64 Fire limits (Repealed by 1963 Code) 65 Tax levy (Special) 66 Poll tax (Expired) 67 Appropriation (Special) 68 Sidewalk construction (Special) 69 Sidewalk construction (Special) 70 Sidewalk construction (Special) 71 Sidewalk construction (Special) 72 Amends Ord. 70, sidewalks (Special) 73 Amends §27 of Ord. 4, misdemeanors (Repealed by 1963 Code) 74 Special election (Special) 75 Street vacation (Not adopted) 76 Sale of alcoholic beverages (Repealed by 1963 Code) 77 Special election (Special) 78 Tree planting (Repealed by 1963 Code) 79 Boundaries of town (Repealed by 1963 Code) 80 Appropriation (Special) 81 Amends §3 of Ord. 76, sale of alcoholic beverages (Repealed by 1963 Code) 82 Waterworks bonds (Special) 83 Poll tax (Expired) 84-141 (Missing) 142 Waterworks bonds (Special) 143 Sanitary Sewer District No. 1 (Special) 144 Tax levy (Special) 145 Appropriation to various funds (Special) 146 Plumbing licenses (Repealed by 1963 Code) 147 Cemetery lots (Repealed by 1963 Code) 148 Amends §§2 and 7 of Ord. 146, plumbing licenses (Repealed by 1963 Code) 149 Tax levy (Special) 150 Appropriation (Special) 151 Assessment (Special) 152 Waterworks rules and regulations (Repealed by 1963 Code) 153 Waterworks bonds (Special) 154 Waterworks bonds (Special) 155 Animals at large (Repealed by 1963 Code) 156 Tax levy (Special) 157 Appropriation (Special) 158 Amends §4 of Ord. 152, waterworks rules and regulations (Repealed by 1963 Code) 159 Grants franchise for petroleum product distribution (Special) 160 Tax levy (Special) 161 Appropriation (Repealed by 162) 162 Appropriation; repeals Ord. 161 (Special) 163 Water rates (Repealed by 1963 Code) 164 Special election (Special) 165 Tax levy (Special) 166 Appropriation (Special) 167 Tax levy (Special) 168 Amusements prohibited on Sunday (Repealed by 186) 169 Tax levy (Special) 170 Appropriation (Special) 171 Sidewalk construction (Special) 172 Huckster and peddler licensing (Repealed by 1963 Code) 173 Fire department regulations (Repealed by 1963 Code) 174 Business licenses for draymen and similar occupations (Repealed by 1963 Code) 175 Water rates (Repealed by 1963 Code) 176 Electrical rates (Repealed by 1963 Code) 177 Amends §1 of Ord. 174, draymen and similar occupations (Repealed by 1963 Code) 178 Tax levy (Special) 179 Appropriation (Special) 180 Electrical rates (Repealed by 1963 Code) 181 Electrical rates (Repealed by 1963 Code) 182 Responsibility for payment of utility charges (Repealed by 1963 Code) 183 Tax levy (Special) 184 Appropriation (Special) 185 Funding for waterworks construction (Special) 186 Repeals Ord. 168, amusements (Repealer) 187 Electrical rates (Repealed by 252) 188 Tax levy (Special) 189 Appropriation (Special) 190 Bowling, pool and billiard table licensing (Repealed by 1963 Code) 191 Street grades (Special) 192 Waterworks bonds (Special) 193 Tax levy (Special) 194 Appropriation (Special) 195 Purchasing system (Repealed by 1963 Code) 196 Sale of property (Special) 197 Special election (Special) 198 Franchise grant (Not adopted) 199 Electrical utility franchise (Special) 200 Sale of property (Special) 201 Sale of property (Special) 202 Sale of property (Special) 203 Special election (Special) 204 Electrical utility franchise (Special) 205 Electrical utility franchise (Special) 206 Street vacation (Special) 207 Sidewalk construction (Repealed by 1963 Code) 208 Engineer established (Repealed by 1963 Code) 209 Tax levy (Special) 210 Appropriation (Special) 211 Sidewalk construction (Special) 212 Street vacation (Special) 213 Circus and itinerant show licensing (Repealed by 1963 Code) 214 Tax levy (Special) 215 Appropriation (Special) 216 Manufacture or sale of intoxicating liquor (Repealed by 1963 Code) 217 Intoxication, fighting and disturbing the peace (Repealed by 1963 Code) 218 Electrical installations and electrical inspector powers; repeals Ord. 136 (Repealed by 1963 Code) 219 Electrical rates (Repealed by 252) 220 Amends §§1, 2 of Ord. 219, electrical rates (Repealed by 255) 221 Selling of produce (Repealed by 1963 Code) 222 Creates LID No. 1 (Special) 223 Unauthorized attachments to electrical and telephone lines (Repealed by 1963 Code) 224 Amends §9 of Ord. 222, LID No. 1 (Special) 225 Bucket shop licensing (Repealed by 1963 Code) 226 Assessment (Special) 227 Tax levy (Special) 228 Appropriation (Special) 229 Amends §1 of Ord. 221, selling of produce (Repealed by 1963 Code) 230 Tax levy (Special) 231 Appropriation (Special) 232 Traffic and parking on Fourteenth Street (Repealed by 1963 Code) 233 Interference with radio reception (Repealed by 1963 Code) 234 Appropriation (Special) 234-A Curfew for minors (Repealed by 1963 Code) 235 (Missing) 236 Tax levy (Special) 237 Appropriation (Special) 238 Water rates (Repealed by 1963 Code) 239 Refunding of bonds (Special) 240 Tax levy (Special) 241 Appropriation (Special) 242 Telephone franchise (Special) 243 Refunding of bonds (Special) 244 Tax levy (Special) 245 Appropriation (Special) 246 Refunding of bonds (Special) 247 Tax levy (Special) 248 Appropriation (Special) 249 Street lighting fund (Special) 250 Tax levy (Special) 251 Appropriation (Special) 252 Electrical rates; repeals Ords. 187 and 219 (Repealed by 322) 253 Waterworks bond (Special) 254 Electrical and water service for persons outside city limits (Repealed by 1963 Code) 255 Electrical rates; amends §§1(A) and 3 of Ord. 252; repeals Ords. 187 and 219 (Repealed by 322) 256 Amends §7 of Ord. 218, electrical regulations (Repealed by 1963 Code) 257 Tax levy (Special) 258 Appropriation (Special) 259 Fireworks (Repealed by 1963 Code) 260 Tax levy (Special) 261 Appropriation (Special) 262 Petition for sewer system bankruptcy (Special) 263 Tax levy (Special) 264 Appropriation (Special) 265 Open-air dancehall licensing (Repealed by 1963 Code) 266 Tax levy (Special) 267 Appropriation (Special) 268 Beer sale regulations (Repealed by 1963 Code) 269 Tax levy (Special) 270 Appropriation (Special) 271 Wartime blackouts (Repealed by 1963 Code) 272 Amends Ord. 238, water rates (Repealed by 1963 Code) 273 Tax levy (Special) 274 Appropriation (Special) 275 Tax levy (Special) 276 Appropriation (Special) 277 Addition to Fairview Cemetery (Special) 278 Tax levy (Special) 279 Appropriation (Special) 280 Building regulations (Repealed by 1963 Code) 280-A Sewer regulations (Repealed by 1963 Code) 281 Sanitary sewer maintenance fund (Repealed by 1963 Code) 282 Tax levy (Special) 283 Appropriation (Special) 284 Electrical bonds (Special) 285 Termination of Paving District No. 1 and Storm Sewer District No. 1 (Special) 286 Tax levy (Special) 287 Appropriation (Special) 288 Fairview Cemetery regulations (Special) 289 Waterworks bonds (Special) 290 Tax levy (Special) 291 Appropriation (Special) 292 Taxicab licenses and regulations (Repealed by 1963 Code) 293 Annexation (Special) 294 Sewer service regulations (Repealed by 1963 Code) 295 Traffic regulations (Repealed by 328) 296 Tax levy (Special) 297 Appropriation (Special) 298 Sale of property (Special) 299 Amends §5(a) of Ord. 292, taxicabs (Repealed by 1963 Code) 300 Natural gas franchise (Repealed by 324) 301 Extension and improvement of lighting system (Special) 302 Electrical bonds (Special) 303 Tax levy (Special) 304 Appropriation (Special) 305 Shooting of air rifles or BB guns prohibited (Repealed by 1963 Code) 306 Participation by employees in the old-age and survivors' insurance system (Repealed by 1963 Code) 307 Tax levy (Special) 308 Appropriation (Special) 309 Annexation (Special) 310 Annexation (Special) 311 Tax levy (Special) 312 Appropriation (Special) 313 Tax levy (Special) 314 Appropriation (Special) 315 Tax levy (Special) 316 Appropriation (Special) 317 Street and alley vacation (Special) 318 Adoption of National Building Code and amendments (Repealed by 1963 Code) 319 Curfew for minors (Repealed by 1963 Code) 320 Tax levy (Special) 321 Appropriation (Special) 322 Electrical rates; repeals Ords. 252 and 255 (Repealed by 1963 Code) 323 Fiscal year (Repealed by 1963 Code) 324 Repeals Ord. 300, gas franchise (Repealer) 325 Tax levy (Special) 326 Appropriation (Special) 327 Solicitor and peddler licensing (Repealed by 1963 Code) 328 Adopts traffic ordinance; repeals Ords. 58 and 295 (Repealed by 1963 Code) 329 Tax levy (Special) 330 Appropriation (Special) 331 Penalty for violations of town ordinances (Repealed by 1963 Code) 332 Tax levy (Special) 333 Appropriation (Special) 334 Zoning regulations (Repealed by 535) 335 Amends §1(B) of Ord. 322, electrical rates (Repealed by 1963 Code) 336 Annexation (Special) 337 Tax levy (Special) 338 Appropriation (Special) 339 Electrical bonds (Special) 340 Annexation (Special) 341 Parking (Repealed by 1963 Code) 342 Weed and rubbish abatement (Repealed by 1963 Code) 343 Alley vacation (Special) 344 Amends §2 of Ord. 54, bowling, pool and billiard tables (Repealed by 1963 Code) 345 Fairsite Park vacation (Special) 346 Street and alley vacation (Special) 347 Tax levy (Special) 348 Appropriation (Special) 349 Street vacation (Special) 350 Annexation (Special) 351 Garbage and rubbish collection (Repealed by 1963 Code) 352 Gas franchise (Special) 353 Throwing materials on public ways prohibited (Repealed by 1963 Code) 354 Regulates use of State Highway No. 4 (Repealed by 1963 Code) 355 Annexation (Special) 356 Sidewalk construction (Repealed by 1963 Code) 357 Amends Art. 3 §4 of Ord. 334, zoning (Repealed by 535) 358 Annexation (Special) 359 Tax levy (Special) 360 Appropriation (Special) 361 Annexation (Special) 362 Street vacation (Special) 363 Bicycle licensing (Repealed by 1963 Code) 364 Amends §16 of Ord. 352, gas franchise (Special) 365 Gas franchise (Repealed by 572) 366 Dogs running at large (Repealed by 1963 Code) 367 Assessment (Special) 368 Amends §I of Ord. 342, weed and rubbish abatement (Repealed by 1963 Code) 369 Tax levy (Special) 370 Appropriation (Special) 371 Amends §§4 and 5 of Ord. 294, sewers (Repealed by 1963 Code) 372 Street vacation (Special) 373 Waterworks bonds (Special) 374 Annexation (Special) 375 Adopts Municipal Code of the Town of Burlington and Uniform Building Code, Technical Plumbing Code and National Electrical Code 376 Amends prior code §§6.12, water, and 8.54, sewers (Repealed by 496, 497) 377 Rezone (Special) 378 Electrical bonds (Special) 379 Tax levy (Special) 380 Appropriation (Special) 381 Annexation (Special) 382 Amends prior code §17.1, repeals §§17.2 and 17.4, keeping of animals (6.08) 383 Tax levy (Special) 384 Appropriation (Special) 385 Street and alley vacation (Special) 386 Electrical bonds (Special) 387 Annexation (Special) 388 Alley vacation (Special) 389 Alley vacation (Special) 390 Tax levy (Special) 391 Appropriation (Special) 392 Adds prior code §§18.17, 18.171 and 18.172, reckless driving (Repealed by 438) 393 Amends prior code §18.107, motorcycles (Repealed by 438) 394 Street and alley vacation (Special) 395 Annexation (Special) 396 Rezone (Special) 397 Alley vacation (Special) 398 Street and alley vacation (Special) 399 Land vacation (Special) 400 Tax levy (Special) 401 Appropriation (Special) 402 Annexation (Special) 403 Traffic regulations on State Highway No. 51 (10.04) 404 Traffic regulations on State Highway No. 4 (10.04) 405 Annexation (Special) 406 Rezone (Special) 407 Trailer coaches and trailer coach parks (Not codified) 408 Adds prior code §18.109 and amends §§18.2, 18.43, 18.44 and 18.45, traffic (Repealed by 438) 409 Annexation (Special) 410 Tax levy (Special) 411 Appropriation (Special) 412 Adds prior code §§12.9(41) (a) and (b) and 12.10(b) (1) (cc) and (dd); amends zoning map in §12.3, and amends §12.12(b), zoning (Repealed by 535) 413 Avenue vacation (Special) 414 Waterworks bonds (Special) 415 Adds language to prior code §16.3, traffic (Not codified) 416 Street vacation (Special) 417 Annexation (Special) 418 Assessment (Special) 419 Street vacation (Special) 420 Establishes electric department advisory board (Not codified) 421 Adds prior code §7.6, electrical rate (Repealed by 557) 422 Rezone (Special) 423 Rezone (Special) 424 Amends prior code §6.12, water rates (Repealed by 496) 425 Annexation (Special) 426 Street and alley vacation (Special) 427 Rezone (Special) 428 Annexation (Special) 429 Annexation (Special) 430 Special election (Special) 431 Tax levy (Special) 432 Appropriation (Special) 433 Amends prior code §18.51(a), speed limits (Repealed by 438) 434 Business and occupation tax on certain utilities (Not codified) 435 Annexation (Special) 436 Annexation (Special) 437 Sale of property (Special) 438 Adopts traffic code; repeals prior code Ch. 18 (Not codified) 439 Alley vacation (Special) 440 Street and alley vacation (Special) 441 Amends §1 of Ord. 396, rezone (Special) 442 Sale of property (Special) 443 Emergency police powers (2.20) 444 Rezone (Special) 445 Annexation (Special) 446 Annexation (Special) 447 Annexation (Special) 448 Regulates right turns at stop signals (Not codified) 449 Repeals prior code §§13.1, 13.11 and 13.12, bowling alley licensing (Repealer) 450 Tax levy (Special) 451 Appropriation (Special) 452 Avenue vacation (Special) 453 Avenue vacation (Special) 454 Amends prior code §15.10, garbage and rubbish collection charges (8.12) 455 Rezone (Special) 456 Appropriation (Special) 457 Budget (Special) 458 Alley vacation (Special) 459 Repeals prior code §10.5 (Repealer) 460 Special election (Special) 461 Electrical bonds (Special) 462 Sale of property (Special) 463 Budget (Special) 464 Appropriation (Special) 465 Amends prior code §16.17, curfew (9.20) 466 Tax levy (Special) 467 Appropriation (Special) 468 Annexation (Special) 469 Adds to, amends and repeals portions of Model Traffic Code adopted by Ord. 438 (Not codified) 470 Street vacation (Special) 471 Open containers of alcoholic beverages prohibited (9.08) 472 Amends prior code §7.81(b), electrical rates (Repealed by 557) 473 Amends prior code §7.86, electrical rates (Repealed by 543) 474 Abatement of nuisances (8.08) 475 Appropriation (Special) 476 Adds to, amends and repeals portions of Model Traffic Code adopted by Ord. 438 (Not codified) 477 Rezone (Special) 478 Bond issue (Special) 479 Appropriation (Special) 480 Appropriation (Special) 481 Appropriation (Special) 482 Appropriation (Special) 483 Adds to, amends and repeals portions of Model Traffic Code adopted by Ord. 438 (Not codified) 484 Annexation (Special) 485 Special election (Special) 486 Street and alley vacation (Special) 487 Sale of property (Special) 488 Appropriation (Special) 489 Street and alley vacation (Special) 490 Appropriation (Special) 491 Street and alley vacation (Special) 492 Special revenue and sharing trust fund (3.20) 493 Tax levy (Special) 494 Amends prior code § 7.81(b), electrical rates (Repealed by 557) 495 Sale of property (Special) 496 Repeals and reenacts prior code Ch. 6, water department (2.08) 497 Repeals and reenacts prior code Ch. 8, health and sanitation (6.08, 8.04, 8.08) 498 Appropriation (Special) 499 (Missing) 500 Creates conservation trust fund (3.24) 501 Amends prior code § 6.11, water department (Repealed by 709) 502 Appropriation (Special) 503 Sale of property (Special) 504 Adds prior code § 7.12, electrical department (Repealed by 557) 505 Sale of property (Special) 506 Sale of property (Special) 507 Sale of property (Special) 508 Sale of property (Special) 509 Sale of property (Special) 510 Annexation (Special) 511 Avenue vacation (Special) 512 Appropriation (Special) 513 Amends prior code § 7.12, electrical department (Repealed by 557) 514 Amends prior code §§ 6.7(F), (G), and 8.5-6(F), (G) water (Repealed by 709) 515 Sale of property (Special) 516 Sale of property (Special) 517 Sale of property (Special) 518 Adds prior code § 7.87, electrical department (Repealed by 557) 519 Sale of property (Special) 520 Amends prior code § 6.13, water rates (Repealed by 709) 521 Sale of property (Special) 522 Sale of property (Special) 523 Business and occupation tax on telephone companies (3.12) 524 Annexation (Special) 525 Sale of property (Special) 526 (Missing) 527 Sale of property (Special) 528 Sale of property (Special) 529 (Missing) 530 Street vacation (Special) 531 (Missing) 532 Street vacation (Special) 533 Sale of property (Special) 534 Appropriation (Special) 535 Repeals and reenacts prior code Ch. 12, zoning; repeals Ord. 334, 357 (17.04, 17.08, 17.12, 17.16, 17.20, 17.24, 17.28, 17.32, 17.36, 17.40) 536 (Missing) 537 Adopts Model Traffic Code (10.04) 538 Sale of property (Special) 539 Sale of property (Special) 540 Sale of property (Special) 541 Amends prior code § 8.55, sewer charges (Repealed by 709) 542 Amends prior code § 6.13, water rates (Repealed by 709) 543 Repeals prior code § 7.86 (Repealer) 544 Sale of property (Special) 545 (Missing) 546 (Missing) 547 (Missing) 548 Adopts Ord. 545, 546, bond issue (Special) 549 Appropriation (Special) 550 Sale of property (Special) 551 Adds prior code § 7.87, electrical rates (Repealed by 557) 552 Adds prior code § 7.31, electrical service connections (Repealed by 557) 553 Sale of property (Special) 554 Sale of property (Special) 555 Subdivisions (16.04, 16.08, 16.12, 16.16, 16.20, 16.24) 556 Street and alley vacation (Special) 557 Repeals and reenacts prior code Ch. 7, electric department; repeals Ord. 421, 472, 494, 504, 513, 518, 551, 552 (Repealed by 588) 558 Appropriation (Special) 559 Sale of property (Special) 560 Appropriation (Special) 561 Sale of property (Special) 562 Sale of property (Special) 563 Sale of property (Special) 564 (Missing) 565 (Missing) 566 Amends prior code § 8.55, sewer charges (Repealed by 709) 567 Amends prior code § 6.13, water rates (Repealed by 709) 568 Amends prior code § 7.87, electrical rates (Repealed by 588) 569 Sale of property (Special) 570 Amends prior code § 7.87, electrical rates (Repealed by 588) 571 Sale of property (Special) 572 Gas franchise; repeals Ord. 365 (Special) 573 Sales and use tax (3.08) 574 Appropriation (Special) 575 Sale of property (Special) 576 Sale of property (Special) 577 (Missing) 578 Annexation (Special) 579 (Missing) 580 Sale of property (Special) 581 Adds prior code §§ 12,201(B)(5), 12,202(B)(2), 12.203(B)(6), 12.207(B)(8), 12.208(B)(3), 12.210(B)(4), 12.211(B)(9), zoning (17.20) 582 (Missing) 583 Sale of property (Special) 584 Sale of property (Special) 585 Mobile homes (15.16) 586 Sale of property (Special) 587 Appropriation (Special) 588 Repeals and reenacts prior code Ch. 7, electrical department; repeals Ord. 557, 568, 570 (2.12) 589 Grants cable television franchise (Special) 590 Annexation (Special) 591 9/13/82 Adds prior code § 12.201(B)(6), zoning (17.20) 591 9/13/82 Amends prior code §§ 12.207(B)(8), 12.208(B)(3), 12.210(B)(4), 12.211(B)(9), zoning (17.20) 592 Acquisition of land (Special) 593 (Missing) 594 (Missing) 595 Appropriation (Special) 596 Acquisition of land (Special) 597 Alley vacation (Special) 598 (Missing) 599 Appropriation (Special) 600 Weed and rubbish removal; repeals prior code §§ 15.12 and 15.13 (8.12) 601 Sale of real property (Special) 602 States compliance with certain federal energy regulations (13.16) 603 Appropriation (Special) 604 Authorizes sale of certain property (Special) 605 Registration of write in candidates (2.26) 606 Claims water rights to Ogallala aquifer (Special) 607 Street and alley vacations (Special) 608 Plat vacation (Special) 609 Authorizes sale of certain property (Special) 610 Amends Ord. 573, sales and use tax (3.08) 611 Appropriation (Special) 612 Bond issuance (Special) 613 Authorizes sale of certain real property(Special) 614 Authorizes sale of certain real property(Special) 615 Authorizes sale of certain real property(Special) 616 Old Town park and museum board (Repealed by 727) 617 Repeals §§ 2, 3 and 4 of Ord. 375 (Repealer) 618 Appropriation (Special) 619 (Number not used) 620 (Number not used) 621 Authorizes sale of certain real property(Special) 622 Street and alley vacations (Special) 623 Plat vacation (Special) 624 Code adoption; amends §§ 1.16.010, 1.16.020, 2.20.040, 3.08.110, 8.08.090, 8.12.180, 9.08.090, 10.04.050, 13.12.140 and 17.40.020, penalties (1.01, 1.16, 2.20, 3.08, 8.08, 8.12, 10.04, 17.40) 625 Telephone utilities tax (Repealed by 696) 626 Appropriation (Special) 627 Repeals and replaces Ch. 5.08, transient dealers (5.08) 628 Lodger's tax (3.28) 629 Annexation (Special) 630 Annexation (Special) 631 Alley vacation (Special) 632 Annexation (Special) 633 Authorizes sale of certain property (Special) 634 Amends §§ 13.04.090 and 13.08.050, public services (Repealed by 709) 635 Appropriation (Special) 636 Appropriation (Special) 637 Appropriation (Special) 638 Backflow and cross connections (13.20) 639 (Number not used) 640 Authorizes sale of certain property (Special) 641 Adds Ch. 9.30, lost, stolen, confiscated or abandoned property (9.30) 642 Street vacation (Special) 643 Authorizes sale of certain property (Special) 644 Authorizes sale of certain property (Special) 645 (Number not used) 646 Appropriation (Special) 647 Street vacation (Special) 648 Adds Ch. 2.28, code of ethics (2.28) 649 Appropriation (Special) 650 Authorizes sale of certain property (Special) 651 Amends § 17.20.020, zoning (17.20) 652 Appropriation (Special) 653 Appropriation (Special) 654 Trees and shrubs (8.16) 655 Adds §§ 12.16.050 and 12.16.060, miscellaneous street and sidewalk use regulations (12.16) 656 Amends § 8.08.010, nuisances (8.08) 657 Street vacation (Special) 658 Appropriation (Special) 659 Appropriation (Special) 660 Authorizes sale of certain property (Special) 661 Authorizes sale of certain property (Special) 662 Amends Ch. 8.08, nuisances (8.08) 663 Authorizes sale of certain property (Special) 664 Authorizes sale of certain property (Special) 665 Lease purchase agreement (Special) 666 Alley vacation (Repealed by 672) 667 Grants cable system franchise (Special) 668 Creates general fund; amends appropriations bill; declines city control over city enterprises (Special) 669 Authorizes sale of certain property (Special) 670 Appropriation (Special) 671 Appropriation (Special) 672 Repeals Ord. 666 (Repealer) 673 Alley vacation (Special) 674 Authorizes exchange of certain property (Special) 675 Authorizes sale of certain property (Special) 676 Amends Ord. 675, property sale (Special) 677 Amends §§ 13.04.090 and 13.08.050, public services (Repealed by 709) 678 Authorizes sale of certain property (Special) 679 Grants telephone service franchise (Repealed by 696) 680 Appropriation (Special) 681 Appropriation (Special) 682 Amends Ord. 584, property sale (Special) 683 Registration of write in candidates-Cancellation of elections (2.26) 684 Alley dedication (Special) 685 Authorizes sale of certain property (Special) 686 Alley vacation (Special) 687 Annexation (Special) 688 Annexation (Special) 689 Repeals Ch. 8.16 (Repealer) 690 Authorizes sale of certain property (Special) 691 Alley vacation (Special) 692 Truck loading and unloading (10.08) 693 Appropriation (Special) 694 Annexation (Special) 695 Grants cable franchise (Special) 696 Repeals Ord. 625 and 679 (Repealer) 697 Amends Ord. 686, alley vacation (Special) 698 Amends § 17.20.100, zoning (17.20) 699 Authorizes sale of certain property (Special) 700 Authorizes sale of certain property (Special) 701 Authorizes sale of certain property (Special) 702 Dog and cat care and possession regulations (6.12) 703 Provides for purchase of real estate (Special) 704 Amends § 17.20.080, zoning (17.20) 705 Authorizes mayor to sign intergovernmental agreement to create emergency telephone service authority (Special) 706 Model Traffic Code adopted (10.04) 707 Appropriation (Special) 708 Repeals and replaces Ch. 13.12, electrical service regulations (Repealed by 757) 709 Repeals and replaces Chs. 13.04 and 13.08, public services (13.04, 13.08) 710 Sale of property (Special) 711 Sale of property (Special) 712 Sale of property (Special) 713 Lease with option to purchase certain real estate (Special) 714 Sale of property (Special) 715 Abandonment of obsolete easement (Special) 716 Purchase of real estate (Special) 717 Sale of property (Special) 718 Amends §§ 13.04.090 and 13.08.010, water and sewer rates (13.04, 13.08) 719 Sale of property (Special) 720 Sale of property (Special) 721 Purchase of real estate (Special) 722 Annexation (Special) 723 Appropriations for calendar year 1997 (Special) 724 Amends Ch. 5.08, transient dealer's license (5.08) 725 Appropriation (Special) 726 Sale of property (Special) 727 Repeals Ord. 616 (Repealer) 728 Amends Ord. 726, sale of property (Special) 728-A Annexation (Special) 729 Sale of property (Special) 730 Sale of property (Special) 731 Amends §§ 17.20.080 and 17.20.100, zoning (17.20) 732 Sale of property (Special) 733 Annexation (Special) 734 Amends § 3.04.030, fiscal procedures (3.04) 735 Sale of property (Special) 736 Approves utility services agreement with Corrections Corporation of America (Special) 737 Land conveyance (Repealed by 739) 738 Appropriations for calendar year 1998 (Special) 739 Land conveyance; repeals Ord. 737 (Special) 740 Sale of property (Special) 741 Annexation (Special) 742 Annexation (Special) 743 Annexation (Special) 744 Annexation (Special) 745 Rezone (Special) 746 Rezone (Special) 747 Rezone (Special) 748 Rezone (Special) 749 Sale of property (Special) 750 Appropriations (Special) 751 Sale of property (Special) 752 Sale of property (Special) 753 Easement vacation (Special) 754 Prohibits use of an independent water supply (13.04) 755 Impoundment of cats (6.12) 756 Adds Ch. 15.14, manufactured housing (15.14) 757 Repeals and replaces Ch. 13.12, electrical service regulations (13.12) 758 Street vacation (Special) 759 Amends §§ 12.04.010 and 12.04.100, construction and repair of streets, sidewalks, curbs and gutters (12.04) 760 Appropriations (Special) 761 Tax levy (Special) 762 Changes name of certain street (Special) 763 Appropriations (Special) 764 Amends § 3.04.030, fiscal procedures generally (3.04) 765 Annexation (Special) 766 Street vacation (Special) 767 Sale of property (Special) 768 Accepts grant of certain property from school district (Special) 769 Annexation (Special) 770 Rezone (Special) 771 Sets court costs (2.16) 772 Amends T. 9, crimes, public peace, morals and welfare (9.01, 9.02, 9.03, 9.04, 9.08, 9.12, 9.16, 9.20, 9.30) 773 (Voided) 774 Adds Title 18 [Ch. 17.44], vested property rights (17.44) 775 Appropriation (Special) 776 Tax levy (Special) 777 Sale of property (Special) 778 Purchase of real estate (Special) 779 Amends § 6.04.080, dog impoundment costs (6.04) 780 Municipal election requirements (Special) 781 Purchase of real estate (Special) 782 Alley vacation (Special) 783 Approves sale of certain property (Special) 784 Authorizes sale of certain property (Special) 785 Grants natural gas franchise (Special) 786 Creates first improvement district (Special) 787 Adds §§ 9.04.010(E), 9.04.015, 9.04.030; amends §§ 9.02.030(C), 9.02.050(E), 9.04.020, crimes, public peace, morals and welfare (9.02, 9.04) 788 Appropriation (Special) 789 Tax levy (Special) 790 Sale of certain property (Special) 791 Appropriation (Special) 792 Property conveyance (Special) 793 Purchase of certain property (Special) 794 Adds Ch. 1.02, city council meetings (1.02) 795 Amends Title 12, street and sidewalk regulations (12.04, 12.08, 12.12, 12.16) 796 Adds Ch. 5.06, armed security guards (5.06) 797 Reassesses improvement costs (Special) 798 Appropriations for 2002 budget year (Special) 799 Tax levy (Special) 800 Proposes amendment to charter for utility franchises (Failed) 801 Proposes amendment to charter for administrative changes (Failed) 802 Proposes amendment to charter for voting changes (Charter 4.6, 8.1) 803 Authorizes transfer of property (Special) 804 Approves sale of certain property (Special) 805 Grants natural gas franchise (Special) 806 Regulates water use (Special) 807 Adds Ch. 8.18, sale and use of fireworks (8.18) 808 Property vacation (Special) 809 Adds §17.08.082, club or lodge (17.08) 810 Appropriations for 2003 budget year (Special) 811 Tax levy (Special) 812 Appropriations (Special) 813 Adds Ch. 3.14, franchise fees for telecommunication services (3.14) 814 Amends §13.12.160, fuel cost adjustment (3.12) 815 Adds §12.04.015, construction and repair of streets, sidewalks, curbs and gutters (12.04) 816 Amends §9.16.020, discharge of firearms (9.16) 817 Authorizes grant agreement for airport improvements (Special) 818 Appropriation (Special) 819 Property tax levy (Special) 820 Approves sale of real property (Special) 821 Amends §§13.12.090-13.12.110 and 13.12.130, electrical service regulations (13.12) 822 Grants nonexclusive franchise (Special) 823 Appropriation (Special) 824 Amends §§8.08.010 and 8.08.040, nuisances (8.08) 825 Annexation (Special) 826 Appropriation (Special) 827 Property tax levy (Special) 828 Amends §3.04.010, fiscal procedures (3.04) 829 Amends Chs. 13.04-13.12, public services (13.04, 13.08, 13.12) 830 Adds Ch. 5.10, business incentive program (5.10) 831 Amends §1.16.020, penalty (1.16) 832 Adds §6.08.015, miscellaneous animal regulations (6.08) 833 Annexation (Special) 834 Approves sale of real property (Special) 835 Tax levy (Special) 836 Appropriation (Special) 837 Establishes compensation for election judges (Charter 2.10) 838 Amends §3.28.010, lodger's tax (3.28) 839 Sale of property (Special) 840 Denial of CCA deposit agreement (Special) 841 Appropriation (Special) 842 Tax levy (Special) 843 Sale of property (Special) 844 Adds §§9.20.030, 9.20.040, offenses by or against minors (9.20) 845 Sale of property (Special)  
    Beginning with Supplement No. 4, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE AND DISPOSITION LIST 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of Burlington, Colorado, beginning with Supplement No. 4, included in this Code. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Description Section Section 
this Code 846  7-30-2007 Amends provisions pertaining to minor curfews 1 9.20.010 847 10-29-2007 Vacating tract Omitted 848 11-26-2007 Approving sale of property Omitted 849 12-10-2007 Levying property taxes for 2008 Omitted 850 12-10-2007 Appropriations Omitted 851  3-10-2008 Amends provisions pertaining to minor curfews 1 9.20.010 852  2-27-2008 Approving sale of property Omitted 853  8-25-2008 Revises base service rates for water, sewer and electrical service 1 13.04.090 A 2 13.08.050 3 13.12.090 C 13.12.100 C 13.12.110 C 13.12.130 C 854  3- 9-2009 Revises tap fees 1 13.04.020 2 13.08.040 3 13.12.040 4 13.08.060 C, G 855 11-10-2008 Amends sewer service regulations 1 13.08.090 856 12- 8-2008 Increases maximum fine for conviction of minor in possession of alcohol 1 9.04.010 E 857 12- 8-2008 Appropriations Omitted 858 12- 8-2008 Levying property taxes for 2009 Omitted 859 Not passed 860  6-29-2009 Deletes provisions pertaining to prohibition of selling on streets 1       Dltd 5.08.100 Deletes provisions pertaining to noisemaking devices to attract children 2       Dltd 8.08.040 I 861  8-31-2009 Selling real property Omitted 862 10-12-2009 Reaffirming water and sewer activity enterprise Omitted 863 10-12-2009 Approving loan Omitted 865 12-14-2009 Levying property taxes for 2009 Omitted 866-A 12-14-2009 Appropriations Omitted 866-B 12-14-2009 Appropriations Omitted 866-C 12-14-2009 Appropriations Omitted 866-D 12-14-2009 Appropriations Omitted 867  1-20-2010 Revises rates for electrical service 1 13.12.090 C 13.12.100 C 13.12.110 C 13.12.130 C       Added 13.12.131 13.12.160 867-A  1-25-2010 Revises rates for electrical service 1 13.12.090 C 13.12.100 C 13.12.110 C 13.12.130 C 13.12.131 13.12.160 868  2- 8-2010 Loan Omitted 869  3- 8-2010 Moratorium Omitted 870-A  5-24-2010 Revises fee for annual dog licenses 1 6.04.020 573-A 11-11-2010 Revises license requirements for commodities or services exempt from taxation and prevention for issuing a license for unlawful activity 1 3.08.090 871 11-11-2010 Adds provisions pertaining to truck or trailer parking 1, 2       Added 10.09.010, 10.09.020 787-A 11-12-2010 Revises provisions pertaining to possession of marijuana 1 9.04.020 872 12-30-2010 Appropriations Omitted 873 12-30-2010 Levying property taxes for 2010 Omitted 874  7-11-2011 Adds provisions pertaining to outdoor use of water for users of water supplied by the city during summer months 1, 2       Added 13.04.160 875 11-14-2011 Approving sale of real property Omitted 876 12-12-2011 Levying property taxes for 2012 Omitted 877 12-12-2011 Appropriations Omitted 878  1- 9-2012 Amends provisions pertaining to the Model Traffic Code 1-6 10.04.010- 
10.04.050 7       Added 10.04.110 8       Added 10.04.120 879  3-26-2012 Approving sale of property Omitted 880  4-30-2012 Approving sale of property Omitted 881 10-29-2012 Disbanding the "Old Town" Park and Museum Board Omitted 882 12-10-2012 Appropriating money for the 2013 budget year Omitted 883 12-10-2012 Levying property taxes for the year 2012 Omitted 884  3-11-2013 Adding provisions relating to prohibiting marijuana from city-owned facilities and vehicles       Added 9.04.021 885  3-11-2013 Adding provisions relating to prohibiting marijuana facilities within the boundaires of the city 1-5 
      Added 9.04.022 886  5-28-2013 Amending provisions relating to water use rates 1, 2 13.04.090 887  5-28-2013 Amending provisions relating to electrical service rates 1 13.12.090 C. 2 13.12.100 C. 3 13.12.110 C. 4 13.12.130 C. 5 13.12.131 888  6-24-2013 Adding provisions relating to net energy metering rules       Added 13.14.010- 
13.14.100 889  9-30-2013 Adding provisions relating to feeding feral animals 1-6 
      Added 6.08.050 890  9-30-2013 Adding provisions pertaining to public parks regulations 1-9 
      Added 12.18.010- 
12.18.090 891 10-28-2013 Vacating taxi way and run way streets and the alley between and adjoining lots 1 through 15 and lots 16 through 30 in block 4 and lots 1 through 14 and lots 15 through 28 in block 5 of the Burlington Industrial Center, City of Burlington, Colorado, and reserving to the city an easement on private property for utility purposes Omitted 892 10-14-2013 Approving the sale of certain real property to Donn Witzel and Kami Witzel with corrected legal description Omitted 893  5-27-2014 Selling real property Omitted 894 12- 9-2013 Appropriating sums of money to the various funds and spending agencies for the City of Burlington, Colorado, for the 2014 budget year Omitted 895 12- 9-2013 Levying property taxes for the year 2013 to defray the costs of government for the City of Burlington, Colorado, for the 2014 budget year Omitted 896  3-17-2014 Authorizing the issuance and sale by the City of Burlington, Colorado, acting by and through its water and sewer activity enterprise, of water and sewer activity enterprise revenue bonds, series 2014, in the maximum aggregate principal amount of $5,500,000, and related "B" interest certificates, for the purpose of refunding an outstanding obligation of the water and sewer activity enterprise and funding capital improvements for the water and sewer activity enterprise; and authorizing, approving and otherwise providing for various matters relating thereto Omitted 897  5-12-2014 Approving the transfer of certain real property between the City of Burlington and Black Hills/Colorado Gas Utility Company, LP d/b/a Black Hills Energy Omitted 898  9-29-2014 Amending the Zoning Ordinance by dispersing sexually oriented businesses and limiting them to a specified zoning district; prescribing definitions of sexually oriented businesses; providing for licensing and regulation of sexually oriented businesses and employees; and providing for additional miscellaneous regulations for sexually oriented businesses I-XXI 
      Added 5.12.010- 
5.12.210 899 10-27-2014 Amends use regulations for I-1 Light Industrial District       Dltd 17.20.100.A. 
10 900 11-10-2014 Zoning map amendment Omitted 901 12- 8-2014 Amends sums of money to the various funds and spending agencies for the 2014 budget year Omitted 902 12- 8-2014 Appropriates sums of money to the various funds and spending agencies for the 2015 budget year Omitted 903 12- 8-2014 Levyies property taxes for the year 2014 to defray the costs of government for the 2015 budget year Omitted 904  3-30-2015 Annexes property known as Browns Addition to the city Omitted 905  3-30-2015 Grants a non-exclusive franchise for the maintenance and operation of a fiber optic system Omitted 906  5-26-2015 Annexes property known as Love's Travel Center Omitted 907 10-12-2015 City sales tax exemptions 1 3.08.040.B 908 11- 9-2015 City sales tax exemptions 1 3.08.040 909 11-30-2015 Adopts 2016 budget Omitted 910 11-30-2015 Fund appropriations Omitted 911 11-30-2015 Property tax levy Omitted 912 12-14-2015 Release of easement Omitted 913  6-13-2016 Annexes property known as Love's Second Addition Omitted 914  5-31-2016 Vacates alley Omitted 915  6-13-2016 Payment of utility bills 13.12.140 916  6-13-2016 Signing of city checks 3.04.030 917  8- 8-2016 Approves loan from Colorado Water Resources and Power Development Authority Omitted 918  8-29-2016 Utility service deposits and billing 13.12.140 919 11- 1-2016 Amends loan agreement Omitted 920 12-12-2016 Adopts 2017 budget Omitted 921 12-12-2016 Funds of the 2017 budget Omitted 922 12-12-2016 Property taxes for 2016 for the 2017 budget year Omitted 923 12-12-2016 Water-sewer fund Omitted 924  1- 9-2017 Water rates 13.04.090 925  1- 9-2017 Utility service policies       Added 13.02.010-13.02.050       Rpld 13.04.100- 
13.04.130       Rpld 13.08.050, 
13.08.070       Rpld 13.12.140 925 A  2- 2-2017 Retaining 10% of contractor payments made on public improvements until completion and approval Omitted 926  3-13-2017 Approving a loan from the Colorado Water 
Resources and Power Development Authority Omitted 927  5-30-2017 Alcoholic beverages during tasting events 1       Added 5.14.010 928  6-12-2017 Appropriating sums of money for a tourism/promotional fund Omitted 929  1-29-2018 Approving the sale of certain real property Omitted 930 12-11-2017 Appropriating additional sums of money to defray expenses in excess of amounts budgeted Omitted 931 12-11-2017 Appropriating sums of money to various funds and spending agencies Omitted 932 12-11-2017 Levying general property taxes Omitted 933 12-11-2017 The collection of delinquent charges Omitted 934  7- 9-2018 Authorizes collection of delinquent charges for abatement of a nuisance Omitted 935 11-26-2018 2019 water rates 1 13.04.090 936 11-26-2018 2020 water rates 1 13.04.090 937 12-10-2018 Amends solid waste agreement service rates for 2019 Omitted 937 12-10-2018 Amends solid waste agreement service rates for 2020 Omitted 938 12-10-2018 Solid waste rates agreement Omitted 939 12-10-2018 2018 property tax rate Omitted 940 12-10-2018 Amends 2018 budget appropriations Omitted 940A  1-28-2019 Amends 2018 budget appropriations Omitted 941 12-10-2018 2019 budget appropriations Omitted  
