This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Title 4 (RESERVED)
Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Title 6 ANIMALS
Title 7 (RESERVED)
Title 8 NUISANCES
Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Title 11 (RESERVED)
Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Title 13 PUBLIC UTILITIES
Title 14 (RESERVED)
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Title 16 SUBDIVISIONS
Title 17 ZONING
Title 18 VESTED PROPERTY RIGHTS
Title 19 DRAINAGE
Title 20 STORMWATER ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND PERMITS
Title 21 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS

Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 20-2020. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION
Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.08 CITY SEAL
Chapter 1.12 VOTING PRECINCTS AND ELECTIONS
Chapter 1.16 MUNICIPAL COURT
Chapter 1.20 TRIALS
Chapter 1.28 GENERAL PENALTY

Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 20-2020. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


1.01.010 Code adopted—Citation form—Effective date.
    A.  Pursuant to Title 31 of the Colorado Revised Statutes, there is hereby adopted the code of ordinances entitled “Code of the City of Cañon City, Colorado, 1988,” compiled, revised, and codified for the City of Cañon City by Book Publishing Company of Seattle, Washington, by authority of the City Council of the City, and containing a compilation, revision, and codification of the permanent and general ordinances of the City, hereinafter referred to as “code” or “primary code,” of which code not less than three copies have been and are now filed in and incorporated into the ordinance codified in this chapter as if set out at length herein, as provided by Part 2 of Article 16 of Title 31, Colorado Revised Statutes, 1986, as amended.

    B.   The code adopted may be cited as “Code of the City of Cañon City, Colorado, 1988,” or by the short title, “Cañon City Municipal Code.” When a change or changes have been prepared and inserted in the code, as provided herein, the words “as amended” may be added to the above citation or title when referring to the code as amended.

    C.   The code adopted hereby shall go into effect on January 8, 1989, at 12:01 a.m. (Ord. 40-1988; prior code § 1.01.010)

 

1.01.020 Inclusion of City Charter.
    The Charter of the City of Cañon City, Colorado is included in the code of the ordinances hereby adopted for convenience. (Ord. 40-1988; prior code § 1.01.020)

 

1.01.030 Reference applies to all amendments.
    Whenever a reference is made to this Code as the “Cañon City Municipal Code” or to any portion thereof, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions made before, as of or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 40-1988; prior code § 1.01.030)

 

1.01.040 Repeal of prior ordinances.
    All ordinances and parts of ordinances of a primary and general nature passed prior to July 5, 1988, and in effect at the time the Code of the City of Cañon City, Colorado, 1988, is adopted, but not included in said code, are repealed as of the time when the code goes into effect. Ordinances passed on or after July 5, 1988, shall not be repealed or amended by the adoption of the code and the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 40-1988; prior code § 1.01.040)

 

1.01.050 Matters not affected by repeal.
    The repeal of ordinances and parts of ordinances of a permanent and general nature by Section 1.01.040 shall not affect any offense committed or act done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract, right or obligation established prior to the time when such ordinances and parts of ordinances are repealed. (Ord. 40-1988; prior code § 1.01.050)

 

1.01.060 Ordinances saved from repeal.
    The repeal of ordinances of a general and permanent nature by Section 1.01.040 of this chapter shall not repeal any ordinance or part thereof saved from repeal specifically by the Cañon City Municipal Code; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance:

    A.  Promising, guaranteeing or authorizing the payment of money by or for the City;

    B.   Authorizing or relating to specific issuances of bonds or other evidences of indebtedness;

    C.   Granting a franchise;

    D.  Establishing the compensation of city officers or employees;

    E.   Levying taxes, making appropriations or adopting a budget;

    F.   Creating specific local improvement districts;

    G.  Making special assessments for local improvements;

    H.  Vacating, accepting, establishing, locating, relocating or opening any street or public way;

    I.    Affecting the corporate limits of the City;

    J.    Which is of a special or temporary nature;

    K.  Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision;

    L.   Setting rates for any services or utilities provided by the City;

    M.  Creating contractual obligation on the part of the City. (Ord. 40-1988; prior code § 1.01.060)

 

1.01.070 Catchlines, headings and titles.
    Catchlines, headings, and titles of sections and other subdivisions in the code adopted by this chapter, or in changes made in the code, are inserted for the convenience of users of the code and shall have no legal effect. Notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information, or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the code or to the City Charter are inserted in the code, and may be inserted in changes to the code for the convenience of persons using the code, and shall have no legal effect. (Ord. 40-1988; prior code § 1.01.070)

 

1.01.080 Penalty for altering or tampering with code.
    Any person, firm, or corporation who shall alter, change or amend the Code of the ordinances adopted by this chapter except in the manner prescribed by this chapter, or who shall alter or tamper with the Code in any manner so as to cause the ordinances of the City to be misrepresented thereby, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided by Section 1.28.010 of this Code. (Ord. 40-1988; prior code § 1.01.080)

 

1.01.090 Severability of ordinance provisions.
    Each section of this chapter is an independent section, and the holding of any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section or part thereof. (Ord. 40-1988; prior code § 1.01.090)

 

1.01.100 Severability of code provisions.
    If any sections, section or subsection or provision of this Code of ordinances, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, is declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any competent court, such invalidity shall not affect the other sections, section, subsection, or provision or application. (Ord. 40-1988; prior code § 1.01.100)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 1.01.110 Secondary codes adopted by reference.
    The following secondary codes as adopted by reference in the Code of the City are adopted and enacted by reference as if the same were set out in full in this chapter:

    A.  The Uniform Building Code, 1985 Edition, promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials, which protects the residents of the city by prescribing minimum standards for buildings and other structures. The Code regulates erection, enlargement, construction, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, use, height, area, maintenance and other matters related to buildings and structures in the city.

    B.   The Uniform Housing Code, 1985 Edition, promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials. The Code, in conjunction with the Uniform Building Code, protects the health and safety of residents of the City by providing for requirements affecting conservation and rehabilitation of housing.

    C.   The Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1985 Edition, promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials. The Code, in conjunction with the Uniform Housing Code and Uniform Building Code, protects the health and safety of the residents of the city by setting forth orderly procedures for remedying dangerous buildings which comply with the requirements of due process.

    D.  The Uniform Mechanical Code, 1985 Edition, promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials. The Code protects the residents of the city by regulating the installation and construction of heating, ventilation, refrigeration, and air-conditioning systems. (Ord. 40-1988; prior code § 1.01.110)

 

1.01.120 Penalty for violation of primary and secondary codes.
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, the maximum general penalty for violation of the primary and secondary codes of the City shall be as set forth in Section 1.28.010 of this Code. (Ord. 17-2013 § 1; Ord. 15-1993 §§ 1, 2)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 1.01.130 Codes to be kept on file.
    A.  At least one copy of the Code of the City of Cañon City, Colorado, 1988, and of each secondary code adopted therein, all certified by the Mayor and the City Clerk to be true copies of such codes as they were adopted by the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk, available for public inspection. One copy of each such code may be kept in the office of the City Administrator.

    B.   The City Clerk shall cause to be prepared and published revised sheets of every looseleaf page in need of revision by reason of amendment, addition or repeal when directed by the City Council. The City Clerk shall distribute such revised looseleaf sheets for such fee as the City Council may direct.

    C.   A copy of this Code shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk in which it shall be the express duty of the City Clerk to insert in their designated places all amendments or ordinances which are intended to become a part of the Code of the City of Cañon City, 1988, when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such code all provisions which may from time to time be available to all persons desiring to examine it and shall be considered the official Code of the City of Cañon City. (Ord. 40-1988; prior code § 1.01.130)

Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.04.010 “Misdemeanor” and “offense” defined.
    The words “misdemeanor” and “offense,” wherever they occur in the City ordinances, shall be construed to mean, and shall severally stand in lieu of, a violation of ordinance, and shall not have the meaning prescribed by Colorado Revised Statutes 1973 Section 18-1-106. (Prior code § 1.08.010)

 

1.04.020 “Heretofore” and “ hereafter” defined.
    Whenever the term “heretofore” occurs in any ordinance of the City, it shall be construed to mean any time previous to the time when such ordinance takes effect; and whenever the term “hereafter” occurs, it shall be construed to mean any time after such ordinance takes effect. (Prior code § 1.08.020)

 

1.04.030 Plural and singular number.
    Whenever, in any ordinance of this city, words importing the plural number are used in describing or referring to any object, matter, parties or persons, any single object, matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive words to that effect may not be used. (Prior code § 1.08.030)

 

1.04.040 Number and gender.
    When any subject, matter, party or person is described or referred to in any ordinance by words importing the singular number or the masculine gender, several things, matters and persons, and females as well as males, and firms and bodies corporate as well as individuals, shall be deemed to be included. (Prior code § 1.08.040)

 

1.04.050 Exceptions to Sections 1.04.030 and 1.04.040.
    The rules prescribed in Sections 1.04.030 and 1.04.040 shall apply in all cases unless it be otherwise expressly provided in any ordinance, or unless there is something in the subject or context repugnant to such construction. (Prior code § 1.08.050)

 

1.04.060 Phrases regarding the City or City Council.
    The phrases “the City” and “this city,” whenever such occur in city ordinances, shall be construed to mean the City of Cañon City, in the state of Colorado; and the phrases “the Council” and “the City Council,” when thus occurring, shall be construed to mean the City Council of the City, unless the context clearly indicates another meaning. (Prior code § 1.08.060)

 

1.04.070 “Law,” “state law” and “statutes” defined.
    Whenever the words “law,” “state law,” “statutes,” or other words are used in the ordinances of the City referring to the statutes of the state of Colorado, they shall have the meaning prescribed by the Charter, Article XV, Section 13. (Prior code § 1.08.070)

 

1.04.080 Officers and employees.
    The Mayor, Councilmembers, City Administrator, City Attorney and Municipal Judge are declared to be officers of the City, and all other persons serving the City in any capacity whatsoever are declared to be employees, in accordance with Article V of the Charter. (Prior code § 1.08.080)

 

1.04.090 Severability.
    If a court of competent jurisdiction should hold one or more sections or a part of a section of this Code or of an ordinance passed hereafter invalid, such holding shall not affect the remainder of the code or ordinance, nor the context in which such section, sections or part of a section so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire section or part of a section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the section, sections or part of a section so held invalid. (Prior code § 1.08.090)

Chapter 1.08 CITY SEAL
1.08.010 City seal designated—Description.
    A seal, the impression of which is as follows: In the center, the words, “Seal, Incorporated April 2, 1872” and around the outer edge the words, “The City of Cañon City, Colorado” shall be and is declared to be the seal of the City of Cañon City. (Prior code § 1.04.010)

Chapter 1.12 VOTING PRECINCTS AND ELECTIONS
1.12.010 District Map, Council member districts and voting precincts.
    A.  District Map Adopted. Effective June 1, 2011, the official City Council District Map shall be that certain “City Council District Boundary Map” formally approved by majority of Council at its May 16, 2011 regular meeting, the original of which shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk.

    B.   Posting of Official Map. The City Clerk is hereby authorized to prepare, post and/or otherwise display and/or distribute true and correct copies of the official map and of each of the four (4) districts designated thereon.

    C.   General Location of Districts. For purposes of general information:

    1.   District One shall include land within the incorporated limits of the city that is generally lying within the north-west section of the city, as more specifically designated on the official map.

    2.   District Two shall include land within the incorporated limits of the city that is generally lying within the south-west section of the city (including the Dawson Ranch area) as more specifically designated on the official map.

    3.   District Three shall include land within the incorporated limits of the city that is generally lying within the north-central section of the city, as more specifically designated on the official map.

    4.   District Four shall include land within the incorporated limits of the city that is generally lying within the south-central section of the city and in the Four Mile Ranch area, as more specifically designated on the official map.

    D.  Voting Precincts. With respect to elections where it is deemed necessary to establish voting precincts, the locations of such voting precincts shall be established in advance of the election by the duly designated election official for such election. (Ord. 5-2011 § 1)

 

1.12.020 Polling places.
    Polling places for regular and special municipal elections shall be determined and designated by:

    A.  The Fremont County Clerk, or such other person authorized to designate polling places under the Uniform Election Code of 1992, as amended (Articles 1 to 13 of Title 1, C.R.S.), in all cases where the City is participating in a coordinated election conducted by the Fremont County Clerk; or

    B.   The City Clerk, pursuant to the Colorado Municipal Election Code of 1965 (Article 10 of Title 31, C.R.S.), as amended, or other applicable law, with respect to all other municipal elections. (Ord. 2-2003 § 2)

 

1.12.050 Council member districts.
    A.  For purposes of defining and identifying the four (4) districts within which the four (4) Council members who are subject to district residency requirements must reside, the following shall apply and supersede any conflicting provision of the Charter and prior ordinances of the City:

    1.   The boundaries of “District One” shall coincide with the boundaries of District One, as shown on the official map identified in Section 1.12.010, and shall include all of the land within said boundaries and any land immediately adjacent to the land in District One that is annexed into the city after June 1, 2011.

    2.   The boundaries of “District Two” shall coincide with the boundaries of District Two, as shown on the official map identified in Section 1.12.010, and shall include all of the land within said boundaries and any land immediately adjacent to the land in District Two that is annexed into the city after June 1, 2011.

    3.   The boundaries of “District Three” shall coincide with the boundaries of District Three, as shown on the official map identified in Section 1.12.010, and shall include all of the land within said boundaries and any land immediately adjacent to the land in District Three that is annexed into the city after June 1, 2011.

    4.   The boundaries of “District Four” shall coincide with the boundaries of District Four, as shown on the official map identified in Section 1.12.010, and shall include all of the land within said boundaries and any land immediately adjacent to the land in District Four that is annexed into the city after June 1, 2011.

    B.   The foregoing designations are authorized and mandated by Subsection C of Section 1 of Article II of the Charter of Cañon City. Except as is otherwise provided in the Charter, one member of City Council, who is not a Council member At-Large, must reside in each district designated in Subsection A of this section. (Ord. 5-2011 § 2; Ord. 2-2003 § 4)

Chapter 1.16 MUNICIPAL COURT
1.16.010 Establishment.
    There shall be a Municipal Court presided over by a Municipal Judge, as provided by Section 3 of Article IV and Sections 1 to 4, inclusive, of Article V of the City Charter. (Prior code § 1.24.010)

 

1.16.020 Municipal Judge—Qualifications.
    The Municipal Judge, in addition to the qualification prescribed by the City Charter shall have been admitted to and currently licensed in the practice of law in Colorado. (Prior code § 1.24.012)

 

1.16.030 Jurisdiction of the court.
    The Municipal Court shall have exclusive original jurisdiction to hear, try and determine all cases arising under the City Charter and the ordinances of the City for the violation and enforcement thereof, and there shall be no change of venue therefrom. (Prior code § 1.24.020)

 

1.16.035 Municipal Court—Authority to issue restraining orders.
    A.  The Municipal Court is authorized to issue temporary and permanent civil restraining orders, as provided for in Part 1 of Article 14 of Title 13, C.R.S., provided that such authority shall be limited to restraining orders authorized in Subsection 13-14-102(4)(b), C.R.S., and further provided that the only “business entity” which shall be authorized to seek and receive the issuance of a restraining order under this subsection will be the City of Cañon City for the protection of one or more City employees.

    B.   For purposes of this section “City employee” means and includes all elected and appointed City officers and all full- and part-time City employees and all regular and alternate members of the City’s official boards and commissions.

    C.   The Municipal Court shall utilize the forms and process described in Article 14 of Title 13, C.R.S., with respect to any petition, motion or other request for the issuance of any temporary or permanent restraining order that it is authorized to issue and enforce under the limited authority granted in Subsection A of this section. (Ord. 16-2003 § 4)

 

1.16.036 Municipal Court—Authority to order restitution.
    A.  Discretionary authority is expressly granted to the judges of the Municipal Court to award, as restitution to any victim of any civil infraction or criminal violation of this Code, an amount equal to the actual damages suffered by said victim, or to order a person found, or pleading, guilty to any such violation to pay such restitution as ordered by the Municipal Court.

    B.   Discretionary authority is expressly granted to the Municipal Court to order restitution for any and all costs incurred by public safety and/or emergency response agencies of the City or other governmental or quasi-governmental entities in connection with the initial response to and all subsequent follow-up investigation of violations of this Code.

    C.   When granted, restitution shall be determined by the submission of a bill of costs by said victim or agency to the Municipal Court on a form approved by the Municipal Court, but the Municipal Court shall be limited to awarding as such restitution only actual costs incurred by said victim that can be determined with a reasonable amount of certainty and whenever it is determined by the court that the payment of restitution is fair and reasonable. The specific amount of restitution shall be determined within the ninety (90) days immediately following the order of conviction or imposition of deferred judgment or deferred sentence, unless good cause is shown for extending the time period by which the restitution amount shall be determined.

    D.  Any restitution ordered by the Municipal Court shall be in addition to any fine or imprisonment authorized by this Code and shall be applicable to any situation in which deferred judgment or deferred sentence is accepted and/or imposed by the Municipal Court. (Ord. 23-2018 § 1)

 

1.16.040 Rules of procedure.
    The Municipal Court Rules of Procedure, promulgated by the Supreme Court of the state from time to time, shall govern the procedures in the Municipal Court. (Prior code § 1.24.030)

 

1.16.050 Sentence may include useful community/public service.
    A.  A defendant convicted of a misdemeanor, petty offense, or infraction in the Municipal Court may be sentenced to perform useful community/public service. Such useful community/public service may be as a condition of or in addition to any other sentence provided by this Code.

    B.   For the purposes of this section, “useful community/public service” means any work which is beneficial to the public, any public entity or any bona fide nonprofit private or public organization, which work involves a minimum of direct supervision or other public cost and which work would not, with the exercise of reasonable care, endanger the health or safety of the person required to work. In addition, the Court may at its discretion order that a defendant participate in a specific useful community/public service program.

    C.   In addition to other court costs imposed by the Court, any defendant sentenced to useful community/public service shall pay court costs of five dollars ($5.00) for costs incurred by the City in obtaining insurance coverage. (Ord. 26-2019 § 1)

 

1.16.060 Contempt of court.
    The Municipal Judge shall have full power and authority to punish for contempt of his or her court; provided, however, that no person shall be punished for contempt by imprisonment unless the imposition of such punishment is preceded by a hearing at which such person may be represented by competent legal counsel, and further provided that no imprisonment for contempt shall exceed five (5) days. No fine for contempt shall exceed the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010 of this Code. (Ord. 17-2013 § 2; prior code § 1.24.040)

 

1.16.070 Assessment of costs.
    Costs in an amount deemed appropriate by the Municipal Judge, but not in excess of three hundred dollars ($300.00), may be assessed by the Municipal Judge against any defendant who, upon conviction, is found guilty of a violation of any ordinance of the City. All costs incurred by the City with respect to the issuance of any warrant issued by the Municipal Court on account of the failure of any defendant or of any person previously convicted of an ordinance violation in Municipal Court to appear before the Municipal Court at a specified date and time for proceedings involving said defendant or convicted person shall be assessable by the Municipal Court against such defendant or convicted person as costs. (Ord. 15-1993 § 3)

 

1.16.080 Records of trial proceedings.
    The Municipal Court shall keep a verbatim record of the proceedings and evidence at trials by either electric devices or stenographic means, and shall in all respects be a “Qualified Municipal Court of Record” as such court is defined by the statutes of the state. (Prior code § 1.24.013)

 

1.16.090 Surcharge.
    A.  A surcharge equal to the greater of ten dollars ($10.00) or ten percent (10%) of the fine imposed for violation of all municipal ordinances, except parking violations, is levied on each Municipal Court action resulting in a conviction or in a deferred judgment and sentence, which municipal ordinance violation is charged pursuant to City of Cañon City ordinances. All calculated surcharge amounts resulting in dollars and cents shall be rounded down to the nearest whole dollar. If a portion of the fine is suspended, a proportionate amount of this surcharge levied shall also be suspended, but in no event shall the surcharge be reduced to an amount less than ten dollars ($10.00). If the suspension of the fine is thereafter revoked, the surcharge shall be reimposed on the total amount of the fine imposed. Such surcharges shall be paid to the Clerk of the Court by the defendant.

    B.   The moneys shall be deposited in the general fund of the City and are intended to be allocated for the following purposes, including, but not limited to, purchase of equipment, training programs, and additional personnel for a victims assistance program, and to domestic violence programs within the community. (Ord. 27-1989 § 1)

Chapter 1.20 TRIALS
1.20.010 Jury trial conditions.
    A.  Cases in the Municipal Court shall be tried by the court, unless the defendant is entitled to a jury trail under the Constitution and general laws of the state, the Charter of the City, or the ordinances of the City, and the defendant shall request a jury trial in writing.

    B.   A jury shall consist of three jurors unless the defendant demands a jury comprised of a larger number of jurors, but in no event shall a jury be comprised of more than six in number. (Prior code § 1.28.010)

 

1.20.020 Terms of court.
    For the purpose of selecting jurors for the Municipal Court of the City, the terms of the court shall be held in each and every year commencing on the second Monday of September and March. (Prior code § 1.28.020)

 

1.20.030 Selection of jurors.
    A.  The City Clerk, forty-five days or more before the commencement of a term of the court, shall select not less than fifty inhabitants of the City, having the qualifications as prescribed by the statutes of the state, for jurors of its district courts and who are not exempted by said statutes.

    B.   The City Clerk shall obtain a list of the names prescribed by this section from the City voter registration list, supplemented from other lists which may be available, such as water customers, utility customers, city directories, telephone directories, driver license registration and property taxpayers.

    C.   The City Clerk shall, upon the compilation of the list of names, certify it to the Clerk of the Municipal Court. (Prior code § 1.28.030)

 

1.20.040 Ballot box—Required Description.
    The Clerk of the Municipal Court shall keep a box of suitable dimensions, having two compartments, each of which shall be closed with a lid or cover and fastened with lock and key. An opening shall be made in each of said lids not exceeding two inches in length, and one-fourth inch in width, which shall be for the reception of ballots. The box shall remain in the possession of the court Clerk and shall not be opened except at the time and in the manner specified in Section 1.20.050. The keys to the same shall be kept by the City Administrator. (Prior code § 1.28.040)

 

1.20.050 Ballot box—Use to select jurors.
    The Clerk of the Municipal Court shall write the names certified to him on ballots in one compartment of the box. At least thirty days prior to the term of the court, and afterwards as often as the court shall order, the Clerk of the Municipal Court shall call to his assistance the City Administrator of the City, and in the presence of the City Administrator draw by chance from the compartment of the box in which names have been placed, a sufficient number of jurors for the next term of the Municipal Court. When so drawn, the ballots shall be placed in the other compartment of the box. (Prior code § 1.28.050)

 

1.20.060 Exemption from jury service.
    At the end of each term of court, the court Clerk shall certify to the City Clerk the names of all persons who have served on any regular panel of jurors at the preceding term, and the persons so certified shall not be again returned as jurors during a period of one year thereafter. The court Clerk shall also destroy all ballots remaining in the box, and for the succeeding term of court the names of persons shall be certified by the City Clerk, and the jurors be drawn in the manner provided in this chapter. The names of competent persons may be successively returned by the City Clerk, until they have been drawn as jurors, and until they have performed service as such, when they shall be omitted for at least one year. (Prior code § 1.28.060)

 

1.20.070 Summoning jurors.
    A.  If a jury is ordered to be drawn, the Clerk thereafter shall cause each person drawn for jury service to be served with a summons, either personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to him at his usual residence, business or post office address, requiring him to report for jury service at a specified time and place.

    B.   Whenever there is an unanticipated shortage of available jurors drawn from a qualified jury list, the court may require the court Clerk to summon a sufficient number of jurors from bystanders, but either party may show cause why bystanders should not be used, in which case additional jurors may be selected at random by the Clerk from the qualified jury list or in any other manner prescribed by the court. (Prior code § 1.28.070)

 

1.20.080 Excusal from jury service—Conditions.
    A person who is not disqualified for jury service may be excused from jury service by the court only upon a showing of undue hardship, extreme inconvenience, or public necessity, for a period the court deems necessary, at the conclusion of which the person shall reappear for jury service in accordance with the court’s direction. (Prior code § 1.28.080)

 

1.20.090 Peremptory challenge and discharge.
    If any juror summoned shall be interested in the event of the case or kin to a defendant, or shall have expressed this opinion on the matter about to be tried, or shall, for any cause (to be judged by the Municipal Judge), be considered as a partial or improper juror, the Municipal Judge shall discharge such juror. In all cases arising under the Charter or ordinances of the City wherein a jury trial is had, each party shall be entitled to three (3) peremptory challenges. (Prior code § 1.28.090)

 

1.20.100 Verdict and sentencing.
    Upon the jury returning a verdict of guilty, the Municipal Judge shall record the same and shall proceed to fix or determine the punishment or penalty, and to render judgment upon such verdict for the punishment or penalty so determined by him or her; but, if the jury returns a verdict of not guilty, the Municipal Judge shall record the same and shall discharge the defendant or defendants. (Prior code § 1.28.100)

 

1.20.110 Plea of guilty—Hearing by court.
    If any person accused of violating any of the provisions of the Charter or ordinances of the City, having a right of trial by jury for such alleged violation thereof, confesses him or herself guilty, the Municipal Court, without a jury, shall hear the evidence relating to such violation and fix and determine the punishment or penalty, and shall enter judgment and issue execution thereon. (Prior code § 1.28.110)

 

1.20.120 Jurors’ fees.
    Jurors shall receive for attending Municipal Court three dollars ($3.00) per day, to be paid out of the general fund of the City. (Prior code § 1.28.120)

Chapter 1.28 GENERAL PENALTY
1.28.010 Penalty for code violations.
    A.  Maximum General Penalty. Whenever in any provision in the Charter of Cañon City, or in this Code, or in any secondary code adopted by the City, or in any ordinance of the City that is not codified, or in any order, rule or regulation promulgated under the provisions of this Code, any act is prohibited, made or declared to be unlawful, an offense, a nuisance or a misdemeanor, any person who shall be convicted of the violation of any such provision shall be punished by a fine of not more than two thousand, six hundred, fifty dollars ($2,650.00), unless some other penalty is specifically provided therefor in such provision. A separate offense may be charged and a separate fine may be imposed upon conviction for each calendar day when any such violation occurs or continues to occur.

    B.   Annual Increases in Maximum Fine Amount. The limitation on Municipal Court fines set forth in Subsection A of this section shall be adjusted for inflation on January 1, 2014, and on January 1 of each year thereafter. As used in this Subsection B, “inflation” means the annual percentage change in the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Consumer Price Index for Denver-Boulder, all items, all urban consumers, or its successor index.

    C.   Penalty for Proceeding Without a Required Valid License, Permit or Certificate. Any person who pursues any business, trade, or calling, or does any act for which a license, permit, or certificate is required, without holding or having a valid license, permit or certificate, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine that is not more than the maximum fine permitted under Subsection A of this section.

    D.  Person-All Inclusive Definition. As used in this Code, “person” shall mean and include a natural person, association, corporation, partnership, limited liability company and any other legal entity capable of owning, using, or occupying real property or of transacting business within the City, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. (Ord. 17-2013 § 3; Ord. 15-1993 § 2)

Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Chapter 2.04 MAYOR AND COUNCIL
Chapter 2.08 CITY ADMINISTRATOR
Chapter 2.12 CITY CLERK
Chapter 2.16 FINANCE DEPARTMENT
Chapter 2.20 FIRE AUTHORITY
Chapter 2.28 LAW DEPARTMENT
Chapter 2.40 CITY ENGINEER
Chapter 2.44 WATER DEPARTMENT
Chapter 2.48 PLANNING COMMISSION
Chapter 2.52 APPEALS OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS
Chapter 2.56 EMPLOYEES’ PENSIONS
Chapter 2.60 CITY PARKS/CITY CEMETERY
Chapter 2.62 PROTECTION OF PALEONTOLOGICAL RESOURCES
Chapter 2.64 LIBRARY/MUSEUM ADVISORY BOARD
Chapter 2.68 ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS
Chapter 2.73 PROHIBITED GIFTS TO CITY OFFICIALS
Chapter 2.78 ROYAL GORGE REGIONAL TOURISM COUNCIL

Chapter 2.04 MAYOR AND COUNCIL
2.04.010 Council—Executive and administrative powers.
    All executive and administrative powers and duties of the City government, except those which have been delegated to the City Administrator pursuant to the Charter, Article IV, Sections 4 and 5, are vested in the Council; provided, also, that all powers and duties which have been delegated to the City Administrator shall also be vested in the Council during a vacancy in the office of City Administrator. (Prior code § 2.04.010)

 

2.04.020 Reservation of powers.
    A.  All legislative powers of the Council, approval of all bills, indebtedness and claims against the City, the granting or approval of all licenses, permits, contracts, agreements, obligations and instruments on behalf of the City, and all powers not included in or incidental to the powers and authority specifically set forth in Section 2.04.010, are reserved to the Council.

    B.   There are also excepted and reserved to the Mayor and other City officers all of the executive and administrative powers, authority and duties granted such officers by the City Charter or incidental thereto, and which may not be delegated by the Council to the City Administrator according to the City Charter. (Prior code § 2.04.020)

 

2.04.040 Compensation.
    A.  The compensation payable by the City to the Mayor shall be the annual sum of nine thousand dollars ($9,000.00), payable in installments on and according to the City’s schedule of regular pay days.

    B.   The compensation payable by the City to all other members of City Council shall be the annual sum of six thousand dollars ($6,000.00), payable in installments on and according to the City’s schedule of regular pay days. (Ord. 14-2017 § 1; Ord. 41-1999 § 1; Ord. 34-1995 § 1)

 

2.04.045 Ceremonial functions—Authority of the Mayor.
    The Mayor shall have the power and authority to perform ceremonial functions that are in keeping with the proper conduct of the affairs of the City. Such powers shall include the power to solemnize marriages and to complete and sign marriage certificate forms in accordance with the requirements of applicable Colorado statutes, including but not necessarily limited to Section 14-2-109, C.R.S. (Ord. 15-2012 § 1)

 

2.04.050 Council meetings—Time—Place—Special meetings.
    A.  Except as provided in subsection B of this section, the City Council shall hold regular meetings on the first and third Monday of each month, commencing at the hour of six p.m.

    B.   Rescheduling of Regular Meetings.

    1.   Whenever the date of a regular meeting shall fall on the date for the national celebration of Martin Luther King, Jr. Day, such meeting shall not be held on Monday, but shall be held on the following Tuesday, commencing at the hour of six p.m.

    2.   Except as provided in subsection (B)(1) of this section, whenever the date of a regular meeting shall fall on a legal holiday, such meeting may be held on such holiday, if determined by the Council to be appropriate. Otherwise, the meeting shall be rescheduled and held on the following Tuesday at the hour of six p.m.

    3.   Whenever the date of a regular meeting conflicts with another event deemed significant, Council may, by resolution, adopted by at least a two-thirds majority of the full Council, change the date of a regular meeting from a Monday to the following Tuesday; provided, that a copy of such resolution is published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city not sooner than twenty-five (25) days nor later than twenty (20) days prior to the date of the rescheduled regular meeting.

    C.   All regular or special meetings of the City Council shall be held in the Council room at the Cañon City Municipal Building, unless the Mayor, or three (3) Councilmembers acting jointly, designates that a meeting shall be held at a different location. If a meeting is held at a different location, notice thereof shall be posted on the front door of the municipal building on or before the date and time of such meeting.

    D.  Special meetings of the Council may be called by three (3) Councilmembers acting jointly, or by the Mayor or Mayor pro tem in the absence of the Mayor, with the concurrence of three (3) Councilmembers; provided, that notice of any such special meeting shall be given to all Councilmembers who have not concurred in the calling of the meeting at least twenty-four (24) hours before such meeting. Such notice may be given by letter or written message delivered to the home of a Councilmember or by personal telephone communication to a Councilmember. (Ord. 20-2012 § 1; Ord. 9-2000 § 1; Ord. 43-1993 § 1; Ord. 3-1990 § 1)

 

2.04.060 Council meetings—Administrator authority.
    The City Administrator shall have charge of the Council room and shall attend the meetings of the Council. (Prior code § 2.04.150)

 

2.04.070 Council meetings—Duties of Mayor and Mayor pro tem.
    The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the City and ex-officio president of the Council, and shall preside at all meetings of the Council when present. The Mayor shall vote upon all questions in case of a tie, but not otherwise. When the Mayor shall be out of the city or unable to act because of disability, the Mayor pro tem shall exercise the same powers, authority and duties as the Mayor. The Mayor pro tem shall preside when the Mayor does not attend a meeting of the Council but, unlike the Mayor, the Mayor pro tem shall have the right and obligation to vote on all matters presented during any meeting of the Council at which the Mayor pro tem presides. (Ord. 22-2007 § 3; Ord. 3-1990 § 2)

 

2.04.080 Council meetings—Rules of order.
    A.  The maintenance of order, rules of procedure and order of business in all respects not specifically provided in this chapter shall be in accordance with rules that the Council may from time to time adopt.

    B.   Robert’s Rules shall govern all questions not determined by this chapter or rules of Council adopted pursuant to this section.

    C.   The rules of order of Council shall be strictly adhered to by the Council, and shall be amended or suspended only by a two-thirds vote of the members present. (Ord. 3-1990 § 3)

 

2.04.090 Order of business.
    At the hour appointed for meeting, the members shall be called to order and the City Clerk shall proceed to call the roll, note the absentees, and announce whether a quorum is present. Upon the appearance of a quorum, the Council shall then continue with the business before them, which shall be conducted in the following order:

    A.  First, the Council shall correct and approve the minutes of the last preceding meeting. The reading of the minutes shall be dispensed with if a copy thereof has been made available to each member of the Council at least two (2) days prior to the meeting at which the same shall be approved, and if copies thereof are available for public inspection in the Council chambers at the time of the meeting.

    B.   Second, the Council shall adopt, with or without amendment, the agenda for the meeting. The agenda shall be prepared in advance of the meeting by the Mayor, with the assistance of the City Administrator and the City Clerk.

    C.   Third, Council shall proceed with the rest of the business pursuant to the agenda that has been adopted. (Ord. 3-1990 § 4)

 

2.04.110 Addressing the chair.
    Any member desirous of speaking shall address the presiding officer, but shall not proceed further until recognized and named by the presiding officer. (Ord. 3-1990 § 6)

 

2.04.120 Precedence of motions.
    When a question is under debate, no motion shall be received but to adjourn, to lay on the table, for the previous question, to postpone to a day certain, to commit, to amend, or to postpone indefinitely, which several motions shall have precedence in the order in which they are arranged. (Prior code § 2.04.110)

 

2.04.130 Quorum.
    Four (4) members of the Council constitute a quorum to do business at all meetings of the Council, but a minority may adjourn from day to day and compel the attendance of the absent members by any lawful means. (Prior code § 2.04.060)

 

2.04.140 Voting procedure—Open voting and when voting may be excused.
    A.  With respect to all matters requiring formal action, all votes of City Council must be by roll call or by another means which clearly identifies the vote of each member and results in the announcement and recording of each such vote.

    B.   Every Councilmember, and in case of a tie, the Mayor, shall be required to vote on all matters presented, unless such person believes he has a conflict of interest or potential conflict of interest with regard to the action under consideration, whereupon the person shall state the reason he does not believe his or her vote should be cast, in which case the remainder of the Council shall determine whether or not such person should be excused from voting. (Ord. 22-2007 § 1; Ord. 3-1990 § 7)

 

2.04.150 Preservation of order.
    The Mayor or person presiding shall preserve order and decide questions of order, subject to an appeal to the Council. The City Attorney shall act as parliamentarian to the Mayor and Council. (Ord. 3-1990 § 8)

 

2.04.160 Standing committees.
    A.  The Council may establish, by ordinance or resolution, standing committees of Council. Such committees shall be created and function with regard to matters involving the operation of City government and the provision of City services to the public.

    B.   At the time the Council establishes standing committees of Council, it shall specify the duties of each committee and determine the number of Councilmembers to sit upon each committee. The Mayor shall be an ex-officio and voting member of each standing committee. (Ord. 3-1990 § 9)

 

2.04.170 Study committees.
    A.  The Mayor, on his or her own initiative, or when directed to do so by Council action, may establish special committees for the purpose of studying specific issues.

    B.   Study committees may be composed of both Councilmembers and such other members as the Mayor may designate. In establishing such committees, the Mayor, and in the case of committees established at the direction of Council, the Council, shall set forth the general duties of each committee so established. (Ord. 3-1990 § 9)

 

2.04.180 Appointment and reports of committees.
    All committees shall be appointed by the Mayor. Committees shall report in writing when so ordered by the Council, and all written reports shall be addressed “To the City Council of the City of Cañon City.” (Prior code § 2.04.130)

 

2.04.190 Appointments to offices.
    In all instances where Council is required by Article V, Section 2 of the Charter of the City of Cañon City to make appointments to office, the majority of the Council shall be necessary for such appointment. (Ord. 22-2007 § 2; Ord. 3-1990 § 10)

Chapter 2.08 CITY ADMINISTRATOR
2.08.010 Authority, powers and duties.
    Pursuant to the authority vested in it by Section 5 of Article IV and Section 5 of Article VI of the Charter of Cañon City, the Council delegates to the City Administrator the following authority, powers and duties, and defines the authority, powers, and duties of the City Administrator as follows:

    A.  To appoint and remove all employees of the City; provided, that city appointive and legislative officers, members of the Planning Commission, members of the board of adjustment, members of the library association or its board of directors, and members of any other board or bureau serving the City without pay, shall not be considered employees of the City within the meaning of this chapter. All appointments as made shall be made subject to salary or wage limitations fixed by the Council;

    B.   To act as chief conservator of the peace, and to supervise the enforcement of all city ordinances and all penal and administrative laws of the state and United States to the extent that the City is required so to do or permitted so to do in the proper administration of city government;

    C.   To supervise all administrative departments and all other departments for which he appoints the heads or directors;

    D.  To keep the Council advised of the immediate financial and administrative needs of the City, and from time to time of the anticipated or future needs of the City;

    E.   To make such recommendations to the Council concerning the affairs of the City as may appear to him to improve the administration of city affairs;

    F.   To prepare and submit to the Council such reports as it may require;

    G.  To supervise all inspections required under city ordinances or the laws of Colorado;

    H.  To abate all nuisances, except in cases where this authority shall conflict with the authority of any other city officer or a state officer or board having exclusive jurisdiction in the matter;

    I.    To supervise the care and maintenance of all buildings and structures owned or controlled by the City, and of all public streets, avenues, boulevards, alleys, bridges, viaducts, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, and thoroughfares, and all construction thereof, and all improvements and repairs thereto;

    J.    To supervise the operation, care and maintenance of cemeteries owned or controlled by the City;

    K.  To supervise the operation, care and maintenance of all public parks of the City;

    L.   To supervise and control the care, maintenance and operation of the City waterworks and water system, and to supervise the construction, alteration or repair of any facility in the waterworks and water system;

    M.  To supervise the planting, care and maintenance of shade trees, shrubbery and lawns in public thoroughfares, public parks, and property owned or controlled by the City;

    N.  To supervise all public utilities operating in the city, or furnishing any service, commodity or convenience to the inhabitants of the City, insofar as they are subject to control by the City under its Charter or ordinances;

    O.  To be chief custodian of all personal property belonging to the City or which it may hold in trust, and to make such periodic inventories and account thereof to the City Council or other board, officer or employee of the City as the Council may by ordinance or resolution direct; to prevent, as far as he is able to do so, the misuse, misappropriation and destruction of such property; and to require the heads of the departments and other officers and employees of the City to account to him periodically for all property entrusted to their use and care; provided, that he shall not be personally liable to the City for any loss to the City because of the destruction, misuse or misappropriation of any such property, nor in case of theft or embezzlement thereof;

    P.   To prepare annually the City budget in accordance with the system and classification of accounts maintained by the Director of Finance, as such system and classification shall be prescribed by the City Council;

    Q.  To present to the Council or to such employees or officer as the Council may direct, all payrolls, bills and claims of every nature against the City, and see to it that the proper requisitions and vouchers are tendered and the required approval of the proper department head or officer procured before the same shall be submitted;

    R.   To make such investigation and inquiry with respect to payrolls, bills and claims against the City before presenting them to the Council, as may be proper and necessary to determine the validity thereof;

    S.   Subject to approval of the Council by resolution duly adopted, to establish administrative departments of the City, and make changes in the administrative departments of the City, as he may consider necessary to a proper and orderly administration of the City’s affairs;

    T.   Acting by or through the Director of Finance and in conjunction with such officer, to collect all moneys due and owing to the City, and, when authorized by the Council so to do, to institute such suits and proceedings for the collection thereof as may be necessary for that purpose;

    U.  To draw and sign all warrants issued on behalf of the City authorized by the Council, provided that the Director of Finance shall countersign the same, pursuant to Section 3, Article VII of the Charter;

    V.  To purchase all supplies and materials, and to purchase, rent or lease all equipment, machines and apparatuses needed in the administration of the City’s affairs, subject to budgetary limitations and subject to Section 3, Article VII of the Charter and any other provisions of the Charter in that regard;

    W.  To perform every function and duty and exercise every power which may be required of or granted to him by the Council by motion or resolution incidental to the functions, duties and powers above set forth. (Ord. 3-1990 § 11; prior code § 2.08.010)

 

2.08.020 Bond required.
    The City Administrator shall give bond, executed by a reliable corporate security in such amount as the Council may by resolution determine, that he will well and faithfully perform the duties of his office and shall account for and turn over all money, property, books and records of the City coming to his hands. The cost of such bond shall be borne by the City. (Ord. 3-1990 § 12)

 

2.08.030 Attendance at Council meetings.
    The City Administrator shall attend all Council meetings. (Prior code § 2.08.020)

 

2.08.040 Assignment of employees and equipment.
    The City Administrator shall have the authority and it shall be his duty to use employees and equipment in one department in prosecuting work in another department, and to assign employees to part-time work in two or more departments, providing proper charges shall be made against each department of the costs attributable to the work performed in each department. (Prior code § 2.08.030)

Chapter 2.12 CITY CLERK
2.12.010 Office established—Appointment.
    There shall be the office of the City Clerk, the head of which shall be the City Clerk, appointed and removable by the City Administrator subject to the consent of the City Council. (Prior code § 2.64.010)

 

2.12.020 Bond required.
    The City Clerk shall give a bond, issued by a reputable corporate surety in such amount as the Council may by resolution determine, that he will well and faithfully perform the duties of his office, and shall account for and turn over all moneys, property, books, investments and records of the City coming into his hands. The cost of such bond shall be borne by the City. (Prior code § 2.64.030)

 

2.12.030 Powers and duties.
    The City Clerk shall have the authority and be required to:

    A.  Keep suitable records of the proceedings of the Council, in which shall appear a record of all ordinances, resolutions, motions and actions of the Council;

    B.   Attend to the publication of ordinances and to the posting, publishing (when required), and the giving of all notices required to be given of ordinances, statements, expenditures, budgets, elections and other city matters wherein notice of any kind is required to be given;

    C.   Attest and affix the seal of the City to all deeds, bonds, coupons, contracts, licenses and other instruments and documents, when required or directed by the City Council;

    D.  Perform such duties with respect to the City elections as may be provided for in the Charter of the City and the ordinances and resolutions of the Council, the laws of the state of Colorado, and the Constitution of the state;

    E.   Be responsible for the safekeeping of all documents and records as required by the Charter, ordinances and resolutions of the City, and by the laws of the state of Colorado;

    F.   Be responsible for the issuance and recording of deeds for cemetery plots and for recording burial information from the City cemeteries;

    G.  Transcribe minutes of the Council and aid in the preparation of the Council agendas;

    H.  Issue all permits and licenses of the City, unless otherwise authorized by ordinance or resolution;

    I.    Attend all meetings of the City Council of Cañon City;

    J.    Perform such other duties as the City Administrator or Council from time to time may determine. (Prior code § 2.64.020)

Chapter 2.16 FINANCE DEPARTMENT
2.16.010 Department established—Director.
    There shall be a Department of Finance, the head of which shall be the Director of Finance, appointed and removable by the City Administrator subject to the consent of the City Council. (Prior code § 2.16.010)

 

2.16.020 Director of Finance—Bond.
    The Director of Finance shall furnish a bond, issued by a reputable corporate surety in such amount as the Council may by resolution determine, that he will well and faithfully perform the duties of his office, and shall account for and turn over all moneys, property, books, investments and records of the City coming to his hands. The cost of such bond shall be borne by the City. (Prior code § 2.16.040)

 

2.16.030 Director of Finance—Powers and duties.
    The Director of Finance shall have the authority and be required to:

    A.  Carry out the responsibilities and direct the activities of the Department of Finance;

    B.   Maintain financial records or accounts of budgeted items of revenue and appropriation, setting forth, among other things, the budgeted amount, expenditures therefrom or receipts thereto, the appropriation, the encumbered balance and the unencumbered balance, and such other information as the City Administrator or Council may direct;

    C.   Keep such moneys in such separate funds and in such depositories as may be required by the Charter of the City and by the ordinances and resolutions passed or adopted by the City Council consistent with the Charter;

    D.  Submit monthly, or from time to time as may be directed by the City Administrator or the Council, such statements of accounts and funds, including trust, pension and custodial funds, in such detail as the City Administrator or Council may direct;

    E.   Prepare annually at the end of each calendar year a current financial statement and report for the fiscal year then ended, in such detail as the City Administrator or the Council may determine, and to assist in the annual independent audit of the financial records of the City;

    F    Prepare, and certify to the appropriate authority, notices of such sums due and owing the City for items which the City has the authority to assess specially, and prepare and certify, or cause to be certified, such notices of taxes, mill levies, and special assessments as may be required by ordinance, the City Charter, or the laws of the state of Colorado;

    G.  Receive and receipt for all funds due the City from the treasurer of Fremont County, any agencies of the state of Colorado, or the United States, and to collect such other taxes, special assessments, fees and other revenues due the City;

    H.  Maintain custody of all funds and any pension moneys and assets under the jurisdiction of the City and of any office, department or agency of the City, and to deposit, invest and reinvest such moneys and funds as the Council or appropriate board or agency shall designate, subject always to the requirements of law relating to the investments for municipalities in the state and the provisions of the City Charter, and the laws of the state, and to make such reports of such investments and the income therefrom as the City Administrator or Council may direct;

    1.   Maintain the employment records for all employees and officials of the City;

    J.    Determine and prescribe the forms for city bills, vouchers, purchase orders, etc., to be issued by the offices, departments and agencies of the City, and the manner of keeping such records by the offices, departments and agencies of the City which are necessary for the proper operation of the Department of Finance;

    K.  Sign or countersign all city warrants and checks except as otherwise provided by City Charter, ordinance, or by directives of the Council;

    L.   To present to the Council, or to such employees or officers as the Council may direct, all payrolls, bills and claims of every nature against the City, and see to it that the proper requisitions and vouchers are tendered and the required approval of the proper department head or officer procured, before the same shall be submitted;

    M.  Make such investigation and inquiry with respect to payrolls, bills and claims against the City before presenting them to the Council or City Administrator as may be proper and necessary to determine the validity thereof;

    N.  Perform such other duties as the City Administrator or Council from time to time may determine;

    O.  Attend all regular meetings of the Council of Cañon City. (Prior code § 2.16.020)

 

2.16.040 Director of Finance—Other powers.
    The Director of Finance shall have access at all reasonable times to all papers, books, files, records and documents in any of the offices and departments of the City which are necessary for the performance of his duties as Director of Finance, and may require such reports from the officers and employees of the City relative to expenditures, purchases, purchase orders and receipts of funds on behalf of the City as may be necessary in the performance of his duties as Director of Finance. (Prior code § 2.16.030(A))

 

2.16.050 Director of Finance—Liability limitations.
    The Director of Finance shall not be liable for any losses resulting from any investments or deposits made at the direction of the Council, and he shall not be liable to the City for loss of any moneys or securities due to larceny or embezzlement by any person or persons other than himself. (Prior code § 2.16.030(B))

Chapter 2.20 FIRE AUTHORITY
2.20.010 Fire Department replaced by fire authority.
    The Cañon City Fire Department was superseded by the Cañon City district fire authority pursuant to an intergovernmental agreement with the Cañon City area fire protection district dated September 11, 1985. (Ord. 3-1990 § 13)

 

2.20.020 Appointments to fire authority board.
    A.  Appointments to the fire authority board of directors shall be made by the Mayor.

    B.   The city’s representatives to the board of directors of the Cañon City district fire authority may be removed by the Mayor or by a majority of the Council without cause. If removed by a majority of Council, such person shall not be reappointed to the board by the Mayor unless a majority of the Council concurs. (Ord. 3-1990 § 13)

Chapter 2.28 LAW DEPARTMENT
2.28.010 Department established—City Attorney appointment.
    There shall be a department of law, the head of which shall be the City Attorney appointed and removable by the Council as provided by the Charter, Article V, Sections 1 to 3. He shall have the qualifications prescribed by the Charter, Article VI, Section 3. (Prior code § 2.32.010)

 

2.28.020 City Attorney—Powers and duties.
    The City Attorney shall have the powers and duties prescribed by the Charter, Article VI, Section 1, and any other powers and duties prescribed by the Charter or ordinance. (Ord. 21-1987 § 2: prior code § 2.32.020)

Chapter 2.40 CITY ENGINEER
2.40.010 City Engineer—Appointment.
    There shall be a City Engineer who shall be appointed and removable by the City Administrator. (Ord. 3-1990 § 17)

 

2.40.020 City Engineer—Duties.
    The City Engineer shall perform such duties as the City Administrator shall, from time to time, prescribe, and such other duties as may be required by the Charter, the Cañon City Code or by law. (Ord. 3-1990 § 17)

Chapter 2.44 WATER DEPARTMENT
2.44.010 Department established—Powers and duties.
    There shall be a Water Department of the City which shall comprise raw water supplies and water rights, filtration plant, machinery, equipment and supplies, the distribution system of potable water, all pumps and pump housing, transmission lines, mains, and that portion of the service lines defined in Chapter 13.04 of this Code, all records, and plat books now maintained or to be maintained, together with all of the appurtenances of any of the equipment and machinery heretofore described and all rights-of-way and easements which have been acquired for purposes of conducting raw water supplies to the filtration plant and the distribution of potable water to water users. (Prior code § 2.40.010)

 

2.44.020 Water Superintendent authority.
    The head of the Water Department shall be the Water Superintendent, who shall be appointed by the City Administrator and is hereby designated as an employee of the City as such term is defined in the Charter. The City Administrator shall be responsible for the proper operation, management and control of the Water Department. (Prior code § 2.40.020)

 

2.44.030 Warrant required for access to premises.
    Except during emergency situations or where the consent of the property owner has been obtained, entrance upon residential property and the nonpublic portions of commercial property may be made by the City only pursuant to a search warrant. (Ord. 21-1987 § 3: prior code § 2.40.030)

Chapter 2.48 PLANNING COMMISSION
2.48.010 Authorization.
    There is authorized by this chapter in accordance with Section 31-23-202, C.R.S., the Cañon City Planning Commission. Except as superseded or modified by this chapter, the provisions of Parts 2 and 3, Article 23, Title 31, C.R.S., shall be applicable to the Planning Commission. (Ord. 24-2001 § 1)

 

2.48.020 Purpose.
    The purpose of the Planning Commission is to assist, advise and coordinate with the City Council with respect to the comprehensive study and review of issues relative to the planning, zoning and growth of the municipality, as more specifically set forth in this Chapter and as provided in additional ordinances, rules and regulations of the City promulgated by the City Council. The Planning Commission shall encourage coordinated and harmonious development of the municipality in accordance with the master plan, zoning ordinance and subdivision regulations of the City. (Ord. 24-2001 § 1)

 

2.48.030 Powers.
    A.  The Planning Commission shall be empowered and authorized to review, act upon and advise the City Council with respect to all zoning, rezoning, planning, subdividing, platting, annexation and other related activities as provided in the zoning and subdivision ordinances and regulations of the City.

    B.   The Planning Commission is empowered to make and submit to the City Council for the Council’s approval a master plan, and any comprehensive amendments thereto, for the physical development of the municipality. The Planning Commission shall initiate a comprehensive review of the master plan no less often than once annually. The master plan for the City and its environs shall contain the Planning Commission’s recommendations with respect to the following matters:

    1.   A comprehensive zoning and subdivision ordinance together with a zoning plan;

    2.   Appropriate plans showing the general location, character and extent of streets, bridges, boulevards, parkways and other types of transportation corridors within and without the City and its environs;

    3.   A plan for the location and extent of public utilities, including, but not limited to, water and sewer development, public communications, gas and electrical extensions, together with the location and extent of other public improvements to be created within the city, such as parks, Fire Departments, police stations, schools and other public buildings;

    4.   Any and all plans for the eventual redesignation of specific areas within the community, condemnation plans, change of use plans or other alterations regarding the existing community structure.

    C.   The Planning Commission is empowered with any and all further powers delineated within Part 2, Article 23, Title 31, CRS. and any and all of the powers and duties granted to a municipal zoning commission within Part 3, Article 23, Title 31, CRS. (Ord. 24-2001 § 1)

 

2.48.040 Duties.
    It shall be the duty of the Planning Commission to proceed expeditiously in accordance with the purposes and powers enumerated in this chapter, to communicate, coordinate and advise the City Council of its activities and accomplishments, to hold public meetings in conjunction therewith, to promulgate its own internal rules and regulations that are not in conflict with the charter and ordinances of the City, and to provide a public forum for discourse and proceedings concerning the further development and orderly growth of the City. (Ord. 24-2001 § 1)

 

2.48.050 Membership.
    A.  1.        The Planning Commission shall consist of eight members, each of whom shall be appointed by City Council. Seven “public members” shall be residents of the City who are not members of City Council or city planning staff. Public members shall be entitled to vote on all matters coming before the commission and shall be counted when the presence of a quorum is to be determined;

    2.   The eighth member of the Planning Commission shall be a member of City Council and be designated a “municipal member.” The municipal member shall have no voting rights and shall not be counted when the presence of a quorum is to be determined.

    B.   All members of the commission shall serve as such without compensation, and the public members shall hold no other municipal office. Any public member of the commission may also be a member of the zoning board of adjustment.

    C.   All members of the commission shall be bona fide residents of the City at the time of appointment, and the discontinuance of residency shall immediately terminate membership.

    D.  The municipal member shall be appointed to a one-year term each July and serve until July 1st of the following year; provided that if such municipal member’s term on the City Council ends prior to the expiration of such term, the municipal member’s position shall become vacant immediately and be filled as provided in Section 2.48.060(A).

    E.   Initially, the terms of all public members shall begin upon their appointment in 2001, following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, provided that: the terms of two such public members shall expire on July 1, 2002; the terms of two such public members shall expire on July 1, 2003; and the terms of three such public members shall expire on July 1, 2004. Thereafter, the terms of all public members will be three years and, in succession, each such term shall expire on July 1st of that year which is three years from the date upon which the term began.

    F.   Members, including the municipal member, may be removed, after public hearing before the City Council, for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office, in which case the Council shall file a written statement of the reasons for the removal of such member. (Ord. 24-2001 § 1)

 

2.48.060 Selection.
    A.  Any vacancy occurring other than through the expiration of the term of a member shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by appointment by the City Council. Any such appointment shall be made within ninety days following the creation of the vacancy.

    B.   Vacancies created by term expiration shall be filled by appointment by the City Council prior to July 15th of the year during which the vacancy occurred. The expiration of a term shall create a vacancy, without regard to whether the incumbent wishes to be reappointed.

    C.   When a vacancy to be filled under Subsection A of this section pertains to the unexpired term of a public member, notice seeking applications of qualified persons desiring to serve out the balance of such term shall be solicited at least thirty days prior to the date upon which the appointment to the vacant position is to be made.

    D.  Whenever the terms of public members are set to expire, requests for applications to fill the vacancies on the commission that will be created by the expiration of such terms shall be published no sooner than sixty nor fewer than thirty days prior to the expiration of such terms. Incumbent public members of the commission whose terms are set to expire may apply and be considered for reappointment. (Ord. 24-2001 § 1)

 

2.48.070 Chairperson.
    The Planning Commission shall elect from its public members a chairperson for a one-year term of office, for the purpose of officiating at meetings of the Planning Commission. The chairperson shall retain his or her voting rights. (Ord. 24-2001 § 1)

 

2.48.080 Meetings.
    The Planning Commission shall schedule and hold, whenever there is business to come before the commission, regular public meetings, not less often than once per calendar month. No official meeting shall take place unless a quorum is present. When a quorum is not present, a majority of those public members who are present may authorize the chairperson to continue the meeting to a date certain, but shall conduct no other business. A majority vote of the public members entitled to vote at a meeting where a quorum is present shall be required for all approvals, recommendations and other official actions of the commission. The commission may adopt rules of procedure for its meetings, which shall constitute official protocol. (Ord. 24-2001 § 1)

 

2.48.090 Rules.
    The Planning Commission may adopt rules which shall be binding upon its members. (Ord. 24-2001 § 1)

 

2.48.100 Record keeping.
    The Planning Commission shall maintain a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, determinations, recommendations and other activities, which record regularly shall be presented to and reviewed by the City Council. The record shall be maintained for public inspection during normal working hours at the municipal office for the City. (Ord. 24-2001 § 1)

 

2.48.110 Advisory capacity.
    Except as specifically may be provided to the contrary in the City’s zoning ordinance, Title 17 of this Code, all recommendations, decisions, determinations, zoning and master plans, regulations, ordinance drafting and other actions taken by the Planning Commission are advisory in nature to the City Council, and as such shall neither be binding upon the City Council nor subject to judicial review. In all instances wherein Parts 1, 2 and 3, Article 23, Title 31, CRS, vest the planning or zoning commission with specific powers to make final decisions, this chapter shall prevail and all such actions shall constitute recommendations and advice to the City Council, rather than final actions. Planning commission recommendations that are made in accordance with the requirements of the City’s Charter, ordinances and regulations shall be given great weight by the City Council. (Ord. 24-2001 § 1)

 

2.48.115 Planning staff.
    A.  The city shall furnish for all regular and special meetings of the Planning Commission, and for all workshops if requested in advance by the chairperson, a recording secretary who shall: call the roll; tally and record all votes; prepare the official minutes of the commission; and maintain such official minutes and all other official records of proceedings before the Planning Commission.

    B.   The City Planner, under the direction of the City Administrator, shall provide technical and advisory support to the commission as one of the City Planner’s primary duties.

    C.   Other members of the City’s professional staff, including but not necessarily limited to the City Engineer and City Attorney, shall be made available by the City to provide reasonable and routine assistance to the commission. The level and extent of their participation shall be as determined by the City Administrator, who shall take into account the requests and expectations of the commission and its chairperson when making such determinations.

    D.  The commission may request and the City may agree to provide outside professional consultants to assist the commission when circumstances warrant. (Ord. 24-2001 § 1)

 

2.48.120 Scope of chapter.
    This chapter designates the purposes, powers and duties of the Planning Commission. The provisions of the statutory authority shall be applicable only in the instance of silence of this chapter, or where the general intent of the Legislature as to scope and authority deemed proper for a Planning Commission can lend meaningful direction and assistance in the interpretation of this chapter. (Ord. 24-2001 § 1)

Chapter 2.52 APPEALS OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS
2.52.010 Appeal rights and procedures.
    A.  City Council. Appeals to the City Council shall be made as set out in this subsection. Appeals to City Council are only authorized when expressly provided for in this section.

    1.   Any aggrieved person, upon receipt of written notice of the determination or decision of an administrative official may, in writing, and within thirty (30) days after receiving such notice, request a hearing on the matter before the City Council when specifically authorized to do so by this section. The City Clerk shall notify the appellants in writing, return receipt requested or by electronic mail, at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date of the time and date of the hearing, to be held not more than thirty (30) days from receipt of the notice. The decision of the City Council upon such hearing shall be final, subject to judicial review.

    2.   Such request for hearing shall contain at least the following:

    a.   A brief statement of the order or action being appealed;

    b.   A brief statement of any material facts supporting the appeal;

    c.   A brief statement of the relief being sought (i.e., the order or action should be reversed, modified, or otherwise set aside) and why the relief should be granted; and

    d.   The signatures of all persons appealing the decisions and their mailing addresses.

    B.   Appeals to Board of Adjustment. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment shall be made in accordance with Section 17.36.050 of this Code.

    C.   Appeals to City Administrator. Appeals to the City Administrator shall be made as set out in this subsection.

    1.   Any aggrieved person, upon receipt of written notice of the determination or decision of an administrative official may, in writing, and within ten (10) days after receiving such notice, submit a written request for appeal to the City Administrator when specifically authorized to do so by this Code.

    2.   Such request for appeal shall contain at least the following:

    a.   A brief statement of the order or action being appealed;

    b.   A brief statement of any material facts supporting the appeal;

    c.   A brief statement of the relief being sought (i.e., the order or action should be reversed, modified, or otherwise set aside) and why the relief should be granted; and

    d.   The signatures of all persons appealing the decision and their mailing addresses.

    D.  Failure of any person to file a timely appeal in accordance with the provisions of this section shall constitute a waiver of the right to an appeal.

    E.   Only those matters or issues specifically raised in the written appeal shall be considered by the appellate body or official.

    F.   The decisions of the City Council, Board of Adjustment, and City Administrator shall be made in writing, and shall contain findings of fact and any conditions within thirty (30) days after the hearing or decision, as applicable. A copy of the decision shall be sent, return receipt requested or by electronic mail, to the appealing party and the administrative body or official of the City whose decision has been the subject of the appeal. (Ord. 18-2020 § 2)

 

2.52.020 Application of chapter provisions.
    The provisions of this chapter shall supersede all other appeal procedures provided for elsewhere in either the ordinances of the City or any codes adopted by the City by reference or otherwise. The procedures provided for in this chapter are not applicable to matters addressed in the personnel regulations of the City, including grievances and interpretation of agreements between the City and its employees, which matters must be determined through the grievance procedures prior to any employee appealing any employment decision to the City Council or the courts. (Prior code § 2.60.020)

Chapter 2.56 EMPLOYEES’ PENSIONS
2.56.020 Social Security insurance coverage for City personnel.
    The City is authorized to execute and deliver to the Department of Employment Security of the state a plan or plans and agreement required under Colorado Revised Statutes 1973 Section 24-51-704, and the Social Security Act, to extend coverage to employees and officers of the City and to do and perform any and all necessary acts or things necessary to effectuate coverage of employees and officers under the Old Age and Survivors’ Insurance System. (Prior code § 2.48.030)

 

2.56.030 Social Security contributions—Payroll deductions.
    The Director of Finance is authorized to establish a system of payroll deductions to be matched by payments of the City to be made into the contribution fund of the Social Security Act through the Department of Employment Security, and to make charges of this tax to the fund or funds from which wage or salary payments are paid and issued to employees of the City. Such payments shall be made in accordance with the provisions of Section 1400 of the Federal Insurance Contribution Act on all services which constitute employment within the meaning of that Act. Payments shall be made to the Department of Employment Security of the state of Colorado, and shall be due and payable on or before the eighteenth day of the month immediately following the completed calendar quarter, and such payments as are delinquent shall bear interest at the rate of one-half percent per month until such time as payments are made. (Prior code § 2.48.040)

 

2.56.040 Social Security contributions—Appropriations.
    There is appropriated from the contingent fund and from any proper fund or funds hereafter established for this purpose of the City the necessary amount required to pay into the contribution fund as provided in Colorado Revised Statutes 1973, Section 24-51-702. (Prior code § 2.48.050)

 

2.56.050 Exclusions from chapter provisions.
    This chapter shall not affect or be applicable to any department of the City government of the City or the employees thereof which is now operating under or is subject to any retirement or pension plan now in operation under the laws of the state. (Prior code § 2.48.060)

Chapter 2.60 CITY PARKS/CITY CEMETERY
2.60.010 Parks Department—Superintendent.
    There shall be a Parks Department, the head of which shall be the Parks Superintendent appointed and removable by the City Administrator. The Parks Superintendent shall have supervision and control of all City parks, forestry, trees and City cemeteries. (Ord. 43-1988; prior code § 2.52.010)

 

2.60.020 Parks Superintendent—Duties.
    The Parks Superintendent shall have charge of, maintain, and improve all parks, community forest, and the cemeteries owned by the City. The Parks Superintendent shall provide for supervision and care, irrigation, weeding, provide for repair, and shall do all such work about the City parks, community trees, and cemeteries as the City Administrator shall require. The Parks Superintendent shall issue permits and administer tests and inspections as required by ordinance. He or she shall hold him or herself in readiness to dig and prepare graves for all who may apply with the proper certificate of death and permit, and shall have graves in readiness for the appointed time of burial, provided, he or she shall enforce the rules and regulations adopted for the parks, forestry, and cemeteries as adopted from time to time by the City Council. (Ord. 43-1988; prior code § 2.52.020)

 

2.60.030 Charges to be determined by resolution.
    The City Council shall, from time to time, by resolution, prescribe:

    A.  The amount to be charged for burial spaces, grave vaults, interment and disinterment, and other services related to use of the City cemeteries;

    B.   Rules and regulations regarding the time, place, and manner in which funerals and other activities are to be conducted in City cemeteries;

    C.   The fees, service charges, rental rates, and other amounts to be charged for use of City parks, Parks Department equipment, and facilities;

    D.  Reasonable regulations regarding the time, place, manner, and type of use to which City park facilities and equipment may be used. (Ord. 43-1988; prior code § 2.52.050)

 

2.60.040 Payment for grave space and interment.
    The full purchase price and all interment charges as prescribed by resolution of the City Council as provided by Section 2.52.050, for each grave space, shall be paid before any permanent monument, cross, emblem, or marker of any kind shall be placed upon such grave space. Any interment placed prior to full payment of cemetery fees is temporary, and this right shall not be acquired by the purchaser of the interment space until all amounts owing the City have been paid in full. Grave spaces reserved for future use may be purchased by payment within six months. (Ord. 43-1988; prior code § 2.52.040)

 

2.60.050 Report of Parks Superintendent—Fees.
    All charges for use of City park facilities or equipment, and all charges relating to burial and administration of the City cemeteries, shall be paid to the Director of Finance. The Parks Superintendent shall make a written report annually to the City Council of all graves dug and burials attended, of all charges and fees received for use of the City cemeteries, and of all moneys received as service charges or rental fees for use of the City park facilities or equipment. The Parks Superintendent shall file all certificates and permits relating to the Parks Department with the City Clerk. (Ord. 43-1988; prior code § 2.52.030)

 

2.60.060 Reconveyance or transfer of ownership of burial space(s).
    No person, institution, association or corporation being the owner of a burial space(s) in any cemetery owned by the City shall sell or convey the same to any other person, institution, association or corporation except: (1) after the lawful owner of the cemetery space(s) surrenders all original deeds to the City Clerk; or (2) to the City for a purchase price set by the Council and paid to the City for the same; or (3) after making application for transfer of burial space(s) at the City Clerk’s office and paying the transfer of ownership fee. Ownership is not transferable without approval of the City Clerk, payment of all appropriate fees and the reissuance of a new certificate of ownership or deed to the new owner, or (4) transfer of ownership may be effected by will or intestacy as provided for in Colorado Revised Statutes. Any transfer of ownership by will or applicable laws of intestacy shall be reported to the City Clerk with proof thereof and appropriate transfer fee paid. All changes in address of owners of grave spaces should be reported to the City Clerk. (Ord. 6-1990; Ord. 43-1988; prior code § 2.52.060)

 

2.60.070 Abandoned burial spaces.
    A.  Reversion. The ownership or right in or to any unoccupied cemetery burial space shall upon abandonment revert to the City of Cañon City.

    B.   Presumption. Failure to inter in any burial spaces after one hundred years from purchase, transfer or interment in adjacent spaces commonly owned, whichever is the later in time, shall create and establish a presumption that the same has been abandoned; except that this presumption shall not apply when a letter of intent is filed by the owner or heir in title with the City Clerk stating that he/she intends to keep specified spaces vacant.

    C.   Notice Required. Abandonment shall not be deemed complete unless the registered owners or their heirs or assigns shall be notified in writing, by certified mail, mailed to the last known or registered address, by the City Clerk. In the event that the address of the owner or his heirs cannot be ascertained, then notice of such abandonment shall be published two times in the City’s official newspaper at least once a week.

    D.  Failure to Reply. If the registered owner or his heirs or assigns fail to inform the City Clerk within sixty days after receipt of notice of abandonment or sixty days after final publication of such notice of intention to retain the burial spaces remaining, then abandonment shall become final and the City may thereafter sell, transfer and convey title thereto. Funds derived from any sale of abandoned space shall be deposited in their entirety into the perpetual care fund. (Ord. 6-1990)

Chapter 2.62 PROTECTION OF PALEONTOLOGICAL RESOURCES
2.62.010 Definitions.
    A.  For the purposes of this chapter:

    1.   “Collection” means a specimen and the associated records documenting the specimen and its recovery.

    2.   “Critical paleontological resources” mean vertebrate fossils and other exceptional fossils that are designated as paleontological landmarks.

    3.   “Curation” means:

    a.   Management and care of collections according to standard professional museum practice, which may include inventorying, accessing, labeling, cataloging, identifying, evaluating, documenting, storing, maintaining, periodically inspecting, cleaning, stabilizing, conserving, exhibiting, exchanging, or otherwise disposing of original collections or reproductions; and

    b.   Providing access to and facilities for studying collections.

    4.   “Curation facility” means the Museum or an accredited facility meeting federal curation standards that is designated by the Museum through a memorandum of agreement.

    5.   “Excavate” means the recovery of critical paleontological resources.

    6.   “Museum” means the Dinosaur Depot Museum and/or any other curation facility operated by the Garden Park Paleontology Society.

    7.   “Paleontological resources” mean remains of prehistoric life.

    8.   “Permit” means a permit for paleontological investigations, excavations and/or collections of critical paleontological resources on City-owned lands required and issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter 2.62.

    9.   “Repository” means an accredited facility meeting federal curation standards.

    10. “Site” means any paleontological deposit or other location that is the source of a specimen.

    11. “Specimen” means remains of a critical paleontological nature found on or below the surface of the earth. (Ord. 22-2011 § 1)

 

2.62.020 Permit required to excavate critical paleontological resources on lands owned or managed by the City of Cañon City—Removal of specimen or site.
    A.  Before excavating for critical paleontological resources on lands owned by the City of Cañon City, a person must obtain a permit from the City or its designee.

    B.   Application for a permit shall be made on a form approved by resolution of City Council and furnished by the City or its designee.

    C.   The City Council may, by resolution, make rules for the issuance of permits specifying or requiring:

    1.   The minimum permittee qualifications;

    2.   The duration of the permit;

    3.   Research designs that provide for the maximum recovery of scientific, paleontological, and educational information, in addition to the physical recovery of specimens and the reporting of paleontological information meeting current standards of scientific rigor;

    4.   The need, if any, to submit data obtained in the course of field investigation to the City or its designee;

    5.   Proof of consultation with a designated Museum representative regarding curation of collections; and

    6.   Other information the City or its designee considers necessary.

    D.  All paleontological work requiring a permit shall be carried out under the supervision of the permittee.

    E.   No person shall remove from City-owned property any specimen, site, or portion of a specimen or site without permission from the City.

    F.   Unless otherwise agreed in writing by the City, no specimen, site or portion of a specimen or site shall be removed to any place other than the Museum or a repository or curation facility designated or approved by the City. (Ord. 22-2011 § 1)

 

2.62.030 Policies concerning curation and the selection of curation facilities.
    A.  From time to time City Council shall adopt, by resolution, policies to ensure the adequate curation of all collections from lands owned by the City of Cañon City. It is anticipated that most such policies will be recommended by the Garden Park Paleontology Society. Such policies shall:

    1.   Conform to, but not limited by, federal curation policy; and

    2.   Recognize that if, at its discretion, the curation facility makes and sells reproductions derived from collections found on lands owned by the City of Cañon City, any revenues after recovering the cost of preparation for sale and a reasonable fee for handling the sale shall be remitted to the City of Cañon City.

    B.   Subject to the approval of City Council, by resolution, the Museum may enter into memoranda of agreement with other repositories to act as its designee for the curation of collections and may, at its discretion, delegate some or all of its authority to curate.

    C.   From time to time, City Council shall adopt, by resolution, policies and procedures for the selection of curation facilities authorized to curate critical paleontological resources discovered on land owned by the City. It is anticipated that most such policies will be recommended by the Garden Park Paleontology Society. Such policies shall consider:

    1.   Whether the permittee is a curation facility;

    2.   The proximity of the curation facility or repository to the point of origin of the collection;

    3.   The nature of the collection and the repository’s or curation facility’s ability and desire to curate the collection in question, and ability to maximize the scientific and educational benefits for the people of the city; and

    4.   Selection of a second curation facility or repository, if the original curation facility or repository becomes unable to curate the collections under its care. (Ord. 22-2011 § 1)

 

2.62.040 Curation and deposit of specimen.
    All collections recovered from lands owned by the City of Cañon City shall be deposited at the Museum, or at a curation facility or repository approved by the City within a reasonable time after completion of field work. (Ord. 22-2011 § 1)

 

2.62.050 Loaning of specimen.
    A.  The Museum and/or a repository or curation facility that has accepted a collection removed from City-owned property pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may make specimens available through loans to museums and research institutions when, in the opinion of the repository or curation facility:

    1.   The use of the specimens is appropriate; and

    2.   Arrangements are made for safe custodianship of the specimens. (Ord. 22-2011 § 1)

 

2.62.060 Paleontological landmarks.
    A.  Sites of significance or sites with exceptional fossils may be recommended to and approved by the City of Cañon City, by resolution, as paleontological landmarks.

    B.   No person without a valid permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall conduct paleontological investigations and/or excavations on any site designated as a paleontological landmark.

    C.   Privately-owned sites within the city also may be designated as paleontological landmarks pursuant to written agreement between the landowner and the City. All such agreements shall provide that the site described in the agreement shall be treated as land owned by the City for purposes of the applicability and enforcement of this chapter.

    D.  No person may conduct paleontological investigations and/or excavations on a privately-owned designated landmark without a valid permit from the City and written permission from the owner of the land so designated. (Ord. 22-2011 § 1)

 

2.62.070 Fossil collection sites.
    A.  The City may identify and designate fossil collection sites on lands owned by the City of Cañon City where it is appropriate to encourage the collection of fossils by individuals, families or school groups for educational purposes. No permit shall be required with respect to paleontological investigations at such sites. Fossils other than specimens may be removed from such fossil collection sites and be kept by the individuals, groups or institutions that removed them.

    B.   Designated fossil collection sites shall not include critical paleontological resources or paleontological landmarks.

    C.   Designated fossil collection sites shall be interpreted with appropriate signage. (Ord. 22-2011 § 1)

 

2.62.080 Unlawful acts and penalties for violations.
    A.  It is unlawful for any person to excavate critical paleontological resources on lands owned by the City of Cañon City without first having obtained a valid permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

    B.   It is unlawful for any person to remove critical paleontological resources from land owned by the City of Cañon City without first having obtained a valid permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

    C.   It is unlawful for any person holding a valid permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to excavate for, remove, deposit or dispose of critical paleontological resources on or from lands owned by the City of Cañon City in a manner prohibited by the other provisions of this chapter or in violation of any requirement or limitation set forth in the permit issued to such person.

    D.  It is unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of Subsections 2.62.020(A), (D), (E) or (F).

    E.   It is unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of Section 2.62.040.

    F.   Excavations on lands owned by the City that have been designated paleontological landmarks pursuant to Section 2.62.060 shall be presumed to be excavations for critical paleontological resources and any specimens removed from such paleontological landmarks shall be presumed to be critical paleontological resources.

    G.  Any person who violates any provision of this Section 2.62.080, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in an amount that does not exceed the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010.

    H.  In addition to any fine or jail sentence imposed, the Municipal Court may order any person convicted of removing critical paleontological resources from lands owned by the City to deliver such resources to the Museum or some other repository or curation facility designated by the City. The failure of any convicted defendant to abide by any such order within the time provided by the Municipal Court shall be a violation of this chapter for which such person may be charged and, if convicted, punished as provided in Subsection G of this section. (Ord. 17-2013 § 4; Ord. 22-2011 § 1)

Chapter 2.64 LIBRARY/MUSEUM ADVISORY BOARD
2.64.005 Establishment and operation.
    A.  The Cañon City Public Library is the official Library of the City of Cañon City. It was established and is operated and maintained pursuant to Article XI of the Charter of Cañon City. All references to the “Library” in this Chapter 2.64 are to the Cañon City Public Library.

    B.   The Royal Gorge Regional Museum and History Center is the official museum of the City of Cañon City. It also was established and is operated and maintained pursuant to Article XI of the Charter of Cañon City. All references to the “Museum” in this Chapter 2.64 are to the Royal Gorge Regional Museum and History Center.

    C.   While it is and will remain the intention of Council for the City to continue having both a Library and a Museum, Council has also determined that it would be prudent and proper for the Library and the Museum to share certain City-owned structures and facilities and for the day-to-day operations and administrative functions of the Library and the Museum to be handled by a single administrative department of the City, and for City officials to receive advice from a single citizen’s advisory board. The Library/Museum Advisory Board created under Section 2.64.010 shall be such single, unified advisory board. Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, all references to “Board” in this Chapter 2.64 are to such Library/Museum Advisory Board. (Ord. 16-2004 § 1)

 

2.64.010 Library/Museum Advisory Board created.
    The Library/Museum Advisory Board shall be comprised of seven (7) members appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter 2.64. Such Board shall be nonpolitical, shall advise the City and its officials on matters concerning the Library and the Museum, and shall have such powers, duties, responsibilities and functions as are set forth in this Chapter 2.64. The Board’s primary focus shall be on matters of policy and planning for the Library and Museum. (Ord. 4-2015 § 1; Ord. 3-2013 § 1; Ord. 28-2008 § 1)

 

2.64.020 Appointment of members and their terms.
    A.  The City Council shall appoint all members to the Board.

 

    B.   Terms of Board members generally shall be three (3) years, but Council shall appoint some new members to shorter initial terms to achieve the staggered term structure required under Subsection C of this section.

    C.   The terms of Board members shall be staggered so that the terms of no more than four (4) members will expire in any single calendar year.

    D.  All Board members shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 28-2008 § 2)

 

2.64.025 Qualifications.
    Applicants for positions on the Board shall be persons over the age of eighteen (18) years who reside within or near the boundaries of the City and have a sincere interest in both Library and Museum operations and policies. (Ord. 16-2004 § 1)

 

2.64.027 Applications.
    The existing members of the Board shall receive and review all applications from qualified persons seeking appointment to the Board to fill new positions and vacancies existing on and after January 1, 2009 when membership on the Board is increased as provided for in Section 2.64.010. Such members shall thereafter interview all qualified applicants and make written recommendations to City Council for the appointment of members in numbers sufficient to fill all then existing vacancies. Thereafter, from time to time, as new vacancies occur on the Board, the Board will receive and review applications, interview applicants and make its written recommendations to the City Council. The Board is hereby authorized to adopt a formal process (that is not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter) for interviewing, evaluating and making recommendations with respect to the filling of new positions and other vacancies on the Board. (Ord. 28-2008 § 3)

 

2.64.030 Removal.
    City Council, at its sole discretion, shall have the authority to remove any Board member, with or without cause, prior to the expiration of his or her term. (Ord. 16-2004 § 1)

 

2.64.035 Filling vacancies.
    A.  City Council shall fill all vacancies on the initial Board and any vacancy thereafter occurring in the membership of the Board by appointment of persons who are qualified as provided in Section 2.64.025 and who have participated in the interview and evaluation process provided for in Section 2.64.027. City Council shall give great weight to the Board’s recommendations.

    B.   With respect to the filling of vacancies on the Board, Council’s priority for appointment should be qualified applicants who now serve or previously served as officers of local organizations and associations supporting the Library and/or the Museum.

    C.   Whenever a successor is appointed to fill a vacancy created by the resignation or removal of a member prior to the expiration of that member’s term, such successor shall serve out the balance of the unexpired term of the member he or she replaces. (Ord. 5-2020 § 1; Ord. 16-2004 § 1)

 

2.64.040 Meeting—Officers.
    The Board shall hold regular meetings as established by the Board, but not less than one meeting per quarter and may hold special meetings as it may from time to time determine to be necessary; provided that all such meetings shall comply with the open meeting requirements set forth in C.R.S. Section 24-6-401 et seq. On an annual basis, the Board shall elect from its membership a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and a Secretary. The Chairperson shall preside over all meetings of the Board and function as the primary liaison between the Board and the City Administrator or designee. The Vice Chairperson shall act during the absence of the Chairperson. The Secretary shall keep accurate minutes of Board meetings and other Board proceedings, provide adequate notice of regular and special meetings to all Board members and the City Administrator, or designee, and perform such other and similar functions as are assigned by the Chairperson. (Ord. 5-2020 § 2; Ord. 16-2004 § 1)

 

2.64.045 Quorum needed to act.
    A majority of the members then in office shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business at any meeting of the Board. No action taken or attempted in the absence of a quorum shall be valid, except that a meeting may be called to order to determine whether a quorum is present and be adjourned if a quorum is not present. (Ord. 3-2013 § 2; Ord. 28-2008 § 4)

 

2.64.050 Powers and duties.
    The Board shall have the following powers:

    A.  The Board shall advise the City Administrator and the City Council on matters associated with the operation of both the Library and Museum, with the primary focus of its recommendations being on the formulation, implementation, evaluation and, when appropriate, modification of policy and practices of both operations.

    B.   The Board shall receive and review complaints and comments concerning the operation, management and use of the Library and Museum and shall promptly forward such complaints, comments and its summaries, reports and recommendations, if any, to the City Administrator for consideration.

    C.   The Board shall establish in writing, subject to approval by City Council, a formal procedure by which complaints, objections and comments from citizens—concerning the type, content and display of materials, collections and exhibits available to the public—are received and reviewed, with an emphasis on better serving the public and enhancing the services of the Library and the Museum.

    D.  The Board shall make a written annual report to the City Council not later than July 31st of each year, in which the Board shall:

    1.   Assess the strengths and weaknesses of the Library and Museum’s service to the community;

    2.   Make recommendations on short and long-term goals that it believes will improve service;

    3.   Make prioritized recommendations on capital improvements it believes are needed to improve the Library and Museum; and

    4.   Recommend such other policies, programs, procedures and/or guidelines which the Board believes will enhance the operation of the Library and Museum, if adopted.

    E.   The Board shall assist the City Administrator and/or the City Council with respect to Library and Museum-related issues on a case-by-case basis, but only when requested to do so by the City Administrator and/or City Council;

    F.   The Board shall make recommendations concerning any proposed budget for the Library and Museum.

    G.  The Board shall assist, if requested by the City Administrator, in the selection process for screening of applicants for various professional positions within the Library and Museum staff.

    H.  The Board will coordinate with the leadership of other citizen groups and associations whose members are interested in and supportive of the functions and operations of the Library, the Museum, or both, with a view toward encouraging and enlarging their interest and support and, when appropriate, raising funds for the Library and Museum. (Ord. 16-2004 § 1)

 

2.64.055 Limitations of powers.
    A.  All budgetary powers, expenditures, and revenues of and with respect to the Library and Museum shall be exclusively controlled by the City Council and its designees.

    B.   All personnel matters, including but not limited to hiring, promotion, demotion, discipline and termination shall be exclusively controlled by the City Administrator in accordance with the provisions of applicable law and City policy.

    C.   Except as may be specifically provided otherwise in this chapter, all actions of the Board will be advisory in nature. The Board may exercise advisory functions by making recommendations to the City Administrator, who shall forward such recommendations to City Council when and if Council action is necessary or desirable with respect to any matter covered by the Board’s recommendations. Nothing in this chapter shall authorize the Board or any of its members to exercise any supervisory or other direct control over any employee of the Library or Museum, or to exercise any direct control over the expenditure of funds of the Library or Museum. (Ord. 16-2004 § 1)

 

2.64.060 Legal advisor, personnel manager and funds custodian.
    A.  The City Attorney shall be the legal advisor of the Board and shall render all legal services required by the Board; provided that the performance of such legal services must first be authorized by the City Council or by the City Administrator.

    B.   The City Administrator, or designee, shall act as an ex-officio member of the Board. The City Administrator, or designee, shall receive notice of and shall attend all regularly scheduled and special Board meetings, and shall make him or herself reasonably available to the Board and its Chairperson for purposes of consultation and advisement concerning the implementation of any policy of the City of Cañon City. The City Administrator, or designee, shall not have a vote on any matter being considered by the Board.

    C.   The Director of Finance shall act as the legal custodian for any funds generated through operation of the Library and Museum. The accounts of the Library and Museum shall annually be audited by a certified public accountant selected or approved by the City Council and may be audited as a part of the City’s annual audit. (Ord. 16-2004 § 1)

 

2.64.065 Personnel.
    All personnel of the Library and Museum shall be subject to the terms and provisions of the Personnel Policy adopted and/or amended from time to time by the City Council. The City Administrator, or designee, shall have sole and exclusive authority over all said employees. (Ord. 16-2004 § 1)

 

2.64.070 Operating manager.
    The City Administrator, or designee, shall be the operating manager of the Library and Museum and all related facilities, with the powers, duties and responsibilities given him or her by the Charter, ordinances, regulations and rules of the City of Cañon City. (Ord. 16-2004 § 1)

Chapter 2.68 ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS
2.68.010 City Administrator to establish other departments—Council approval.
    There shall be such other administrative departments as the City Administrator shall from time to time establish, subject to approval of the Council by resolution. The City Administrator, and Council in its resolution approving the establishment of the department, shall set forth the powers and duties of each of the departments so established. (Ord. 3-1990 § 18)

 

2.68.020 Appointment of department heads—Authority of department heads.
    The head of each administrative department of the City established as provided in this chapter shall be appointed and removable by the City Administrator. Each such department head shall have supervision and control of the department he heads. (Ord. 3-1990 § 18)

Chapter 2.73 PROHIBITED GIFTS TO CITY OFFICIALS
2.73.010 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the following meanings, except where the context clearly indicates otherwise:

    A.  “Appointed officer” shall mean the City Administrator, the City Attorney or the Municipal Judge, without regard to whether such officer is or is not considered for federal income tax purposes to be an independent contractor.

    B.   “Board and Commission member” shall mean any person duly appointed by the Mayor or City Council to any Board or Commission of the City, as authorized in the City Charter or this Municipal Code.

    C.   “City official” shall mean a member of City Council, an appointed officer, an employee, a designated independent contractor or a Board and Commission member.

    D.  “Designated independent contractor” means and shall include any person who: (1) provides services on behalf of the City as an official who has discretionary authority with respect to the interpretation and/or enforcement of any code, regulation or published standard applicable in the City; (2) is compensated pursuant to contract by the City for performing such services; and (3) is considered for federal income tax purposes to be an independent contractor.

    E.   “Employee” shall mean each compensated person in the service of the City who is designated as an employee in accordance with the City’s personnel rules and regulations.

    F.   “Gift” shall mean the transfer of a thing of value by one person to another person without the person transferring the thing of value receiving in return lawful compensation or consideration of equal or greater value from the person receiving the thing of value. However, a “gift” shall not mean any thing of value given to a person by the federal government or by a state or local government as authorized by law.

    G.  “Official act” or “official action” means any vote, decision, recommendation, approval, disapproval, or other action, including inaction, which involves the use of discretionary authority.

    H.  “Person” shall mean any individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, limited liability company, partnership, labor organization, association, political party, committee or other legal entity. Person shall not include the federal government, a state or local government, or the Colorado Municipal League.

    I.    “Thing of value” shall mean any tangible or intangible thing having a market value, including, without limitation, money, real property, personal property, services, loans of money or property, favors, gratuities, rewards, awards, grants, scholarships, stipends, discounts, promises of future employment, honoraria, event tickets, travel, lodging, meals, and the forbearance and forgiveness of debt. (Ord. 5-2007 § 1)

 

2.73.020 Prohibited gifts.
    A.  A City official shall not solicit or accept any gift or thing of value from any person, either directly or indirectly through the City official’s spouse or dependent child, which the City official knows, or which a reasonable person in the City official’s position should know under the circumstances, is either:

    1.   A gift or thing of value that would tend to improperly influence that City official to depart from the faithful and impartial discharge of his or her public duties; or

    2.   Is a gift or thing of value being solicited or given for the primary purpose of rewarding the City official for an official action he or she has taken.

    B.   A City official shall not solicit or accept any gift or other thing of value from a “professional lobbyist” as that term is defined in Subsection 2(5) of Article XXIX of the Colorado Constitution. This provision is not intended and shall not be construed to prohibit City officials from attending and/or participating in seminars, workshops, conferences, business meetings and similar sessions and events hosted, sponsored or arranged by the Colorado Municipal League or to partake of food, beverages and/or entertainment offered or provided at such functions. (Ord. 5-2007 § 1)

 

2.73.030 Permitted gifts.
    A.  The prohibitions of Section 2.73.020 shall not apply if the gift or thing of value is:

    1.   A campaign contribution as defined by law;

    2.   A non-monetary award, publicly presented, in recognition of public service;

    3.   An educational scholarship, stipend, grant or other form of student financial aid that is offered and available to members of the general public similarly situated and is given based upon: (i) merit; (ii) demonstrated financial need; (iii) athletic ability; or (iv) any other factor unrelated to the anticipated or past performance of an official act by a City official;

    4.   A donation, loan, grant or service provided for medical, respite or hospice care or other social welfare needs; provided that such donation, loan, grant or service is available to members of the general public similarly situated and is unrelated to the anticipated or past performance of an official act by a City official;

    5.   A donation, loan, grant, service or item of tangible personal property offered or given to assist a person or family impacted by a natural disaster or as the victim of a crime; provided that such donation, loan, grant, service or item of tangible personal property is available to similarly situated members of the general public and is unrelated to the anticipated or past performance of an official act by a City official;

    6.   An occasional, unsolicited gift having a fair market value of less than fifty dollars ($50.00);

    7.   Unsolicited informational material, publications, or subscriptions related to the City official’s performance of his or her official duties;

    8.   An unsolicited token or award of appreciation in the form of a plaque, trophy, desk item, wall memento or similar item;

    9.   Payment of or reimbursement for actual and necessary expenditures for registration, travel, lodging and meals for attendance at a convention, training seminar, or other meeting at which the City official is scheduled to participate as a representative of the City or to attend as part of his or her official duties;

    10. An occasional, unsolicited opportunity to participate in a business meeting or social function where a meal is served and/or entertainment is provided if the City official’s attendance would not be considered extraordinary when viewed in light of the position held by the City official;

    11. A payment received by a City official for a speech, appearance or publication required to be reported by the City official pursuant to C.R.S. Section 24-6-203;

    12. Compensation received by a City official from the City as authorized in the City’s Charter, ordinances, policies and/or personnel rules and regulations;

    13. An unsolicited gift given by a relative or a personal friend to a City official on a special occasion that is unrelated to his or her performance of duties for or on behalf of the City and is not intended to influence the City official in the performance of official acts or to reward such City official for official action previously taken; and

    14. A gift solicited or received by the spouse or by a dependent child of a City official that is unrelated to the City official’s performance of his or her official duties for the City and which is not intended to influence the City official’s performance of official acts or to reward the City official for official action previously taken. (Ord. 5-2007 § 1)

 

2.73.040 Violations.
    A.  It shall be unlawful for any City official to violate Section 2.73.020. Proof of a violation shall be established by the evidence admitted at trial before the Cañon City Municipal Court. The standard of proof in any such trial shall be “proof by a preponderance of the evidence.”

    B.   The Cañon City Municipal Court is hereby authorized to conduct trials with respect to alleged violations of Section 2.73.020 by City officials and to impose the civil penalties provided for in Subsection C of this section.

    C.   Any City official determined by the Municipal Court to have violated Section 2.73.020 shall be deemed to have committed a civil infraction. The penalty for a City official who is found to have violated said Section 2.73.020 shall be a civil judgment in an amount equal to twice the fair market value of the prohibited gift solicited or received by the City official, as determined by the evidence admitted by the Municipal Court. If the City official fails to pay such judgment within thirty (30) days following the entry of the final judgment, or such longer period as may be authorized by order of the Municipal Court, the City may pursue any legal means available to it for the collection of the judgment.

    D.  Nothing in this chapter is intended to preclude the bringing and prosecution of criminal proceedings in a state court of competent jurisdiction against a City official who is accused of committing any crime described in Part 3 of Article 8 of Title 18, Colorado Revised Statutes. A civil judgment entered by the Municipal Court in a proceeding brought pursuant to this chapter shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any criminal penalty that might be imposed upon conviction in any such criminal proceeding. (Ord. 5-2007 § 1)

 

2.73.050 Municipal Ethics Commission.
    A.  There is hereby created a Municipal Ethics Commission to be composed of three (3) members. The purposes of the Municipal Ethics Commission shall be: to receive and review complaints; to investigate alleged violations of Section 2.73.020; to dismiss frivolous or unfounded complaints; to propose and effectuate settlements with respect to complaints that appear to be valid in appropriate cases; and to recommend the instigation of Municipal Court proceedings in appropriate circumstances. The Municipal Ethics Commission also may issue advisory opinions on ethics issues and questions arising under this chapter and may establish a local repository for disclosure statements voluntarily filed by City officials respecting permitted gifts received by them, their spouses and/or their dependent children.

    B.   The Municipal Ethics Commission shall have authority to adopt reasonable rules that are not inconsistent with the provisions of this section which may be necessary for purposes of administering and enforcing the provisions of this section.

    C.   City Council shall do those things necessary to provide staff assistance and the funding necessary to allow the Municipal Ethics Commission to carry out its duties pursuant to this section. Members of the Commission shall receive no compensation for their services on the Commission, but may have their reasonable expenses paid or reimbursed by the City.

    D.  Membership on the Municipal Ethics Commission shall be established as follows:

    1.   The City Council shall appoint two (2) members of the Commission at a regular or special meeting of City Council;

    2.   Each of the two (2) appointed members shall be a resident of the City and neither shall be a City official;

    3.   Public notice of the availability of positions on the Municipal Ethics Commission shall be given prior to City Council’s selection and appointment of Commission members from among the several applicants;

    4.   The City Attorney shall be the third member of the Commission.

    E.   The terms of the two (2) appointed members of the Commission shall be two (2) years, except that one such member initially shall be appointed to a one-year term to achieve staggered terms.

    F.   If a member is appointed to fill an unexpired term, that member’s term shall end at the same time as the term of the person being replaced was set to expire.

    G.  Each member shall continue to serve until a successor has been appointed, except that if a member is unable or unwilling to continue to serve until a successor has been appointed, City Council shall fill the vacancy promptly.

    H.  Any resident of the City may file a written complaint with the Municipal Ethics Commission alleging that a City official has violated Section 2.73.020 and stating the factual basis for such claim. No allegation in any such complaint shall refer to an act occurring prior to the effective date of the ordinance adopting this chapter and, after this chapter has been effective for longer than twelve (12) months, no allegation with respect to a violation occurring more remotely than twelve (12) months prior to the filing date of the complaint shall be considered.

    I.    The Commission shall adhere to the procedure set forth in paragraphs 1 through 5 of this Subsection I when dealing with any complaint filed pursuant to Subsection H.

    1.   The Commission may dismiss frivolous and unfounded complaints without conducting or completing an investigation. Complaints dismissed as frivolous or unfounded shall be maintained confidentially by the Commission.

    2.   Except as provided in paragraph 1 of this Subsection I, the Commission shall conduct an investigation with respect to all complaints.

    3.   Following any investigation, the Commission shall dismiss the complaint or refer the complaint to the City’s Municipal Court Prosecutor with its recommendation that proceedings against the City official named in the complaint be initiated, as provided for in Section 2.73.040.

    4.   If the Commission’s decision is to refer the complaint, the Commission, prior to such referral, shall have the right, but not the obligation, to propose to the City official named in the complaint a settlement pursuant to Subsection J of this section under which a resolution penalty would be paid in lieu of the matter proceeding to Municipal Court.

    5.   All decisions of the Commission that are required or permitted in this subsection shall require a majority vote of the Commission.

    J.    Settlement Offers.

    1.   The Commission may propose settlements with respect to alleged violations of Section 2.73.020 to the City official named in a complaint. Such proposals shall be made in writing and shall designate the amount of a proposed resolution penalty. Settlement proposals shall be accepted or rejected in writing by the City official within twenty (20) days following the date of the offer. A failure to respond shall be deemed a rejection.

    2.   The proposed resolution penalty shall represent the amount that the Commission believes, based upon its investigation, is equal to twice the value of a gift or thing of value improperly solicited or accepted by the City official (or, when applicable, the City official’s spouse or dependent child).

    3.   If a resolution penalty is proposed, accepted and paid, the name of the City official, the essential details of the alleged violation and the amount of the resolution penalty paid by the City official shall be included in a summary report prepared by the Commission and filed with the City Clerk. Such summary report shall be a public record.

    4.   If a proposed settlement is not accepted or if an agreed-upon resolution penalty is not paid with thirty (30) days following the acceptance of a settlement offer, the matter will be referred to the City’s Municipal Court Prosecutor, who shall make the ultimate decision regarding whether Municipal Court proceedings will be instigated.

    5.   The Municipal Prosecutor shall do what is necessary to instigate and prosecute such proceedings unless he or she believes in good faith that sufficient evidence to support a civil judgment authorized in Section 2.73.040(C) could not be presented in a Municipal Court proceeding. If the matter is referred, the fact that a settlement proposal was made shall be kept confidential and shall not be offered or admitted as evidence at trial.

    6.   Resolution penalties paid by City officials shall be deposited into the City’s General Fund.

 

    K.  During the course of its investigations, the Municipal Ethics Commission shall have the power to request copies of documents that are relevant to the allegations in a complaint and to interview witnesses, including but not necessarily limited to the person who filed the complaint and the accused City official.

    L.   If a City official who is accused in a complaint of violating Section 2.73.020 is a member of the Municipal Ethics Commission, that member shall be disqualified and replaced by a temporary member appointed by the Mayor for purposes of investigating, considering and disposing of the complaint.

    M.  Any City official may submit a written request to the Municipal Ethics Commission for an advisory opinion on whether any conduct by that person would constitute a violation of Section 2.73.020. The Commission may render an advisory opinion pursuant to written rules adopted by the Commission, but in any event shall respond to such request within fifteen (15) days of its receipt. Any City official who acts in specific reliance upon an advisory opinion shall have the right to offer a copy of the opinion as a part of his or her defense in any trial of such City official conducted pursuant to the authority granted in Section 2.73.040(B). Unless otherwise provided in the Commission’s rules, requests for advisory opinions shall be filed with the City Attorney. (Ord. 5-2007 § 1)

Chapter 2.78 ROYAL GORGE REGIONAL TOURISM COUNCIL
2.78.010 Created—Purpose.
    A.  The City Council hereby creates the Royal Gorge Regional Tourism Council, which shall have principal responsibility for matters of marketing the City and the Royal Gorge region.

    B.   The purpose of this chapter is to create and empower the Royal Gorge Regional Tourism Council to promote, market, manage and coordinate tourist-related activities. (Ord. 18-2017 § 1)

 

2.78.020 Membership—Terms of office.
    A.  The Royal Gorge Regional Tourism Council shall consist of eleven (11) members appointed by the City Council. Except for the initial appointments as set forth in this Section 2.78.020, members shall serve three (3) year staggered terms from the date of appointment. Members may continue to serve until their successors have been appointed. Appointments to fill the vacancies on the Royal Gorge Regional Tourism Council shall be made by the City Council. All members of the Royal Gorge Regional Tourism Council shall serve without compensation except for such amounts determined appropriate, in advance, by the City Council to offset expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. Members of the Royal Gorge Regional Tourism Council may be removed by the City Council without cause being stated and without a hearing.

    B.   The eleven (11) members of the Royal Gorge Regional Tourism Council shall be constituted as follows:

    1.   Three (3) members shall be representatives determined by the City Council to be current lodging industry leaders with significant marketing, tourism, lodging, and/or promotional experience;

    2.   One (1) member shall be a senior management representative of the Royal Gorge Bridge Company;

    3.   One (1) member shall be a senior management representative of the Royal Gorge Route Railroad;

    4.   Two (2) members shall be senior management representatives of the outdoor recreation industry; and

    5.   Four (4) members shall be current or past tourist industry leaders with significant marketing, tourism, lodging, and/or promotional experience.

    C.   Initial Appointments. The initial appointments to the Royal Gorge Regional Tourism Council were made as follows: three (3) members were appointed to three (3) year terms; three (3) members were appointed to two (2) year terms; and three (3) members were appointed to one (1) year terms.

    D.  Additional Appointments. The appointments of the two (2) additional members appointed in 2018 upon expansion of the membership from nine (9) members to eleven (11) members shall be one (1) member from the tourist industry appointed to a three (3) year term and one (1) member from the outdoor recreation industry be appointed to a two (2) year term. (Ord. 16-2018 § 1; Ord. 18-2017 § 1)

 

2.78.030 Quorum and voting.
    A quorum for the Royal Gorge Regional Tourism Council shall consist of at least six (6) of its sitting members. A quorum is necessary for the Royal Gorge Regional Tourism Council to conduct business. (Ord. 16-2018 § 2; Ord. 18-2017 § 1)

 

2.78.040 Officers.
    At the first regular meeting of each calendar year, the Royal Gorge Regional Tourism Council shall, by majority vote, elect one (1) of its members to serve as chairperson to preside over the meetings and one (1) member to serve as vice chairperson. The members so designated shall serve in these capacities for terms of one (1) year. (Ord. 18-2017 § 1)

 

2.78.050 Meetings.
    The Royal Gorge Regional Tourism Council shall establish a regular meeting schedule. Minutes shall be kept of all proceedings. (Ord. 18-2017 § 1)

 

2.78.060 Powers and duties.
    The Royal Gorge Regional Tourism Council shall have the following powers and duties:

    A.  To enter into contracts and agreements, except as otherwise provided in this article, affecting the affairs of the City regarding the powers enumerated in this chapter, including contracts with the United States, the State of Colorado, and any of their respective agencies or instrumentalities;

    B.   To adopt such bylaws, rules and regulations for its own guidance as it deems appropriate;

    C.   Submit annually a budget to the City Council no later than September 15 of the preceding year of the proposed budget to be included within the City’s budget. The submitted budget shall reflect annual lodging tax revenues and the City’s obligation to match the annual lodging tax revenues from the General Fund;

    D.  Operate and expend the revenue generated by the City’s lodging tax and those General Fund revenues provide by the City for the purposes set forth in this Section 2.78.060, except that no revenue collected from the lodging tax or the General Fund revenues provided by the City shall be used for any capital expenditures, with the exception of tourist information centers;

    E.   To provide any of the following services within the City and Royal Gorge region:

    1.   Organization, promotion, marketing, and management of public events,

    2.   Coordinating tourism promotion activities;

    F.   To have the management, control and supervision of all the business and affairs of the City’s provision of promotion, marketing, managing and coordinating tourist-related activities; and

    G.  To hire employees or retain agents, engineers, consultants, attorneys, and accountants as determined necessary. (Ord. 18-2017 § 1)

 

2.78.070 Conduct of business.
    The Royal Gorge Regional Tourism Council shall conduct its business in accordance with the Colorado Public (Open) Records Act, C.R.S. § 24-72-200.1, et seq., the Colorado Open Meetings Law, C.R.S. § 24-6-401, et seq., and other laws applicable to local public bodies. (Ord. 18-2017 § 1)

Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapter 3.04 SALE OF CITY PROPERTY
Chapter 3.08 TAX COLLECTION
Chapter 3.12 SALES TAX
Chapter 3.13 USE TAX
Chapter 3.20 CAPITAL ACQUISITION AND IMPROVEMENT FUND
Chapter 3.24 EQUIPMENT ACQUISITION AND IMPROVEMENT FUND
Chapter 3.26 MUSEUM FUND
Chapter 3.28 RAW WATER ACQUISITION AND PRESERVATION FUND
Chapter 3.30 QUALITY OF LIFE FUND
Chapter 3.32 EMERGENCY TELEPHONE CHARGE
Chapter 3.34 SEIZURE/FORFEITURE FUND
Chapter 3.36 RECOVERY OF FEES AND DAMAGES with respect to dishonored checks
Chapter 3.40 INTEREST CHARGEABLE ON MISCELLANEOUS ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE
Chapter 3.50 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVE PROGRAM
Chapter 3.60 BUDGETING PROCEDURES

Chapter 3.04 SALE OF CITY PROPERTY
3.04.010 Sale of City-owned property—Council authority.
    The Council of the City shall have the power, by ordinance, to sell, dispose of and convey any and all real property owned by the City, of whatsoever nature and used or held for any purpose, upon such terms and conditions as the Council may determine at a regular meeting, and all deeds of conveyance duly executed and acknowledged by the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk, with the seal of the City affixed thereto, purporting to have been made in pursuance of the ordinance codified in this section, shall be deemed prima facie evidence of due compliance with all requirements of this section and the Charter and ordinances of the City. (Prior code § 3.04.010)

Chapter 3.08 TAX COLLECTION
3.08.010 Tax levy and collection—Charter authority.
    Taxes for City purposes shall be levied and collected in the manner prescribed by the City Charter, Article VII, Section 7. (Prior code § 3.08.010)

Chapter 3.12 SALES TAX
3.12.010 Sales tax imposed.
    A.  There is levied a tax upon all sales of tangible personal property and taxable services specified in Section 3.12.030. The rate levied shall be two percent (2%).

    B.   In addition to the sales tax levied in subsection (A) above, there is an additional sales tax of a rate of one percent levied on all sales of tangible person property and taxable services specified in Section 3.12.030 which shall be used exclusively for street-related infrastructure improvements and repairs. This additional sales tax shall terminate on December 31, 2026. (Ord. 19-2020 § 1)

 

3.12.020 Definitions.
    The definitions of the words contained in this chapter shall be as defined in Title 39, Article 26, C.R.S. as may be amended, which definitions are incorporated herein by this reference. The City further adopts all rules and regulations adopted by the Colorado Department of Revenue and such rules and regulations are incorporated herein by this reference. (Ord. 19-2020 § 1)

 

3.12.030 Transactions subject to sales tax and exemptions.
    A.  The transaction subject to the sales tax shall be as set forth below and as required by Colorado state law.

    1.   The tangible personal property and services taxable hereunder shall be the same as the tangible personal property and services taxable pursuant to C.R.S. Section 39-26-104, except as provided herein, and shall be subject to the same exemptions as those specified in Part 7 of Article 26 of Title 39, C.R.S., expressly including the following exemptions:

    a.   For vending machine sales of food specified in C.R.S. Section 39-26-714(2).

    b.   For sales by a charitable organization specified in C.R.S. Section 39-26-718(1)(b).

    c.   For sales of items of personal property through vending machines in the amount of fifteen cents or less as specified in C.R.S. Section 39-26-714.

    d.   For sales of farm equipment and farm equipment under lease or contract as specified in C.R.S. Sections 39-26-716(2)(b) and (2)(c).

    e.   For sales that benefit a Colorado school specified in C.R.S. Section 39-26-725.

    f.    For sales by an association or organization of parents and teachers of public school students that is a charitable organization as specified in C.R.S. Section 39-26-718(1)(c).

    g.   For manufactured homes as specified in C.R.S. Section 39-26-721(3).

    2.   The sales tax shall not be imposed on the sale of construction and building materials, as the term is used in C.R.S. Section 29-2-109, if such materials are picked up by the purchaser and if the purchaser of such materials presents to the retailer a building permit or other acceptable documentation that a local use tax has been paid or is required to be paid on the value thereof.

    3.   The sales tax shall not be imposed on the sale of personal property on which a specific ownership tax has been paid or is payable if: (a) the purchaser is a nonresident of or has its principal place of business outside the City, and (b) such personal property is registered or required to be registered outside the limits of the City under the laws of the State of Colorado.

    4.   The sales tax shall not be imposed on the sale of tangible personal property at retail or the furnishing of services if the transaction has been previously subjected to a sales or use tax lawfully imposed on the purchaser or user by another statutory or home rule county equal to or in excess of the amount imposed by this chapter. A credit shall be granted against the sales tax payable with respect to such transaction equal in amount to the lawfully imposed sales or use tax previously paid by the purchaser or user to such other statutory or home rule county, provided that such credit shall not exceed the amount imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 19-2020 § 1)

 

3.12.040 Determination of place at which sales are consummated.
    All retail sales shall be considered consummated at the place of business of the retailer, unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or its agent to a destination outside the City or to a common carrier for delivery to a destination outside the limits of the City. The gross taxable sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax imposed by Article 26 of Title 39, C.R.S., regardless of the place to which delivery is made. If a retailer has no permanent place of business in the City, or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated for the purpose of this sales tax shall be determined by the provisions of Article 26 of Title 39, C.R.S., and by the rules and regulations promulgated by the Colorado Department of Revenue. The amount subject to the sales tax shall not include the amount of any state sales and use tax imposed by Article 26 of Title 39, C.R.S. (Ord. 19-2020 § 1)

 

3.12.050 Credit for sales taxes previously paid.
    The City’s sales tax shall not apply to the sale of tangible personal property at retail or the furnishing of services if the transaction was previously subjected to a sales or use tax lawfully imposed on the purchaser or user by another statutory or home rule municipality equal to or in excess of the sales tax imposed by the City. A credit shall be granted against the City’s sales tax with respect to such transaction equal in an amount to the lawfully imposed local sales or use tax previously paid by the purchaser or user to the previous statutory or home rule municipality. The amount of the credit shall, however, not exceed the sales tax imposed by the City upon the sale. (Ord. 19-2020 § 1)

 

3.12.060 Collection, administration and enforcement.
    The collection, administration and enforcement of the sales tax shall be performed by the Executive Director of the Colorado Department of Revenue (the “Executive Director”) in the same manner as the collection, administration and enforcement of the Colorado state sales tax. The provisions of Article 26 of Title 39, C.R.S. and all rules and regulations promulgated thereunder by the Executive Director shall govern the collection, administration, and enforcement of the sales tax. (Ord. 19-2020 § 1)

 

3.12.070 Vendor fee.
    A.  A retailer’s collection and remittance expense (vendor’s fee) equal to 3.33 percent of the amount of sales taxes collected and reported may be claimed on each sales tax return timely filed in accordance with the requirements of this Code and retained by such retailer as a credit against sales taxes paid on or before the date upon which such taxes were due, except that the amount of such credit shall not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) per month.

    B.   Any vendor’s fee that otherwise would be available as a credit to any retailer shall be forfeited if the sales tax return upon which such vendor’s fee may be claimed is not filed on or before its due date or if the sales taxes payable to the City with respect to such sales tax return are not paid when due. (Ord. 19-2020 § 1)

Chapter 3.13 USE TAX
3.13.010 Use tax imposed.
    A.  There is levied a tax upon the privilege of using, storing, distributing or consuming in the City any article of tangible personal property or taxable services specified in Section 3.13.030. The rate levied shall be two percent (2%).

    B.   In addition to the use tax levied in subsection A above, there is an additional use tax of a rate of one percent levied upon the privilege of using, storing, distributing or consuming in the City any article of tangible personal property or taxable services specified in Section 3.13.030, which shall be used exclusively for street-related infrastructure improvements and repairs. This additional use tax shall terminate on December 31, 2026.

    C.   Imposition and Collection. The taxes specified in this section are imposed upon and payable by the taxpayer. The taxes shall be computed in accordance with schedules or systems approved and specified by the Finance Director.

    D.  Continuation. The taxes imposed in this section shall continue to be levied and collected until amended or repealed by ordinance.

    E.   Tax Cumulative. The taxes imposed in this section shall be in addition to all other taxes imposed by law. (Ord. 19-2020 § 2)

 

3.13.020 Definitions.
    The definitions of the words contained in this chapter shall be as defined in Title 39, Article 26, C.R.S. as may be amended, which definitions are incorporated herein by this reference, except as provided in this section.

    A.  “Automotive Vehicle” means any vehicle or device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, or any device used or designed for aviation or flight in the air. Automotive vehicle includes, but is not limited to, motor vehicles, trailers, semi-trailers, or mobile homes. Automotive vehicle shall not include devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.

    B.   “Construction Materials” means tangible personal property which, when combined with other tangible personal property, loses its identity to become an integral and inseparable part of a completed structure or project including public and private improvements. Construction materials include, but are not limited to, such things as: asphalt, bricks, builders’ hardware, caulking material, cement, concrete, conduit, electric wiring and connections, fireplace inserts, electrical heating and cooling equipment, flooring, glass, gravel, insulation, lath, lead, lime, lumber, macadam, millwork, mortar, oil, paint, piping, pipe valves and pipe fittings, plaster, plumbing fixtures, putty, reinforcing mesh, road base, roofing, sand, sanitary sewer pipe, sheet metal, site lighting, steel, stone, stucco, tile, trees, shrubs and other landscaping materials, wall board, wall coping, wall paper, weather stripping, wire netting and screen, water mains and meters, and wood preserver. The above materials, when used for forms, or other items which do not remain as an integral or inseparable part of a completed structure or project are not construction materials.

    C.   “Consumer” means any person in the City who purchases, uses, stores, distributes or otherwise consumes tangible personal property or taxable services, purchased from sources inside or outside the City.

    D.  “Storage” means any keeping or retention of, or exercise dominion or control over, or possession of, for any length of time, tangible personal property not while in transit but on a stand still basis for future use when leased, rented or purchased at retail from sources either within or without the City from any person or vendor.

    E.   “Taxpayer” means any person obligated to pay tax under the terms of this chapter.

    F.   “Use” means the exercise, for any length of time by any person within the City of any right, power or dominion over tangible personal property or services when rented, leased or purchased at retail from sources either within or without the City from any person or vendor or used in the performance of a contract in the City whether such tangible personal property is owned or not owned by the taxpayer. Use also includes the withdrawal of items from inventory for consumption. (Ord. 19-2020 § 2)

 

3.13.030 Transactions subject to use tax and exemptions.
    A.  The use tax levied by Section 3.13.010 shall apply only to the price of the following:

    1.   Construction or building materials which are used or consumed in the City and upon which a sales or use tax has not been paid.

    2.   All items of stock or inventory originally purchased at wholesale by a person engaged in business in the City, but only to the extent that such item is removed from stock or inventory and consumed by such person or distributed to any other person for use or consumption by any means or transaction other than a retail sale. Items with respect to which the use tax will apply shall include, but not be limited to, goods given as samples or prizes for purposes of promoting business, sales or goodwill by persons engaged in business in the City.

    3.   All items of tangible personal property originally purchased at wholesale and stored by any person engaged in manufacturing in the city, but only to the extent that such item is removed from stock and consumed by such person or distributed to any other person for use or consumption by any means or transaction other than a retail sale.

    4.   All items of tangible personal property leased or rented from persons outside the City by persons residing in the City or persons engaged in business in the City, if such item of tangible personal property is used in the business, but only to the extent that a sales tax on the price of such item has not been paid to the City.

    5.   Automotive vehicles required by the statutes of Colorado to be registered at an address inside the City on which a municipal sales tax has not been paid. The County Clerk of the County in which the registration occurs is authorized to collect such tax for the City prior to or at the time of registration.

    a.   The determination of vehicle registration requirements for individuals shall be the same as for the determination of residency for voter registration purposes.

    b.   The determination of vehicle registration requirements for automotive vehicles which are owned by a business and operated primarily for business purposes shall be based on the address from which such automotive vehicles are principally operated and maintained.

    B.   The use tax levied by Section 3.13.010 shall not extend or apply to the following:

    1.   The storage, use or consumption of any tangible personal property the sale of which is subject to a retail sales tax imposed by the City;

    2.   Automotive vehicles if the owner is or was, at the time of purchase, a nonresident of the City who purchased the vehicle for use outside the City, and if the vehicle was previously registered, titled and licensed outside the City.

    C.   The list of exemptions shall not be increased by implication or similarity.

    D.  The burden of proving that any consumer is exempt from paying the use tax shall be on such consumer under such reasonable requirements of proof as the Finance Director may prescribe. (Ord. 19-2020 § 2)

 

3.13.040 Provisions relative to building permits.
    A.  Except as otherwise provided by subsection C of this section, every person who shall build, construct, reconstruct, alter, expand, modify or improve any building dwelling unit, or other structure, or improvement to real property and who shall purchase construction materials as defined in this chapter, supplies and other tangible personal property used, consumed or stored on real property, improvements and/or attached or affixed structures located within the City, shall pay the City the use tax provided for in this chapter on construction materials, whether purchased from sources inside or outside the City, in either of the following two (2) ways, at the option of the Finance Director:

    1.   Estimated Prepayment. The estimated cost of such construction materials shall be calculated by multiplying the estimated value of this construction project, entered on the building permit by the City, by a percentage established by the Finance Director. Use tax on such estimated cost of construction materials shall be paid at the time the building permit is issued. If use tax is prepaid, interest on any tax deficiency related to construction materials shall be computed from the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy, whichever is earlier.

    2.   Actual Cost. The actual cost of such construction materials shall be reported and tax paid on monthly returns if the permit issued is in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or more, and on quarterly returns if the permit issued is for less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). If use tax is paid on actual cost basis, interest on any tax deficiency shall be computed from the date on which tax is due.

    B.   No final certificate of occupancy or final inspection in lieu of permanent certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless all tax due on construction materials for the project for which the building permit was issued has been paid or arrangement therefor has been made with the Finance Director. Any temporary certificate of occupancy shall be revoked if the use tax payable pursuant to this chapter has not been paid within ninety (90) days of issuance.

    C.   No use tax shall be due on construction materials used in construction projects undertaken and managed directly by the City.

    D.  No person shall make any false statement in connection with this section. (Ord. 19-2020 § 2)

 

3.13.050 Duty to keep books and records—Audit.
    A.  It shall be the duty of every person, firm or corporation liable to the City for any use tax under this section to keep and preserve records for a period of at least three (3) years after completion of construction activities subject to a use tax. Such records shall include all books, accounts and records, together with all bills, receipts, invoices, cash register tapes or other documents of original entry supporting the entries in the books, including subcontractor’s detailed invoices for goods and services.

    B.   Every person shall provide all such records for audit by the Finance Director during normal business hours.

    C.   The City may conduct an audit to recompute the use tax by reviewing and evaluating the actual cost of construction materials. If any recomputed use tax is less than that shown and paid by the taxpayer, the difference shall be refunded to the taxpayer. If the recomputed use tax is more than that shown and paid by the taxpayer, the taxpayer shall be notified of the deficiency and shall be required to pay the same. (Ord. 19-2020 § 2)

 

3.13.060 Refunds.
    A.  Within sixty (60) days of the date of final inspection by the building official, if no certificate of occupancy will be issued, or on the date of issuance of a certificate of occupancy, temporary or otherwise is issued, the taxpayer may submit a request for a refund to the Finance Director with the cost of materials as verified by records kept pursuant to Section 3.13.050. The taxpayer will be allowed one thirty (30) day extension of time, if the taxpayer requests the extension prior to the expiration of the sixty (60) day period of time described herein. Failure to so notify the Finance Director and provide the required records shall be grounds for denying a refund request. Upon receipt of the timely request for a refund, complete with required records, the Finance Director shall determine whether, in his or her reasonable opinion, receipts for all of the material used have been provided and shall make a determination of whether a refund of any excess use taxes paid may be given.

    B.   Whenever the Finance Director discovers from the examination of a return or pursuant to an audit of a taxpayer’s records that the taxpayer has overpaid use taxes due the City, the Finance Director shall issue a refund for payment of the excess taxes to the taxpayer, plus interest at the rate established by this chapter, unless the overpayment and interest are applied to offset other tax due. The Director shall keep a duplicate of said refund and also a statement that sets forth the reason why such refund was ordered. (Ord. 19-2020 § 2)

 

3.13.070 Interest.
    Any use tax due and unpaid shall be a debt to the City and shall draw a monthly interest rate of one percent at the rate. (Ord. 19-2020 § 2)

 

3.13.080 Lien upon property.
    The City use tax payable by virtue of the storage, use or consumption in this City of any construction and building material and any penalties and interest thereon shall be a first and prior lien upon the real and personal property of the person from whom such tax is due, subject only to preexisting liens of a bona fide mortgagee, pledgee, judgment creditor or purchaser whose right was attached prior to the filing of the notice of such lien by the City. The notice of lien to claim the lien for any such delinquent use tax, when filed in the office of the clerk and recorder of any county in which the delinquent taxpayer owns real or personal property or both, shall constitute notice to all persons of such delinquent taxpayer. (Ord. 19-2020 § 2)

 

3.13.090 Enforcement.
    A.  The City may institute such legal actions, suits or proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction against any person from whom a use tax is due and payable, to establish the amount due and to collect such delinquent tax and any applicable interest.

    B.   Repeated violations of this chapter could preclude issuance of further building permits to the violator by City’s Building Department. (Ord. 19-2020 § 2)

 

3.13.100 Penalty.
    Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.28 of this Code. (Ord. 19-2020 § 2)

Chapter 3.20 CAPITAL ACQUISITION AND IMPROVEMENT FUND
3.20.010 Establishment.
    There is established for the planned growth, general welfare and proper administration of the affairs of the City, a fund of the City which shall be known as the “capital acquisition and improvement fund.” (Prior code § 3.22.010)

 

3.20.020 Composition.
    The capital acquisition and improvement fund shall consist of such revenues as the Council may annually appropriate to or designate for such fund. (Prior code § 3.22.020)

 

3.20.030 Expenditures.
    Expenditures of moneys from the capital acquisition and improvement fund shall be made from time to time, and at any time, as the Council may determine (consistent with Charter provisions relating to annual budget and the appropriation ordinances), for the purposes of acquiring, constructing or improving any land, building, structure or other capital asset of the City, or for retiring any bonded indebtedness created for these purposes. (Prior code § 3.22.030)

Chapter 3.24 EQUIPMENT ACQUISITION AND IMPROVEMENT FUND
3.24.010 Establishment.
    There is established for the convenience and proper administration of the affairs of the City a fund of the City, which shall be known as the “equipment acquisition and improvement fund.” (Prior code § 3.20.010)

 

3.24.020 Composition.
    The equipment acquisition and improvement fund shall consist of such sums of money as the City Council may from time to time appropriate or otherwise deposit to such fund. (Prior code § 3.20.030)

 

3.24.030 Transfer of funds.
    There is transferred into the equipment acquisition and improvement fund all sums heretofore appropriated to the “reserve for equipment purchase” account in the general fund of the City. (Prior code § 3.20.020)

 

3.24.040 Revenues from investment of funds.
    Revenues derived from earnings from investment of funds appropriated to or deposited to the equipment acquisition and improvement fund shall be transferred annually to the general fund. (Prior code § 3.20.040)

Chapter 3.26 MUSEUM FUND
3.26.010 Establishment.
    There is established for the planned growth, general welfare and proper administration of the affairs of the City, a fund of the City which shall be known as the “museum fund.” (Ord. 14-1990 § 1)

 

3.26.020 Composition.
    The museum fund shall consist of all revenues received by way of donations, gifts, bequests, grants and similar conveyances to or for the benefit of the City’s museums; revenues generated by fund-raising efforts and events for the benefit of City museums; and such other revenues as the Council may annually appropriate or otherwise designate for such fund. (Ord. 14-1990 § 1)

 

3.26.030 Expenditures.
    Expenditures of moneys from the museum fund shall be made from time to time, and at any time, as the Council may determine (consistent with Charter provisions relating to annual budget and the appropriation ordinances), for the purposes of operation of the City’s museums, maintenance of museum buildings and grounds, and for the preservation, enlargement, construction, reproduction, improvement, acquisition and maintenance of any artifact, historically significant item or building, diorama, display, land, building, structure or other asset of the City’s museums. (Ord. 14-1990 § 1)

Chapter 3.28 RAW WATER ACQUISITION AND PRESERVATION FUND
3.28.010 Establishment.
    There is established for the planned growth, general welfare and proper administration of the affairs of the City, a fund of the City which shall be known as the “raw water acquisition and preservation fund.” (Ord. 36-1988; prior code § 3.21.010)

 

3.28.020 Transfer of funds.
    There are transferred into the raw water acquisition and preservation fund all sums heretofore appropriated and not encumbered to the “reserved for acquisition of raw water and protection of city’s water rights” account in the water fund. (Ord. 36-1988; prior code § 3.21.020)

 

3.28.030 Composition.
    The raw water acquisition and preservation fund shall consist of.

    A.  The moneys transferred pursuant to Section 3.28.020 of this chapter;

    B.   Fourteen percent of the amount collected for raw water and plant investment charges, pursuant to Section 13.08.030 of this Code;

    C.   All revenues or sums derived from investment of funds of the raw water acquisition and preservation fund. (Ord. 29-1995 § 1; Ord. 1-1993 § 2; Ord. 15-1990 § 1)

 

3.28.040 Expenditures.
    Appropriations and expenditures of moneys of the raw water acquisition and preservation fund shall be made from time to time and at any time, as the Council of the City may determine, in the acquisition and preservation of raw water and raw water sources for the City water system. (Ord. 15-1990 § 1)

 

3.28.050 Termination Disposition of moneys.
    Should the Council of the City determine that the raw water acquisition and preservation fund is at any time unessential for any reason, all funds and moneys in the fund shall be transferred to the water fund for appropriation and expenditure pursuant to Section 5-A, Article VII, of the Charter of the City. (Ord. 36-1988; prior code § 3.21.050)

Chapter 3.30 QUALITY OF LIFE FUND
3.30.010 Establishment.
    There is established for the planned growth, general welfare and proper administration of the affairs of the City, a fund of the City which shall be known as the “quality of life fund.” (Ord. 13-1990 § 1)

 

3.30.020 Composition.
    The quality of life fund shall consist of such revenues as the Council may annually appropriate to or designate for such fund. (Ord. 13-1990 § 1)

 

3.30.030 Expenditures.
    Expenditures of moneys from the quality of life fund shall be made from time to time, and at any time, as the Council may determine (consistent with Charter provisions relating to annual budget and the appropriation ordinances), for the purposes of repairs, replacements, enlargements, construction, improvements, acquisition and maintenance of any land, building, structure or other asset of the City, for retiring any bonded indebtedness created for these purposes, or for purchases or grants the Council determines Will enhance the quality of life that distinguishes a vital, attractive and functional city from a static, less attractive or less utilitarian city. (Ord. 13-1990 § 1)

Chapter 3.32 EMERGENCY TELEPHONE CHARGE
3.32.010 Imposed.
    There is imposed, pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes, Section 29-11-101 et seq., upon all telephone exchange access facilities within the city an emergency telephone charge in an amount not to exceed two percent of the tariff rates as approved by the Public Utilities Commission or fifty cents, whichever is less, per month. Upon recommendation of the emergency telephone service authority the City Council may, by resolution, raise or lower the emergency telephone charge, but in no event shall such charge exceed the amount of two percent of the tariff as approved by the Public Utilities Commission or fifty cents, whichever is less, per month. (Ord. 18-1987 § 2)

 

3.32.020 Collection.
    Telephone service suppliers providing telephone service in the city are authorized to collect the emergency telephone charge imposed by this chapter in accordance with Colorado Revised Statutes Section 29-11-101 et seq. (Ord. 18-1987 § 3)

Chapter 3.34 SEIZURE/FORFEITURE FUND
3.34.010 Establishment.
    There is established for the convenience and proper administration of the affairs of the City a fund of the City, which shall be known as the “seizure/forfeiture fund.” (Ord. 14-1997 § 1)

 

3.34.020 Composition.
    The seizure/forfeiture fund shall consist of such sums of money that are delivered to and received by or on behalf of the Cañon City Police Department with respect to law enforcement activities that resulted in the seizure and forfeiture of real or personal property pursuant to applicable federal or state laws. The moneys to be deposited in this fund may include, without limitation, any sums payable to and received by or on behalf of the Cañon City Police Department as a seizing agency from state of Colorado sources identified at Parts 3 and 5 of Title 16, Article 13, C.R.S. or from federal sources pursuant to federal laws, rules and regulations, the receipt, use and disposition of which are authorized by Section 16-13-601, C.R.S. (Ord. 14-1997 § 1)

 

3.34.030 Special provisions.
    A.  The seizure/forfeiture fund is designated as the lawfully created fund to receive proceeds from property forfeited to the federal government and allocated to the Cañon City Police Department pursuant to federal law and regulation.

    B.   For accounting purposes, the seizure/forfeiture fund shall be treated as a special reserve account which will have two divisions. One such division shall receive proceeds from federally forfeited property allocated by an agency or officer of the United States government and the other division shall receive proceeds from property forfeited pursuant to state law. The assets of each division shall not be commingled.

    C.   All forfeited property and all proceeds from forfeited property received by or on behalf of the Cañon City Police Department shall be subject to the reporting and audit requirements set forth at Section 1631-701, C.R.S.

    D.  All such forfeited property and all proceeds from forfeited property received by or on behalf of the Cañon City Police Department shall be used and expended only as approved and authorized by the committee on disposition required under Section 16-13-702, C.R.S. No expenditure shall be authorized except by a majority vote of all committee members. A memorandum regarding each expenditure authorized by the committee shall be made and shall reflect the vote of each committee member.

    E.   The composition of the committee shall be as provided in Section 16-13702(3), C.R.S. The initial representative of the Council of Cañon City shall be the City Administrator. The Council reserves the right to designate a replacement representative at any time and from time to time by resolution. The committee is specifically authorized to establish and maintain one or more bank accounts to be used for law enforcement purposes designated by the committee and to deposit into such account or accounts assets of the seizure/forfeiture fund.

    F.   In accordance with applicable federal and state law, moneys in the seizure/forfeiture fund shall not be subject to appropriation by the Council of Cañon City, nor shall such moneys be used or expended for any purpose that is prohibited by applicable federal or state law or for any permitted purpose that is not specifically authorized by the committee.

    G.  Any interest or other revenue generated on account of the investment of moneys in the seizure/forfeiture fund shall remain in the fund. (Ord. 14-1997 § 1)

Chapter 3.36 RECOVERY OF FEES AND DAMAGES with respect to dishonored checks
3.36.010 Bookkeeping charge authorized for checks not paid upon presentment.
    Any person who obtains goods, property, services, including but not limited to water service, or any other thing of value from the City, or who makes any payment of any obligation owing to the City by means of making any check, draft, or order for the payment of money upon any bank, depository, person, firm, or corporation which is not paid upon its presentment is liable to the City, as holder of such check, draft, or order for an amount equal to the face amount of the check, draft, or order and the amount of any reasonable posted or contractual bookkeeping charge not exceeding twenty dollars ($20.00), or such greater amount as might be specified in Section 13-21-209(1)(b)(I), C.R.S. (Ord. 20-2002 § 1)

 

3.36.020 Relief from liability for bookkeeping charge.
    As to any check, draft or order that is not paid upon its presentment, the bookkeeping charge authorized in Section 3.36.010 shall not be imposed if the maker thereof establishes any one of the following:

    A.  That the account contained sufficient funds or credit to cover the check, draft, or order at the time the check, draft, or order was made, plus all other checks, drafts, and orders on the account then outstanding and unpaid;

    B.   That the check, draft, or order was not paid because a paycheck, deposited in the account in an amount sufficient to cover the check, draft, or order, was not paid upon presentment;

    C.   That funds sufficient to cover the check, draft, or order were garnished, attached, or set off and the maker had no notice of such garnishment, attachment, or setoff at the time the check, draft, or order was made;

    D.  That the maker of the check, draft, or order was not competent or of full age to enter into a legal contractual obligation at the time the check, draft, or order was made;

    E.   That the making of the check, draft, or order was induced by fraud or duress;

    F.   That the transaction which gave rise to the obligation for which the check, draft, or order was given lacked consideration or was illegal. (Ord. 20-2002 § 1)

 

3.36.030 Additional remedies with respect to water services accounts.
    If the Director of Finance, or his or her designee, elects to impose the bookkeeping charge authorized in Section 3.36.010, and if the check, draft or order that was not paid upon its presentment was tendered in payment of a water bill, the Director of Finance, or his or her designee, shall be authorized to:

    A.  Add the amount of the bookkeeping charge to the applicable customer account and to bill such amount as a current charge on the customer’s next regular water bill, even if the dishonored check, draft or order is honored on its second presentment.

    B.   Order the disconnection of water service, without further notice to the water customer, in cases where a shut-off notice was given to the affected water customer (in accordance with the provisions of Section 13.08.150 of this Code) prior to the tender of a check, draft or money order that is twice dishonored upon its presentment.

    C.   If water service is disconnected under circumstances described in Subsection B of this section, turn-on and turn-off fees authorized in Section 13.08.095 of this Code may be assessed against the account of the affected water customer. (Ord. 20-2002 § 1)

 

3.36.040 Cash only status authorized.
    If, during the same calendar year, any person tenders two or more checks, drafts or orders to the City that are not paid upon their first presentment, the City may place such person, and any account such person has with the City, on a cash-only basis with respect to all future transactions between that person and the City, by giving written notice to such person. After such notice is given, the City may require that all of such person’s payments to the City be made in cash and may refuse to accept as payment for any obligation owing to the City anything other than cash. The City may remove a person from “cash-only” status by written notice, signed by the Director of Finance, or his or her designee. For purposes of this subsection, cash means and includes United States currency, certified checks, cashier’s checks and money orders payable to the City. (Ord. 20-2002 § 1)

 

3.36.050 Statutory damages available.
    Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the City and its officers, employees, agents and assigns from exercising any right or option under Section 13-21-109, C.R.S., that is available to the holder of a check, draft or order that is not paid upon its presentment; provided that the “bookkeeping charge” provided for in Section 3.36.010 and the charge authorized under Section 13-21-109(1)(b)(I), C.R.S., shall not both be imposed with respect to any single check, draft or order. (Ord. 20-2002 § 1)

Chapter 3.40 INTEREST CHARGEABLE ON MISCELLANEOUS ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE
3.40.010 Legal rate of interest.
    Unless a different rate is specified in a written agreement signed by the City or a greater rate is specified in another ordinance of the City, interest calculated at the monthly rate of one and one-half percent (1-1/2%) may be charged with respect to any money owing to the City that is not paid when due. Such interest will be calculated on past due outstanding balances. (Ord. 18-2008 § 1)

Chapter 3.50 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVE PROGRAM
3.50.010 Water tap fee deferrals and waivers.
    A.  In an effort to encourage the construction of new residential, commercial and industrial buildings within the corporate boundaries of the City and the associated creation and/or preservation of construction-related employment opportunities for local citizens and sales of building materials by local businesses, the Council of Cañon City established a temporary program that began in 2014 and which will end on December 31, 2017 pursuant to which qualifying applicants will become entitled to deferrals and thereafter waivers of water tap fees otherwise payable before a building permit is issued in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 13.08 of the Cañon City Municipal Code (“CCMC”).

    B.   Definitions.

    1.   For purposes of the temporary water tap fee deferral and waiver program outlined in this section, “building” means and includes any new single family residence, new duplex, new multi-family building, new commercial building, new industrial building and also includes newly-constructed residential and/or commercial units within existing buildings that require new water taps as a precondition to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for such unit.

    2.   “Person” for purposes of this chapter, shall mean and include individuals, corporations, LLCs, partnerships and other entities capable of owning property in Colorado.

    C.   “Qualifying applicants” will include only those persons who apply for water taps and who also satisfy each of the following conditions:

    1.   A qualifying applicant must own or otherwise control land located within the water service area served by the Cañon City Water Department with respect to which a completed application for water service to new residential, commercial or industrial buildings was filed in accordance with the provisions and requirements of Section 13.08.030, CCMC.

    2.   A qualifying applicant must have complied with all provisions and requirements of Section 13.08.020, CCMC, except for that portion of Subsection 13.08.020(A)(2) which requires the tender of payment of the full water tap fee.

    3.   Notwithstanding the provisions of this section that provide for a waiver of the water tap fee, a person who seeks to become a qualifying applicant shall become entitled to a deferral of the obligation to pay the water tap fee for such person’s project once such person has signed a statement prepared and presented by the City Engineer certifying that the City and the applicant agree on the amount of the water tap fee for applicant’s entire project, which shall be calculated in accordance with the provisions of Section 13.08.040, CCMC. Such statement shall reflect the maximum water tap fee payable by an applicant with respect to the applicant’s project and also shall clearly state the maximum water tap fee waiver offered by the City as a set-off to the maximum water tap fee otherwise payable. Such signed statement also shall contain the applicant’s agreement to pay the applicable water tap fee for any unit, units, building or buildings, as a condition precedent to the issuance of a permanent certificate of occupancy, if a permanent certificate of occupancy for such unit(s) or building(s) is not issued on or prior to December 31, 2017.

    4.   A qualifying applicant must pay when due all costs, if any, charged by the City for meters, meter pits, water line installations, service line connections and/or inspections associated with the establishment of water service to the properties where the applicant’s project is situated and restore any affected City-owned property to a condition equal to or better than the condition that existed prior to the making of such water system improvements.

    5.   Nothing in this section will relieve a qualifying applicant from any obligation to pay impact fees provided for at Section 13.08.140 and/or water line rebates required under Section 13.08.127. In addition, nothing in this section will relieve any qualifying applicant from any obligation provided for in a written improvements agreement executed by such person in order to comply with provisions and requirements of subdivision and/or site plan approval obtained by such person through any approval process required or permitted under the ordinances, resolutions, regulations or rules of the City, including all applicable written City standards.

    6.   A qualifying applicant must have been issued a building permit by the City and must have paid in full all applicable City fees—other than building permit fees and use taxes waived by the City pursuant to this chapter—with respect to such new unit(s) or building(s) and also must have obtained the issuance of a permanent certificate of occupancy for each building or unit with respect to which a water tap fee waiver will apply. All such permanent certificates of occupancy must be issued no later than December 31, 2017.

    7.   If permanent certificates of occupancy for some, but not all, units or buildings of a multiple-unit or multi-building project have been issued on or before December 31, 2017, water tap fee waivers will be available on a pro-rated basis only with respect to those newly constructed units or buildings for which permanent certificates of occupancy were issued on or prior to December 31, 2017.

    8.   Water tap fees with respect to those units or buildings for which permanent certificates of occupancy were not issued on or before December 31, 2017 shall be paid for in accordance with the provisions of the statement signed by the applicant pursuant to Subsection (C)(3) of this Section 3.50.010.

    9.   Water tap fees otherwise payable to the City will be waived for all persons who become qualifying applicants in accordance with the provisions of this Section 3.50.010.

    10. If a person becomes a qualifying applicant with respect to some, but not all, units or buildings in a project, for the sole reason that the applicant failed to receive the issuance of a permanent certificate of occupancy on or before December 31, 2017 with respect to some, but not all, of the units or buildings of a project, the applicant shall be entitled to a waiver of water tap fees for those units or buildings with respect to which permanent certificates of occupancy were issued on or before December 31, 2017.

    D.  Persons who fail to qualify as qualifying applicants pursuant to Section 3.50.010 of this Chapter shall nevertheless be entitled to water service for their projects; provided that such persons comply with all requirements of applicable local law and pay the full water tap fee set forth in the agreement required under Subsection (C)(3) of this section for each and every unit or building with respect to which the applicant has failed to qualify for a water tap fee waiver pursuant to the provisions of this section.

    E.   The City will be unable to waive tap fees for or with respect to new units or buildings located outside of the City or within the City but outside of the water service area of the Cañon City Water Department. (For example, no waiver will be available with respect to new buildings located on properties within the service area of the Park Center Water District that will be served by that District.) (Ord. 2-2015 § 1)

 

3.50.020 Building permit fee deferrals.
    A.  As additional incentives to persons who undertake certain new construction projects within the City, building permit fees otherwise payable by such persons to the City prior to the issuance of a building permit may be deferred.

    B.   Building permit fees shall be deferred under the following circumstances:

    1.   In all cases where the owner of land upon which new construction is to take place qualifies for the deferral of water tap fees pursuant to the provisions of Section 3.50.010.

    2.   In cases where a new residential, commercial, industrial or mixed use building is constructed on vacant land in any zone district where such building is an allowed use; provided that no building previously existed on such land.

    3.   In cases where a principal commercial, residential, or industrial building (or significant portions thereof) is (are) remodeled or renovated to make the remodeled space suitable for occupancy for an allowed commercial, residential or industrial use that did not exist prior to the application for a building permit; provided that the property on which the building is situated is located in a C, CB, I-1, or mixed use zone district of the City.

    4.   In cases where a commercial, mixed use or industrial building in a C, CB or I-1 zone district of the City is demolished or torn down and promptly rebuilt in accordance with the provisions of applicable law.

    5.   In cases where a historical building façade of a property situated within the designated downtown historic district of the City is renovated in accordance with applicable standards within such historic district. (Ord. 2-2015 § 1)

 

3.50.030 Building permit fees—Waiver.
    A.  In those cases where building permit fees for a project are deferred pursuant to Section 3.50.020, such building permit fees will be waived if, but only if, a permanent certificate of occupancy is issued for the project on or before December 31, 2017 and the person seeking such waiver has complied with applicable law in the construction of such person’s unit, building or project.

    B.   Persons who become eligible for a deferral of building permit fees pursuant to Section 3.50.020, as a prerequisite to the subsequent waiver of such building permit fees, shall be required to sign an agreement with the City that sets forth the amount of the deferred building permit fee and provides that the person entitled to such deferral agrees to pay the deferred building permit fee if a permanent certificate of occupancy is not issued for the project on or before December 31, 2017. Such agreement also shall provide that the City will waive the building permit fee if a permanent certificate of occupancy covering the project is issued on or before December 31, 2017.

    C.   Owners of projects with respect to which building permit fees were deferred, but not waived, will not be issued permanent certificates of occupancy until deferred building permit fees identified in the agreement required under Subsection B of this section have been paid in full.

    D.  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Section 3.50.030, if a certificate of occupancy is not required to be issued for any project identified in Section 3.50.020, the building permit fee will be waived with respect to such project if, but only if, on or before December 31, 2017, all elements of the project have been approved following a final inspection by a City Building Inspector. (Ord. 2-2015 § 1)

 

3.50.040 Use tax deferrals and waivers.
    A.  The owner of any land upon which any building, unit or project is to be constructed who becomes eligible for a deferral of building permit fees pursuant to Section 3.50.020 shall also be entitled to obtain a building permit without first paying estimated use taxes for such owner’s building, unit or project.

    B.   Persons whose use tax obligation was deferred pursuant to this section shall be relieved of any obligation to pay use taxes to the City with respect to such person’s construction project if a permanent certificate of occupancy is issued for their unit, building or project on or before December 31, 2017.

    C.   If a permanent certificate of occupancy for such unit, building or project is not issued on or before December 31, 2017, the owner of such unit, building or project shall be obligated to pay to the City, prior to the issuance of a permanent certificate of occupancy, use taxes on the value of all building materials incorporated into such owner’s unit, building or project on or prior to December 31, 2017, unless such owner is able to show proof acceptable to the City that sales taxes on such building materials were paid at the times and places of their purchase. Use taxes also will be owing to the City with respect to building materials purchased after December 31, 2017 that are incorporated into any unit, building or project.

    D.  Owners who wish for the City to defer prepayment of use taxes pursuant to this section must first sign an agreement with the City that identifies the estimated use tax for the building materials to be incorporated into the owner’s unit, building or project that would have been payable to the City prior to the issuance of a building permit had the use tax deferral outlined in this Section 3.50.040 not been available. Such agreement also must contain the owner’s promise to pay any use taxes that might become payable with respect to building materials incorporated into their units, buildings or projects to the extent that such owner is unable to adequately document the payment of sales taxes with respect to such building materials. Such agreement also shall contain the owner’s promise to pay use taxes on all building materials purchased after December 31, 2017 if such materials are incorporated into such owner’s unit, building or project.

    E.   Nothing in this section shall constitute a deferral or waiver of any owner’s obligation to pay sales taxes when and where the payment of state or local sales taxes is required by applicable law.

    F.   All owners are encouraged to purchase building materials locally as their contribution to stimulating the local economy.

    G.  Nothing in this section shall relieve any owner of its obligation to prepay or pay estimated or actual use taxes to other jurisdictions, including but not necessarily limited to the County of Fremont.

    H.  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Section 3.50.040, if a certificate of occupancy is not required to be issued for any project with respect to which the owner was not obligated to prepay estimated use taxes, such owner shall be relieved of any obligation to pay use taxes to the City respecting such project if, on or before December 31, 2017, all elements of the project have been approved following a final inspection by a City Building Inspector. (Ord. 2-2015 § 1)

 

3.50.050 Codification and expansion of stimulus program.
    A.  This Chapter 3.50 codifies and expands the scope of the economic stimulus program first established by the City through Ordinance No. 19, Series of 2014, which is superseded by this chapter. Any person who qualified for the deferral of a water tap fee, a building permit fee and/or who was issued a building permit without first being required to pay estimated use taxes to the City shall be eligible to qualify for waivers of such water tap fee, building permit fee and/or use tax obligation by complying with the provisions of this chapter.

    B.   Unless extended by subsequent ordinance of the Council of Cañon City, the economic stimulus program provided for in this chapter shall expire on January 1, 2018; provided that any person who becomes obligated to pay water tap fees, building permit fees or use taxes to the City because a permanent certificate of occupancy was not issued for such person’s unit, building or project on or before December 31, 2017 shall remain obligated to make such payment or payments until such obligation or obligations have been paid in full.

    C.   Agreements required under the provisions of Sections 3.50.010, 3.50.030 and/or 3.50.040 may be included in a single document if the City so decides. (Ord. 2-2015 § 1)

 

3.50.060 Sunset of Economic Development Incentive Program.
    A.  The Economic Development Incentive Program outlined in this Chapter 3.50 shall sunset and terminate for all purposes on December 31, 2017 and this Chapter 3.50 shall be repealed as of said date.

    B.   Applications for participation in the Economic Development Incentive Program shall not be considered or acted upon after December 31, 2016.

    C.   Deadline for Execution of Agreements for Deferrals.

    1.   No deferral of water tap fees shall be considered or granted unless both the applicant for such deferral and the City have executed the statement and agreement required by Subsection 3.50.010(C)(3) of this chapter on or before December 31, 2016.

    2.   No application for the deferral of building permit fees shall be considered or granted unless both the City and the applicant shall have executed the agreement required by Subsection 3.50.030(B) of this chapter on or before December 31, 2016.

    3.   No application for the deferral of the obligation to prepay estimated use taxes prior to the issuance of a building permit shall be considered or granted unless both the City and the applicant have executed the agreement required by Subsection 3.50.040(D) of this chapter on or before December 31, 2016.

    D.  No waiver of water tap fees, building permit fees or use taxes shall be offered or allowed by the City for any project with respect to which the agreements provided for in this chapter have been timely executed unless the project is completed on or before December 31, 2017, as evidenced by the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any project requiring the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or by the Building Official’s final inspection and approval of all elements of a project for which a certificate of occupancy is not required.

    E.   Agreements executed pursuant to the requirements of this Chapter 3.50 shall be enforceable by the City following the sunset of the Economic Development Incentive Program and the repeal of Chapter 3.50. (Ord. 16-2016 § 1)

Chapter 3.60 BUDGETING PROCEDURES
3.60.010 Budget transfers and amendments.
    A.  Pursuant to the City’s Charter, City Council is required to approve transfers of monies to satisfy the expenditure related to any object and/or purpose, specified within the City’s annual budget.

    B.   The phrase “objects and purposes” or each term individually, as used in the City’s Charter, shall include personal services, supplies and purchased services, and capital outlay.

    C.   Amendments to the annual budget due to the receipt of unanticipated revenue shall be made in accordance with applicable state law.

    D.  The City Council may, by resolution, set the minimum amount of a budget transfer that requires City Council approval and delegate transfers of monies which are less than that established amount to the authority of the City Administrator. (Ord. 1-2019 § 1)

Title 4 (RESERVED)

Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 5.08 AUCTIONEERS
Chapter 5.12 CONTRACTOR LICENSING
Chapter 5.24 TRASH, GARBAGE, REFUSE AND RUBBISH COLLECTION
Chapter 5.28 JUNK DEALERS
Chapter 5.30 LIQUOR LICENSES
Chapter 5.32 MERCHANT PATROL AND SECURITY GUARD SERVICES AND SECURITY GUARDS
Chapter 5.34 MOBILE HOME PARKS
Chapter 5.36 PAWNBROKERS
Chapter 5.40 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS
Chapter 5.42 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Chapter 5.43 LICENSING OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Chapter 5.46 SECONDHAND DEALER AND FLEA MARKET BUSINESSES
Chapter 5.52 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANT DISEASE CONTROL
Chapter 5.56 MEDICAL MARIJUANA FACILITIES
Chapter 5.60 COMMUNITY MARIJUANA CULTIVATION FACILITIES
Chapter 5.66 PROCEDURAL MATTERS PERTAINING TO LICENSES

Chapter 5.08 AUCTIONEERS
5.08.010 “Auctioneer” defined.
    Whoever shall sell, or offer to sell, any goods, wares or merchandise, or any horses or other livestock, or any vehicles of any description, or any other personal property, or any real estate or interest therein, at any store, stand or other place in the city, by public outcry, for his or her own gain or profit, or shall advertise or in any other way hold him or herself out as an auctioneer for public patronage, or shall receive fees as a commission for his or her services, is defined to be an auctioneer. (Prior code § 5.08.020)

 

5.08.012 Colorado Revised Statutes apply.
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, laws relative to auctioneers and sales at auction set forth in the Colorado Revised Statutes, as the same exist now or may be amended in the future, shall apply to all auctioneers and sales at auction. (Ord. 33-2010 § 2)

 

5.08.015 Direct purchase for resale.
    Any auctioneer that directly purchases merchandise or items from a seller with the intent to directly resell such merchandise or items, either through auction or other means, for which the auctioneer will receive the entire proceeds of the sale (as opposed to a percentage of each item auctioned on behalf of a seller), shall be obligated to comply with all provisions as set forth in Chapter 5.46 of this Code (pertaining to Secondhand Dealers and Flea Market Businesses) with respect to such merchandise and items. (Ord. 33-2010 § 3)

 

5.08.020 Exceptions to chapter application.
    A.  No provisions in this chapter shall be construed to apply to sales made at public auction under and by virtue of any legal process or proceeding through a court of law or equity, or to sales under any mortgage or trust deed, or to sales under any ordinance of the City by any municipal officer.

    B.   Auctioneers who donate auction services for the direct benefit of bona fide non-profit organizations are not required to obtain any license required in this chapter with respect to such donated auction services. In such cases, the auctioneer shall not be publicized or advertised as an auctioneer related to the event and the auctioneer calling the sales shall receive no remuneration or benefit for donating such services. (Ord. 33-2010 § 4; prior code § 5.08.010)

 

5.08.030 License—Required.
    No person shall sell any property at public auction within this city without a license therefor first had and obtained from the City Clerk according to the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 5.08.030)

 

5.08.040 License—Types and fees.
    A.  Auction Room License. For a license limited in character to maintain an auction room or place as a regular business within this city, and to sell at auction therein, there shall be paid to the City a license fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per year or portion thereof.

    B.   Annual Auctioneer License. For an annual license to conduct auctions at places other than a licensed auction room or place of business, there shall be paid to the City, a license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) annually. Auctioneers who acquire a one-year license contemplated in this subsection shall notify the City Clerk’s office of the location of each auction to be held inside city limits at least five (5) business days prior to the auction date. Failure to timely provide such notification shall result in a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) late reporting fee being charged to the licensee in addition to any other applicable fees provided for in this section.

    C.   One-Day Auctioneer License. For a one-day license to conduct auctions in places other than a licensed auction room or place of business, there shall be paid to the City a license fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Such application for license and payment shall be made no less than five (5) business days prior to the date of the scheduled auction. Failure to apply for such license at least five (5) business days prior to the date of the scheduled auction shall result in an additional twenty-five dollar ($25.00) late application fee. (Ord. 33-2010 § 5)

 

5.08.045 Renewals.
    Renewals of the licenses provided for in this Chapter 5.08 shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5.66 of this title. (Ord. 33-2010 § 6)

 

5.08.050 Violation—Misdemeanor—Administrative penalty.
    Penalties for violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter 5.08 shall be as provided in Chapter 5.66 of this title. (Ord. 33-2010 § 7)

Chapter 5.12 CONTRACTOR LICENSING
5.12.010 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter:

    A.  “Contractor” means any person or entity who undertakes, within the City, to perform any work on any building or structure or any portion thereof for which a permit is required by Title 15 of this Code, or the improvement, excavation or installation of utilities, or any work accomplished on City property or in a public right-of-way.

    B.   “Trade” means one component of the work on any building or structure or work within or on infrastructure in the public right-of-way. These trades shall include, by example but not be limited to, the following: awnings, demolition, excavation/concrete, fencing, foundation repair/mud jacking, framing/carpentry, insulation, signage, swimming pools, masonry, dry wall, glazing/window replacement, roofing, siding/stucco, structural steel fabrication/carports, ornamental iron, and right-of-way work carried on in the construction, alteration, or repair of buildings or structures requiring special knowledge and skill for the performance thereof. (Ord. 9-2020 § 1)

 

5.12.020 License—Required.
    A.  No contractor shall perform any work without having obtained a license to perform such work from the City under this chapter.

    B.   No contractor that is not a natural person shall perform any work without having in its employ a natural person licensed as a contractor under this chapter for the type of work performed. The name of such person shall be registered with the Building Official. If such person should leave the employ of the licensee, the license shall be deemed suspended until another licensed natural person is registered with the Building Official. Such person shall provide personal supervision at the work, job or project site adhering to reasonable attention to the job site to insure proper construction as determined by the City.

    C.   The following persons are exempt from the licensing requirements of this chapter:

    1.   A person working under the supervision of any other person licensed under this chapter;

    2.   A homeowner who builds, constructs, alters, repairs, adds to or demolishes any building or structure or any portion thereof that constitutes the owner’s residence, or a building or structure accessory thereto, and that is intended for the owner’s personal use. This section shall not apply to the installation or repair of fire alarms and fire sprinklers;

    3.   A public utility company and its employees, when engaged in the installation, operation and maintenance of its equipment used for the production, generation or distribution of the utility, product or service through the facilities owned or operated by the utility company to the point of customer service;

    4.   Persons who perform work with homeowners as volunteers on projects for which a homeowner is not required to obtain a license.

    D.  Licenses are nontransferable. (Ord. 9-2020 § 1)

 

5.12.030 Applications.
    A.  Any person, firm or corporation applying for a new license or to renew a license shall:

    1.   Submit a complete and accurate written application on a form provided or specified by the City;

    2.   Provide proof of passage of examination, if applicable, as required by Section 5.12.050; and

    3.   Pay to the City the application or renewal fee, established by resolution of City Council.

    B.   No license shall be issued to an applicant until the applicant has successfully passed an examination to test the applicant’s qualifications for the category of license requested, as required by Section 5.12.050.

    C.   Trade class licenses may be issued for up to four (4) different trades under one licensee. (Ord. 9-2020 § 1)

 

5.12.040 Classification of contractor licenses.
    A.  General Contractor Class A. This license entitles the licensee to construct, remodel or repair any commercial or residential structure or addition thereto, including tenant finish, for which a building permit is required. This license does not allow work that includes electrical, plumbing, mechanical, signs, fire and burglar alarms, fire protection, and trades outside the license holder’s area of expertise.

    B.   General Contractor Class B. This license entitles the licensee to construct, remodel or repair commercial or residential buildings not exceeding three stories in height for which a building permit is required. This license does not allow work that includes electrical, plumbing, mechanical, signs, fire and burglar alarms, fire protection, and other trades outside the license holder’s area of expertise.

    C.   General Contractor Class C. This license entitles the licensee to construct, remodel or repair any residential building. This license does not allow work that includes electrical, plumbing, mechanical, signs, fire and burglar alarms, fire protection, and other trades outside the license holder’s area of expertise.

    D.  Mechanical Class M. A mechanical license entitles the holder to install, maintain, alter, or repair mechanical systems that are permanently installed and utilized to provide control of environmental conditions and related process within buildings. This shall include evaporative refrigeration systems and related appurtenances.

    E.   Trade Class D. A trade license may be issued to a contractor who specializes in a specific trade listed in this Section 5.12.010. An applicant may obtain a trade license for up to four (4) trades. (Ord. 9-2020 § 1)

 

5.12.050 License—Denial or revocation conditions.
    Any license issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked, suspended or refused to any person, firm or corporation that intentionally violates the federal, state or municipal laws, rules and ordinances pertaining to the building trades. A contractor’s license may be revoked or suspended immediately by the Building Inspector if the situation warrants such action. The contractor may appeal the decision of the Inspector to the City Administrator pursuant to Section 2.52.010(C) of this Code. (Ord. 18-2020 § 3)

 

5.12.060 Denial of license.
    A.  The Building Official may deny a license under this chapter upon a finding of any of the following:

    1.   The applicant has failed to provide information requested on the application form;

    2.   The applicant is not qualified by experience, training or education to engage in the activity authorized by the license;

    3.   The applicant’s license for the same or similar work is under suspension or revocation in the City or another jurisdiction; or

    4.   The applicant has been convicted of an offense relating to the conduct of the activity licensed by this chapter within the last year prior to the application.

    B.   If the Building Official denies a license application under this section, he or she shall notify the applicant in writing stating the specific grounds for the denial. The applicant may thereafter appeal the denial of the application to the City Administrator in writing within ten (10) days of the denial. (Ord. 9-2020 § 1)

 

5.12.070 Renewal.
    A.  All licenses expire on December 31st of each year.

    B.   A licensee under this chapter shall renew his or her license every year by filing a completed application for renewal with the Building Official and paying the fees required in this chapter.

    C.   A renewal application may be denied as provided in Section 5.12.060. (Ord. 9-2020 § 1)

 

5.12.080 Insurance.
    All contractors who work within the public right-of-way, unless exempted from licensing in this chapter, shall meet the insurance requirements in Section 12.12.070 of this Code. (Ord. 9-2020 § 1)

 

5.12.090 Suspension or revocation of license.
    A.  The Building Official shall, upon the verified complaint in writing of any person, require the licensee to appear before the City Administrator for hearing on the possible suspension or revocation of the licensee’s license. The licensee shall be given a copy of the complaint and at least twenty (20) days written notice of the time and place of the hearing. The notice shall be served personally, or shall be mailed by first class mail to the licensee’s last known mailing address. At the hearing the licensee shall have the right to present his or her case by oral or documentary evidence, to submit rebuttal evidence, and to conduct such cross-examination as may be required for a full and true disclosure of the facts. The licensee shall be entitled at said hearing to have the benefit of legal counsel of his or her own choosing and own expense.

    B.   The City Administrator, after review of the evidence presented, shall have the power to suspend or revoke the license or take other disciplinary action on the license, including the issuance of a formal letter of reprimand; or order the licensee to pay unpaid permit fees and inspection or investigative costs incurred by the City; or impose a probationary period during which time any further violations would result in automatic suspension or revocation of the license. The City Administrator may take any of the foregoing actions if the City Administrator finds that the licensee committed one or more of the following acts related to work as a contractor:

    1.   Violation of any provision of Titles 3, 15, and 17 of this Code;

    2.   Failure to comply with any lawful order of the Building Official or any other authorized representative of the City;

    3.   Use of the license or registration to obtain permits required under the building codes for any other person;

    4.   Misrepresentation of a material fact when applying for a license, or fraud in obtaining a license;

    5.   Gross negligence in the work done by the licensee;

    6.   Failure to obtain a permit required under this Code;

    7.   Failure to give written notice to the Building Official of any matter for which notice is required by this chapter; or

    8.   Conviction of an offense involving misapplication of funds or property received from another.

    C.   Emergency Suspension. If the Building Official finds that an emergency exists which justifies immediate suspension or revocation of a license, he or she may enter an order for immediate suspension of such license, pending further investigation and proceedings for suspension or revocation as provided in this chapter. The licensee may, upon notice of such suspension, request an immediate hearing before the Building Official.

    D.  The Building Official may suspend licenses upon the written consent and approval of the licensee.

    E.   If the license of any contractor is revoked, another such license shall not be granted to such contractor within twelve (12) months after the effective date of the revocation. If a license is suspended, the City Administrator shall state the period and terms of the suspension. Unless otherwise ordered by the City Administrator, a license shall not be reinstated following a suspension or renewed following revocation unless the contractor has successfully passed an examination as specified in Section 5.12.050. (Ord. 9-2020 § 1)

Chapter 5.24 TRASH, GARBAGE, REFUSE AND RUBBISH COLLECTION
5.24.010 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter:

    “Compensation” means any money, property, service or thing of value charged or received or to be charged or received whether directly or indirectly.

    “Motor vehicle” means any automobile, truck, tractor, bus, or other self-propelled vehicle or any trailer drawn thereby excluding vehicles operated upon fixed rails.

    “Person” means any individual, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, association or other legal entity, but does not include the City of Cañon City or any of its departments or employees.

    “Trash haulage license” means a license issued to a trash hauler pursuant to the requirements and other provisions of this chapter.

    “Trash haulage purpose” means any activity of a trash hauler involving the use of streets, alleys and other public thoroughfares in the city for the collection, hauling or transportation, for compensation, of any trash, garbage, refuse, rubbish or other waste material of any kind.

    “Trash hauler” means any person who uses the streets, alleys and other public thoroughfares in the city for the collection, hauling or transportation, for compensation, of any trash, garbage, refuse, rubbish or other waste material of any kind. (Ord. 36-1998 § 1)

 

5.24.020 License—Required.
    A.  Beginning January 1, 1999, no person shall use any street, alley or other public thoroughfare in the city for the collection, hauling or transporting, for compensation, of any trash, garbage, refuse, rubbish or other waste materials of any kind unless such person holds a valid trash haulage license issued pursuant to this chapter or is exempt under Subsection B of this section.

    B.   The following persons are not required to obtain a trash haulage license:

    1.   A civic, community, benevolent or charitable nonprofit organization that collects, transports and markets materials for resource recovery solely for the purpose of raising funds for a charitable, civic or benevolent activity;

    2.   A person who transports trash or recyclable materials produced by such person;

    3.   A property owner or agent thereof who transports trash or recyclable materials left by a tenant upon such owner’s property, so long as such property owner does not provide trash collection service for compensation for tenants on a regular or continuing basis;

 

    4.   A demolition or construction contractor or landscaper who produces and transports trash other than garbage in the course of such occupation, where the trash produced is merely incidental to the particular demolition or construction work being performed by such person;

    5.   A tree trimming service, lawn care service or garden care service contractor who in the normal course of his or her occupation produces yard rubbish, including tree branches, twigs, grass, shrub clippings, weeds, leaves and other general yard, garden and organic waste material, and transports such materials from places where such contractor works as an incidental portion of the work being performed by such contractor.

    6.   A person hauling trash as the City’s agent pursuant to a nuisance abatement action. (Ord. 44-2017 § 2; Ord. 36-1998 § 1)

 

5.24.030 Trash haulage license—Application and fee.
    A.  Applications for trash haulage licenses shall be made to the City Clerk on forms provided for that purpose.

    B.   No application for a trash haulage license shall be complete and no trash haulage license shall be issued until the applicant has:

    1.   Submitted a copy of each registration for all motor vehicles owned or controlled by the trash hauler that will be used for trash haulage purposes during the effective period of the license being applied for. Such list shall identify each such motor vehicle by make, model, VIN and State of Colorado vehicle registration number and shall state where each such vehicle will be parked or kept when not in use for trash haulage purposes;

    2.   Submitted valid and current certificates of general liability insurance coverage for all such listed vehicles indicating that each such vehicle is insured in accordance with Section 5.24.040;

    3.   Submitted such other forms and documents that may be required by the City Clerk;

    4.   Paid an annual trash haulage license fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00), with respect to any one vehicle to be used for trash haulage purposes, plus an additional fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each additional vehicle shown on or added to the applicant’s list.

    C.   During the effective period of the license, any person holding a valid trash haulage license may add to its list of vehicles available for use for trash haulage purposes any motor vehicle that is insured pursuant to Section 5.24.040. No motor vehicle shall be used for trash haulage purposes unless such vehicle is first included on the licensee’s list of registered vehicles and a copy of the registration and proof of insurance has been submitted to the City Clerk.

    D.  Each trash haulage license shall be nontransferable and shall remain in effect from its date of issuance until the last day of January of the following year.

    E.   For all vehicles to be used for trash haulage purposes after March 31, 2000, the Clerk shall also require that such vehicle be inspected and certified pursuant to Section 5.24.050 before such vehicle will be authorized for use for trash haulage purposes during the remainder of calendar year 2000 and thereafter under any license issued by the Clerk. (Ord. 33-2010 §§ 8—10; Ord. 36-1998 § 1)

 

5.24.040 Liability insurance requirements.
    A.  Before any license provided for in this chapter shall be issued, the applicant for such license shall file a certificate of insurance evidencing that the applicant is covered by comprehensive general liability insurance in amounts equal to or greater than those minimum coverage amounts specified by the City Administrator or designee for the type of license to be issued pursuant to this chapter. Such certificate shall provide that the City of Cañon City is named as an additional insured. All such insurance must be maintained and remain in full force and effect during the period for which the license will be issued.

    B.   Each insurance certificate shall provide that the holder of the insurance policy and the City will be notified by the insurer not fewer than thirty (30) days prior to any material decrease in coverage or cancellation of the policy. (Ord. 33-2010 § 11; Ord. 36-1998 § 1)

 

5.24.050 Trash haulage vehicles—Inspection and certification.
    A.  Effective April 1, 2000, every motor vehicle used by a trash hauler for trash haulage purposes:

    1.   Must have been manufactured for the express purpose of being used for the collection, hauling and transportation of trash, garbage, refuse, rubbish and other similar waste materials; and

    2.   Must be fitted with a good and substantial watertight container equipped with a tight-fitting top to prevent the escape or spillage of any of the contents therefrom.

    B.   Beginning January 1, 1999, the City’s Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to physically inspect motor vehicles proposed for use for trash haulage purposes to determine whether each such motor vehicle satisfies the requirements of Subsection A of this section at the time of the inspection. Motor vehicles that appear to satisfy the minimum requirements of Subsection A of this section shall be certified by the Code Enforcement Officer. Such certification shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of certification or until the certified motor vehicle is either recertified or denied certification following a subsequent inspection occurring within the one-year period. The obtaining of such inspections and certifications shall be optional until March 31, 2000.

    C.   Any certified motor vehicle must be reinspected and recertified no later than one year after the date of its most recent certification; provided, that an earlier reinspection may be requested in writing by the Code Enforcement Officer in the event the Code Enforcement Officer has good cause to believe that such trash haulage vehicle no longer satisfies the requirements of Subsection (A)(2) of this section. A reinspection requested by the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to this subsection must occur within thirty (30) days following the date the written request is mailed to the holder of the trash haulage license, at such licensee’s address, as shown on the license. Failure to make a motor vehicle available for reinspection in accordance with this subsection shall be grounds for revocation of the trash haulage license under which such motor vehicle is authorized to operate in the city. (Ord. 36-1998 § 1)

 

5.24.060 License—Revocation conditions.
    A.  Any trash haulage license issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended or revoked by order of the City Council if the City Council, following a public hearing, preceded by not fewer than seven (7) days’ notice to the licensee, finds by a preponderance of the evidence that the holder of such license:

    1.   Failed to exercise reasonable care in the collecting, hauling or transporting of trash, garbage, refuse, rubbish or other waste material of any kind with such failure resulting in the littering of the streets, alleys, other public thoroughfares and public and private properties within the city;

    2.   Failed to maintain the general liability insurance required in Section 5.24.040 of this chapter;

    3.   Used or operated an uninsured or underinsured motor vehicle in the city for trash haulage purposes; or

    4.   After March 31, 2000, used or operated a motor vehicle in the city for trash haulage purposes at a time when such motor vehicle was not the subject of a valid certificate under Section 5.24.050.

    B.   No license shall be revoked under this section until the holder of the license has been given written notice of the alleged violation(s) of this chapter, mailed to the licensee’s address, as shown on the license.

    C.   With respect to any violation admitted by a licensee or proven at the hearing which would justify the suspension or revocation of a trash haulage license, the City Council may, at the request of the licensee, accept payment of a monetary sum of not less than four hundred dollars ($400.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), in lieu of suspending or revoking the license, if City Council is reasonably satisfied that the violation admitted by the licensee or otherwise proven at the hearing is unlikely to reoccur. (Ord. 36-1998 § 1)

 

5.24.070 Violation—Misdemeanor—Administrative penalty.
    Penalties for violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter 5.24 shall be as provided in Chapter 5.66 of this title. (Ord. 33-2010 § 12; Ord. 36-1998 § 1)

Chapter 5.28 JUNK DEALERS
5.28.010 Junk defined.
    “Junk,” as used in this chapter, means and includes all scrap metal, and all materials, fabrics, rubber, paper, glass, metal and rubbish, made up of discarded furniture, furnishings, clothing, bottles, rope, cable, books, magazines, newspaper and other articles, and discarded automobiles, machines, apparatuses and contrivances, and parts thereof, which are no longer in use or objects of sale or trade for the purposes for which they were originally made, fabricated, assembled, manufactured or sold; excluding, however gold, silver and platinum. (Prior code § 5.32.020)

 

5.28.020 Application of chapter provisions.
    The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all persons acting on behalf of persons, firms and corporations, as well as on their own behalf. (Prior code § 5.32.010)

 

5.28.030 License—Required.
    No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of either buying or selling junk, or the business of buying and selling junk, within the city, without having first paid the license fee and having obtained a license so to do, as provided in this chapter. (Prior code § 5.32.030)

 

5.28.040 License—Fee—Expiration.
    Each such license shall expire on December 31st in each year, and shall be issued by the City Clerk upon payment of a license fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per year. (Prior code § 5.32.040)

 

5.28.050 Purchases from minors—Restrictions.
    A.  It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to buy junk from any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years without the written consent of the parents of such minor, the survivor of them, or the parent having sole legal custody of such minor, or the person having the lawful custody of such minor other than a parent, and unless a record is kept of each such purchase in a suitable record book at the place of business of the purchaser, open for inspection during usual business hours by members of the Police Department.

    B.   Every person, firm or corporation buying or selling junk within the city and not maintaining a place of business in the city, shall make and file immediately after each purchase, with the Chief of Police, a report of all purchases of junk made by such person, firm or corporation from minors under the age of eighteen (18) years within the city.

    C.   All such records and reports shall contain a brief description of the junk bought or sold, the quantity, the name and address of the person or persons from whom the same was purchased, the date of the transaction, the age of the minor making the sale, and the name and address of the parents or custodian giving consent of the sale. (Prior code § 5.32.050)

 

5.28.060 Violation—Misdemeanor.
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Each sale or purchase in violation of this chapter is a separate offense. (Prior code § 5.32.060)

Chapter 5.30 LIQUOR LICENSES
5.30.020 Changing, altering or modifying a licensed premises.
    A.  Whenever a person holding a license issued under the Colorado Liquor or Beer Codes applies for consent to change, alter or modify a licensed premises, the City Council, acting as the Local Licensing Authority, shall grant (with or without conditions) or deny such consent in writing. When an application is denied, the grounds for the denial shall be stated in the written decision.

    B.   When a licensee requests modifications that will not result in a change in the service capacity of the licensed premises, consent to the request may be granted or denied without a public hearing, provided that the application for modification is processed, considered and determined in a manner consistent with the requirements and provisions of Regulation 47-302, Colorado Code of Regulations, 1 C.C.R. 203-2. Examples of modifications that may be covered by this Subsection B include: remodeling of a kitchen or fixtures within a kitchen; changing an internal doorway from one location to another; and moving an existing bar from one location to another.

    C.   Except as provided in Subsection B of this section, the Local Licensing Authority will conduct a public hearing before granting (with or without conditions) or denying any application to change, alter or amend a licensed premises.

    D.  Examples of proposals that will require a public hearing prior to the Local Licensing Authority’s decision include, but are not limited to, those which request:

    1.   Any increase or decrease in the total size or capacity of the licensed premises;

    2.   The sealing off, creation of or relocation of a common entryway, doorway, passage or other such means of public ingress and/or egress, when such common entryway, doorway or passage alters or changes the sale or distribution of alcohol beverages within the licensed premises;

    3.   Any substantial or material enlargement of a bar, or the addition of a separate bar, or the installation of a bar or bar area within a premises that has no bar or bar area;

    4.   The installation of a stage, bandstand or dance floor in a premises where there is no existing stage, bandstand or dance floor, or a material enlargement or reduction in size of an existing stage, bandstand or dance floor;

    5.   Any other material change in the interior of the premises that would affect the basic character of the premises or the physical structure that existed in the plan on file with the latest prior application.

    E.   Any public hearing permitted or required under Subsection C of this section shall be preceded by public notice given in accordance with the requirements of Section 44-3-311, C.R.S.

    F.   In any public hearing conducted pursuant to this section, it shall be the burden of the licensee seeking consent to change, alter or modify a licensed premises to establish by petitions or otherwise that the proposed change, alteration or modification, if made, will be consistent with the reasonable requirements of the neighborhood and satisfy the desires of the adult inhabitants of the neighborhood. A licensee’s failure to circulate and tender to the Local Licensing Authority petitions in support of the proposed change, alteration or modification, signed by adult inhabitants of the neighborhood, may be grounds for denial of the application. Petitions shall be supplied or approved by the City Clerk prior to their circulation.

    G.  When a licensee requests consent to create or enlarge an outdoor service area in an application for modification of a premises and competent evidence is presented in a public hearing conducted pursuant to this section showing that the establishment or enlargement of such outdoor service area is likely to have a continuing adverse impact within the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises if conditions protecting the immediate neighborhood are not imposed, the Local Licensing Authority may, as an alternative to denying the application, make its consent to the requested modification conditional. Such conditional consent may:

    1.   Restrict or limit the hours of operation of an outdoor service area;

    2.   Require or limit lighting in and around such outdoor service area;

    3.   Require fencing or other screening designed to discourage patrons of the licensed premises from entering into neighboring areas and to minimize light and noise impacts in such areas;

    4.   Limit or prohibit live entertainment and amplified music in outdoor service areas;

    5.   Contain other requirements, restrictions and/or limitations deemed necessary by the Local Licensing Authority to eliminate or mitigate potential adverse impacts within neighborhoods in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises. (Ord. 3-2019 § 2; Ord. 24-2004 § 1)

 

5.30.030 When consent to modify is not required.
    Nothing in Section 5.30.020 shall require a licensee to seek consent for modification of a premises if the modification will not materially or substantially alter the licensed premises or the usage of the licensed premises. Examples of modifications for which written consent of the Local Licensing Authority is not required include:

    1.   Painting and redecorating of premises;

    2.   The installation or replacement of electric fixtures or equipment;

    3.   The lowering of ceiling;

    4.   The installation and replacement of floor coverings;

    5.   The replacement of furniture and equipment, and other similar changes;

    6.   Any non-structural remodeling of a fermented malt beverage licensee’s premises where the remodel does not expand the existing area designed for the display or sale of fermented malt beverage products. (Ord. 24-2004 § 1)

 

5.30.040 Optional premises license standards.
    A.  The following standards for the issuance of optional premises licenses or for optional premises in association with a hotel/restaurant class of license are hereby adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 44-3-310(1) C.R.S. These standards adopted herein shall be considered in addition to all other standards applicable to the issuance of licenses under the Colorado Liquor Code for optional premises license or for optional premises for a hotel and restaurant license. These two (2) types of licenses for optional premises will be collectively referred to as “optional premises” in these standards unless otherwise provided.

    B.   Eligible Facilities. An optional premises may only be approved when that premises is located on or adjacent to an outdoor sports and recreational facility as defined in Section 44-3-103(33)(a) and (b) C.R.S. The types of outdoor recreational facilities which may be considered for an optional premises license include the following:

    1.   Golf courses, driving ranges, and subsidiary buildings;

    2.   Country clubs, club houses, event and/or conference centers;

    3.   Arenas.

    There are no restrictions on the minimum size of the outdoor sports and recreational facilities which may be eligible for the approval of an optional premises license. However, the Local Licensing Authority may consider the size of the particular outdoor sports and recreational facility in relationship to the number of optional premises areas requested for the facility.

    C.   Number of Optional Premises. There are no restrictions on the number of optional premises areas which any one licensee may have on his or her outdoor sports or recreational facility. However, any applicant requesting approval of more than one optional premises area shall demonstrate the need for each optional premises in relationship to the outdoor sports or recreational facility and its guests.

    D.  Submittal Requirements. When submitting a request for the approval of an optional premises, in addition to meeting the license application requirements set forth by the State of Colorado and the City of Cañon City, the applicant shall submit:

    1.   A map or other drawing illustrating the outdoor sports or recreational facility boundaries and the approximate location of each optional premises area requested. Such optional premises areas shall be numbered in such a manner as to clearly depict the area encompassed in each location;

    2.   Any other documents, drawings, reports, or requirements necessary to ensure compliance with the Colorado Liquor Code and Regulations, including the control of the premises and the ease of enforcement.

    E.   Advance Notification. Pursuant to Section 44-3-310(3) and (4), C.R.S., no alcohol beverages may be served on the optional premises until the licensee has provided written notice to the City of Cañon City Clerk’s Office and the State of Colorado Liquor Enforcement Division forty-eight (48) hours prior to serving alcohol beverages on any optional premises areas.

    1.   Such notice shall be in force until service of alcohol beverages in any optional premises area is changed. Any change in the active service or voluntary suspension of service of alcohol beverages in any optional premises area shall require forty-eight (48) hours notice to the City Clerk and to the Colorado Liquor Enforcement Division;

    2.   Such notice shall include specific days and hours on which the optional premises are to be used;

    3.   In this regard, there is no limitation on the number of days which a licensee may specify in each notice to serve or suspend service of alcoholic beverages. (Ord. 3-2019 § 3; Ord. 17-2008 § 2; Ord. 15-2008 § 1)

 

5.30.050 Special event liquor permits.
    A.  Pursuant to C.R.S. § 44-5-107(5), the City Council of the City of Cañon City, acting as the local liquor licensing authority, hereby elects to exercise exclusive local control over the issuance of liquor license special event permits for events within the City.

    B.   Pursuant to C.R.S. § 44-5-101 et seq., City Council may issue special event permits for the sale of fermented malt and alcoholic beverages to those qualified organizations set forth in the Colorado Liquor Code (C.R.S. Title 44, Article 5) and on the grounds set forth therein.

    C.   Pursuant to C.R.S. § 44-5-107(4), the City Clerk shall be authorized to issue special event permits administratively.

    D.  The provisions of this section notwithstanding, the City Clerk shall report to the Colorado Liquor Enforcement Division, within ten (10) days after the City issues any special event permit, the name of the organization to which the permit was issued, the address of the permitted location, and the permitted dates of alcohol beverage service.

    E.   The City shall cause a hearing to be held if, after investigation and upon review of the contents of the application by the City Clerk or of any protest filed by affected persons, sufficient grounds appear to exist for denial of a permit. Any protest shall be filed by affected persons within ten (10) days after the date of notice pursuant to C.R.S. § 12-48-106(2). Any hearing shall be held at least ten (10) days after the initial posting of the notice, and notice thereof shall be provided the applicant and any person who has filed a protest. (Ord. 3-2019 § 4; Ord. 2-2018 § 2)

 

5.30.060 Alcohol beverage tastings.
    A.  Permit Required.

    1.   Alcohol beverage tastings on the licensed premises of a retail liquor store or of a liquor-licensed drugstore are authorized to be conducted within the City in accordance with C.R.S. Section 44-3-310(10) and subject to the provisions of this chapter.

    2.   The authority hereby authorizes the City Clerk to issue tasting permits as a routine matter and in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.

    3.   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct tastings within the City without having first received a permit issued in accordance with this chapter.

    4.   Submittal Requirements. The initial application and any renewal applications shall be submitted on a Tasting Permit Application form obtained from the City Clerk’s office. This form shall include the following:

    a.   Licensee information including, but not limited to, name, address, contact information, and license number;

    b.   Verification that the licensee and employee(s) who will be conducting the tastings have completed a seller/server training program that meets the standards established by the Liquor Enforcement Division of the Colorado Department of Revenue and is qualified to conduct an alcohol beverage tasting;

    c.   The dates and times in which the licensee intends to conduct tastings events;

    d.   A permit fee of one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00).

    5.   Advance Notification. No alcohol can be provided as samples during a tasting until the licensee has provided written notice to the City Clerk’s Office at least five (5) business days prior to conducting said tasting. Such notice shall contain the specific days and hours on which the tasting will occur.

    6.   Renewal of tasting permits shall be concurrent with the renewal of licenses for Retail Liquor Stores and Liquor-Licensed Drugstores. A licensee’s initial tasting permit shall expire on the same date as the date of the licensee’s underlying liquor license. The initial tastings permit application fee shall be prorated if the permit expires in less than one year. Renewal permits shall be issued for a period of time concurrent with the underlying license.

    7.   Tasting permits shall be conspicuously and prominently posted by the licensee on the licensed premises at all times during business hours.

    8.   A tasting permit shall only be valid when issued to a Retail Liquor Store or a Liquor-Licensed Drugstore licensee whose license is valid and is in full force and effect.

    B.   Limitations on Tastings. Tastings within the City of Cañon City shall be subject to the following limitations:

    1.   Tastings shall be conducted only by a person who has completed a server training program that meets the standards established by the Liquor Enforcement Division of the Colorado Department of Revenue and who is either a Retail Liquor Store Licensee or a Liquor-Licensed Drugstore licensee, or an employee of such licensee, and only on a licensee’s licensed premises;

    2.   The alcohol beverages used in tastings shall be purchased through a licensed wholesaler, licensed brew pub or winery licensed pursuant to C.R.S. Section 44-3-403, at a cost that is not less than the laid-in cost for such alcohol;

    3.   The size of an individual sample shall not exceed one ounce for malt or vinous liquor, or one-half ounce for spirituous liquors;

    4.   The licensee shall not serve, nor allow to be consumed by any one patron, more than four (4) individual samples to a patron during a tasting;

    5.   Tastings shall not exceed a total of five (5) hours in duration per day, which need not be consecutive;

    6.   Tastings shall be conducted only during the operating hours during which the licensee on whose premises the tastings occur is permitted to sell alcohol beverages, and in no case earlier than eleven a.m. or later than nine p.m.;

    7.   The licensee shall prohibit patrons from leaving the licensed premises with an unconsumed sample;

    8.   The licensee shall promptly remove all open and unconsumed beverage samples from the licensed premises or shall destroy the samples immediately following the completion of the tasting;

    9.   The licensee shall not serve a person who is under twenty-one (21) years of age, or who is visibly intoxicated;

 

    10. The samples used in the tastings shall be served in open containers and shall be provided to a patron free of charge;

    11. Tastings may occur on no more than one hundred fifty-six (156) days per year;

    12. No manufacturer of spirituous or vinous liquors shall induce a licensee through free goods or financial or in-kind assistance to favor the manufacturer’s products being sampled at a tasting. The licensee shall bear the financial and all other responsibility for a tasting.

    C.   Violations.

    1.   A violation of this section, whether by the licensee’s employees, agents, or otherwise, shall be the responsibility of the licensee who is conducting the alcohol tasting.

    2.   Licensees conducting a tasting shall be subject to the same revocation, suspension and enforcement provisions as otherwise apply to those licensees. (Ord. 5-2019 § 1; Ord. 3-2019 §§ 5, 6; Ord. 6-2012 § 1)

 

5.30.070 Distance restrictions not applicable to restaurant and hotel licenses.
    The five hundred (500) foot distance restriction set forth in C.R.S. § 44-3-313(1)(d)(I) shall be eliminated within the corporate boundaries of the City of Cañon City for hotel and restaurant licenses only. Any applicant who otherwise qualifies under the terms and provisions of the Colorado Liquor Code to receive a hotel and restaurant license, shall not be denied such license for reasons having to do with the proximity of the building in which liquor is to be sold under such hotel and restaurant license to any land used for school purposes. (Ord. 3-2019 § 7; Ord. 12-2017 § 1)

 

5.30.080 Administrative applications.
    A.  City Clerk. Administrative applications may be decided by the City Clerk upon receipt of a completed application and such fees as are required by this chapter and the state liquor laws.

    B.   Administrative application shall mean the application on forms approved by the City or the State for special event permits and renewals.

    C.   Referrals. The City Clerk shall refer to the local licensing authority for decision all administrative applications when the City Clerk has reason to believe that violations of this chapter or the state liquor laws, not previously reviewed by the authority, may have occurred on the licensed premises during the previous license period. In addition, the City Clerk may refer to the local licensing authority for decision any administrative application when, as determined by the City Clerk, the public interest would be best served by the determination of the matter by the authority.

    D.  Appeals. Administrative applications that are denied by the City Clerk may be appealed to the local licensing authority. Appeals must be submitted in writing to the City Clerk within ten (10) days of the denial and may include a request for hearing. Appeals to the authority will be decided de novo. (Ord. 2-2018 § 3)

Chapter 5.32 MERCHANT PATROL AND SECURITY GUARD SERVICES AND SECURITY GUARDS
5.32.010 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings as provided herein:

    A.  “Merchant patrol or security guard service” means any person, partnership or corporation which conducts or is engaged in the business of guarding or keeping a surveillance upon business, industrial or similar premises or providing protection to persons and property, by maintaining or providing on or near any premises one or more security guards.

    B.   “Security guard” means any natural person employed by a licensed merchant patrol or security guard service for the purpose of watching, guarding or otherwise protecting the persons or property on any premises not his or her own. The term shall include, but is not limited to, uniformed guards and “bouncers” performing services as an employee of a licensed merchant patrol or security guard service in premises licensed under Articles 3 and 4 of Title 44, C.R.S. 2018, but shall not include individuals employed by any common carrier engaged in interstate commerce, industrial or commercial guards employed directly by the owner of an industrial or commercial premises, or peace officers acting within the scope of their employment. A security guard may be licensed as either an armed security guard or an unarmed security guard.

    C.   “License officer” means the City Clerk.

    D.  “Approved security guard program” means an accredited training program including curriculum for security guards approved by the Chief of Police.

    E.   “Approved firearms course” means a firearms training program including curriculum approved by the Chief of Police. (Ord. 3-2019 § 8; Ord. 9-1992 § 1)

 

5.32.020 Unlawful acts.
    It is unlawful:

    A.  For any person, partnership or corporation to engage in the merchant patrol or security guard service business without first being licensed under this chapter.

 

    B.   For a merchant patrol or security guard service to employ as a security guard any person who is not licensed as a security guard under this chapter.

    C.   For any person who is not licensed as a security guard under this chapter to perform services as a security guard.

    D.  For any person to perform services as a security guard for a merchant patrol or security guard service which is not licensed under this chapter. (Ord. 9-1992 § 1)

 

5.32.030 Application for license.
    Application for either a merchant patrol or security guard service license or security guard license shall be submitted on forms provided by the City and shall contain at least the following information:

    A.  For a merchant patrol or security guard service license:

    1.   The full name, age, residence, present occupation and occupations for the preceding five (5) years of each individual applicant, of each partner, if a partnership, and of the managing officer and each stockholder of ten percent (10%) or more stock if a corporation. Such application shall show available facts relating to the character, competency and integrity of the applicant, partner or managing officer and shall list any felony, misdemeanor or ordinance violations for which the applicant, partner or managing officer was convicted within the ten (10) year period preceding the filing of the application (other than minor traffic violations), the nature of the offense, the penalty imposed and the date and place where such offense occurred.

    2.   Other documents as deemed necessary by the City Clerk or the Chief of Police.

    B.   For an armed security guard license:

    1.   The full name, date of birth, residence, present occupation and past occupations and all addresses for the preceding five (5) years of the applicant, and the name and address of the merchant patrol or security guard service by whom he or she is to be employed.

    2.   A list of all felony, misdemeanor or ordinance violation convictions (other than minor traffic violations) of the applicant during the ten (10) years immediately preceding the filing of the application. As to each such conviction, such list shall indicate:

    a.   The date of the offense;

    b.   The place where the offense occurred;

    c.   The date of conviction;

    d.   The identity of the court entering the judgment of conviction;

    e.   The penalty imposed;

    f.    The date upon which the applicant satisfied the requirements of the penalty (i.e., paid the fine, completed serving a jail or prison sentence, completed probation, etc.).

    3.   A list indicating as to the ten (10) year period immediately preceding the filing of the application:

    a.   Whether the applicant had received mental health counseling, and, if so, indicating when, where and why such counseling was received and giving the name and address of the mental health practitioner or facility involved;

    b.   Whether the applicant had been voluntarily or involuntarily committed for psychiatric or mental health treatment, and if so, indicating when, where and why such commitment occurred and giving the name and address of the practitioner or facility providing the psychiatric or mental health treatment;

    c.   Whether the applicant has had any chemical use or abuse problems or whether the applicant has voluntarily or involuntarily participated in or was ordered by a court or otherwise committed to a treatment program for substance abuse or addiction. If so, the applicant shall furnish details as to the matter sufficient to advise as to when, where and why the problems occurred and describe the treatment program participated in by the applicant.

    4.   A full set of fingerprints (to be provided at the applicant’s expense).

    5.   Documentation that the applicant has successfully completed an approved security guard program and an approved firearms course.

    6.   A statement that the applicant is not currently employed as a peace officer or that the applicant, if currently employed as a peace officer, will not serve as a security guard while being so employed. No security guard license shall be issued to a currently employed peace officer.

    7.   In the case of an alien, proper work documents indicating that the applicant is lawfully in the United States and entitled to employment in this country.

    8.   Other documents as deemed necessary by the City Clerk or the Chief of Police.

    C.   For an unarmed security guard license: all of the information required for an armed security guard license, except that documentation that the applicant has completed an approved firearms course will not be required. (Ord. 33-2010 §§ 13—16; Ord. 9-1992 § 1)

 

5.32.040 Issuance or denial of licenses.
    A.  Upon submission of a completed application to the license officer, and payment of the fee provided for at Section 5.32.050, the license officer shall cause the application to be transmitted to the Chief of Police or designee for investigation of the accuracy of the application and the character, integrity and competency of the applicant. Thereafter, the Chief of Police shall report his or her findings and recommendations in a timely manner to the license officer, who shall either grant or deny the application.

    B.   The license officer shall deny an application for any of the following reasons:

    1.   The applicant is under the age of twenty-one (21) years or, if an alien, has failed to produce proper work documents.

    2.   The character and reputation and past conduct of the applicant is unsatisfactory.

    3.   The applicant has been convicted of a felony, or a misdemeanor or ordinance violation involving moral turpitude, or any crime of violence within ten (10) years immediately preceding the date of application, or if the applicant had been imprisoned with respect to any such conviction, at any time within the five (5) years immediately preceding the filing of the application.

    4.   The applicant has had a civil judgment entered against him or her for fraud, theft, deceit or misrepresentation within the ten (10) years immediately preceding the date of application which has not been paid or otherwise satisfied.

    5.   The applicant is addicted to drugs or is habitually intoxicated or has a history of emotional or psychiatric instability.

    6.   An applicant for a security guard license has not satisfactorily indicated he or she will be employed by a licensed merchant patrol or security guard service.

    7.   An applicant for a security guard license has failed to provide acceptable documentation that the applicant has successfully completed an approved security guard program and, if required, an approved firearms course. This requirement will apply to all applicants, including former law enforcement officers.

    C.   Upon approval of an application, payment of license fees, and posting of a sufficient and proper bond and, where required, proof of adequate insurance, all as provided in this chapter, the license officer shall issue the license. (Ord. 9-1992 § 1)

 

5.32.050 Schedule of fees.
    A.  License fees payable to the City of Cañon City shall be charged according to the following schedule:

    1.   Merchant Patrol or Security Guard Service—Annual Fee. One hundred dollars ($100.00) for the issuance of the initial license and fifty dollars ($50.00) for the timely renewal of such initial service license or any subsequently issued service license if no material or substantial change has occurred since the initial application.

    2.   Security Guard—Annual Fee. Fifty dollars ($50.00) for the issuance of the initial license and twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the timely renewal of such initial license or any subsequently issued license.

    B.   No application shall be processed if not accompanied by the applicable license fee. No license fee shall be refundable in whole or in part, even if the application is denied. (Ord. 33-2010 § 17; Ord. 9-1992 § 1)

 

5.32.060 Bond—Required—Amount—Liability insurance.
    A.  Before a license shall be issued for engaging in business as a merchant patrol or security guard service, the applicant shall file with the license officer a bond running to the City, in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), with good and sufficient sureties, conditioned that the applicant shall comply fully with all of the provisions of the ordinances of the City regulating and concerning such business, and further conditioned on the faithful performance and honest conduct of all security guards employed by the licensee and will pay all judgments rendered against such applicant for any violation of such ordinances or conditions, and hold the City harmless on account of the issuance of such license. Such bond shall remain in force and be binding for the period of the license, and may be continued from year to year thereafter upon giving to the license officer a continuation certificate signed by the sureties thereon.

    B.   Before any merchant patrol or security guard service license shall be issued, the applicant for such license shall file a certificate of insurance evidencing that the applicant is covered by comprehensive general liability insurance in amounts equal to or greater than those minimum coverage amounts specified by the City Administrator or designee for the type of license to be issued pursuant to this chapter. Such certificate shall provide that the City of Cañon City is named as an additional insured. Each insurance certificate shall provide that the holder of the insurance policy and the City will be notified by the insurer not fewer than thirty (30) days prior to any material decrease in coverage or cancellation of the policy. All such insurance must be maintained and remain in full force and effect during the period for which the license will be issued. (Ord. 33-2010 § 18; Ord. 9-1992 § 1)

 

5.32.070 Prohibited practices.
    A.  Security guards shall not carry firearms while in the course of their employment for any merchant patrol or security guard service unless the merchant patrol or security guard service certifies in writing to the Chief of Police that such security guard has successfully completed an approved firearms course. Nothing herein shall be construed to permit a security guard to carry an illegal weapon or to carry any concealed weapon.

    B.   Security guards shall not arrest any person except as permitted by law for any citizen.

    C.   Security guards shall not represent themselves in any manner to be a peace officer or as having any police authority.

    D.  Security guards shall not wear any uniforms unless same are first approved by the Chief of Police. No uniform shall be deceptively similar to any uniform worn by any law enforcement agency in the County of Fremont, nor shall any uniform bear the words “police” or “officer” anywhere thereon. (Ord. 9-1992 § 1)

 

5.32.080 Renewal of license.
    Renewals for licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5.66 of this title. (Ord. 33-2010 § 19; Ord. 9-1992 § 1)

 

5.32.090 Transfer of licenses.
    A.  All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be nontransferable and non-assignable. Persons negotiating for the purchase of an existing merchant patrol or security guard service having a license issued pursuant to this chapter may, in contemplation of the acquisition of such service, file an application for license pursuant to Section 5.32.030 (which must be accompanied by the appropriate fee) and receive an advisory opinion from the license officer as to whether the license would be granted to the applicant. Such application must be complete and accurate in all respects before the applicant will be entitled to an advisory opinion. If the advisory opinion is that the license will be granted to the applicant, the applicant shall have sixty (60) days from the issuance of the advisory opinion to submit documentation showing that the purchase of the service has been completed and necessary proof of bonding and insurance. Upon the submission of such documentation and necessary proof of bonding and insurance and review by the license officer, the applicant’s license will be issued. The time allowed for submission of such documentation and necessary proof of bonding and insurance may be extended by the license officer for an additional sixty (60) days upon the license officer’s receipt of a written request for extension filed within the original sixty (60) day period. (Ord. 9-1992 § 1)

 

5.32.100 Suspension or revocation of license.
    A.  After notice and hearing, a merchant patrol or security guard service license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the license officer for any of the following reasons:

    1.   That the licensee or any employee of the licensee has been convicted of a felony or of a violent crime or of any offense involving moral turpitude under the laws of the United States or under the laws of any state or territory of the United States or the ordinances of this City.

    2.   That the licensee or any employee of the licensee has failed to report a crime to the Police Department or has failed to report circumstances to the Police Department which should have put a reasonable prudent security guard on notice that a crime has been committed.

    3.   That the licensee or any employee of the licensee has violated any provision of this chapter.

    B.   After notice and hearing, the license officer shall suspend or revoke the license of any security guard for any of the following reasons:

    1.   Failure to report to the Police Department a crime of which the security guard has knowledge.

    2.   Failure to report to the Police Department any circumstances which would lead a reasonable prudent security guard in his or her circumstances to believe that a crime has been committed.

    3.   Violation of any provision of this chapter.

    C.   The license officer shall summarily suspend and demand surrender of the license of any licensee charged in any court of competent jurisdiction with the commission of a felony or of an offense involving moral turpitude or of a crime of violence or if the licensee is committed pursuant to a court order for mental health treatment or treatment for substance abuse. Thereafter, he or she shall forthwith give notice of hearing and provide a hearing to determine by a preponderance of evidence whether such offense was committed. In the event he or she so determines, the suspension of such license shall continue pending final disposition of such charges.

    D.  Notice of hearing shall be served at least three (3) days before hearing is held.

    E.   At any such hearing, conviction of any offense may be but is not required to be proven by a transcript of the judgment or order of conviction certified by the judge or clerk of the court in which said conviction occurred.

    F.   No suspension shall be for a period longer than six (6) months.

    G.  Whenever any license is revoked, no part of the fee paid shall be returned to the licensee.

    H.  Any person whose license shall be revoked hereunder shall not be eligible for a new license for a period of two (2) calendar years from the date of revocation. (Ord. 9-1992 § 1)

 

5.32.110 Compliance with the City Code.
    Nothing herein shall be construed as permitting or allowing any licensee hereunder to violate or to disobey any provision of this Code or any ordinances of the City of Cañon City or exercise any authority of a peace officer. (Ord. 9-1992 § 1)

 

5.32.120 Badges, uniforms and equipment.
    The Chief of Police shall regulate the style of all badges, uniforms and equipment used by persons engaged in the merchant patrol or security guard service business to the end that the same shall be sufficiently distinctive to avoid confusion in the mind of the public with badges, uniforms and equipment of local law enforcement agencies. For purposes of this section, “equipment” shall include paint, insignias and markings on motor vehicles. Security guards shall wear City-issued photo identification badges in clear view at all times while providing security services. (Ord. 33-2010 § 20; Ord. 9-1992 § 1)

 

5.32.130 Duty to report break-in and other suspicious circumstances.
    It is unlawful for any person engaged in merchant patrol or security guard work, whether or not licensed under this Code, to fail or refuse to report any break-in or suspicious circumstances to the Police Department as soon as possible. All persons licensed hereunder shall cooperate with the Police Department in the investigation of such circumstances when requested to do so, but shall not attempt to investigate such break-in or suspicious circumstances him or herself. (Ord. 9-1992 § 1)

 

5.32.140 Violation—Misdemeanor—Administrative penalty.
    Penalties for violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter 5.32 shall be as provided in Chapter 5.66 of this title. (Ord. 33-2010 § 21; Ord. 9-1992 § 1)

Chapter 5.34 MOBILE HOME PARKS
5.34.010 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter, “mobile home park” means a residential development which is located on property under single parcel ownership, and which is designed and intended primarily for two (2) or more mobile homes, each placed upon a mobile home rental pad within an individual mobile home rental space with utility hookups provided, and which is arranged for operation by on-site management. (Ord. 1-1998 § 1)

 

5.34.020 License to operate required.
    No person shall operate or maintain within the city any mobile home park without first securing from the City Clerk a license for the same, as provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 1-1998 § 1)

 

5.34.030 Application procedure.
    Application for such license shall be in writing and shall state the address of the premises occupied or proposed to be occupied, the name of the owner of the premises, and that such owner has consented to the premises as a mobile home park, shall give such other information as the City Administrator may require, and shall be signed by the applicant. (Ord. 1-1998 § 1)

 

5.34.040 Issuance of license—Inspection.
    A.  Upon receipt of such application, the City Administrator shall conduct or cause to be conducted a detailed inspection of such premises, and shall require the applicant to comply with the requirements and regulations set forth in Section 17.20.135 of the Municipal Code.

    B.   If a detailed inspection of the premises reveals that all regulations contained in Section 17.20.135, and all provisions of all other applicable ordinances of the City, have been fully complied with, the City Administrator shall cause to be issued by the City Clerk a mobile home park license to the applicant upon payment of those fees provided for in this chapter. Such license fees shall be paid in advance and such license shall expire on December 31st of the year in which it is issued. (Ord. 1-1998 § 1)

 

5.34.050 License fee.
    The license fee to operate a mobile home park shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year. (Ord. 1-1998 § 1)

 

5.34.060 Inspection authority—License revocation.
    All proper officers of the City shall have access to each mobile home park at all reasonable times to inspect the same and ascertain whether the provisions of Section 17.20.135 of the Municipal Code are being complied with. If any person operating a mobile home park shall fail to maintain the same in a safe and sanitary condition, or maintains and conducts it contrary to the requirements and regulations set forth in the ordinances of the City, or contrary to the requirements and regulations set forth in this chapter, the City Administrator may, after a hearing held before the City Council, due notice of which shall be given, revoke such mobile home park license. (Ord. 1-1998 § 1)

 

5.34.070 Renewals.
    Renewals for licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5.66 of this title. (Ord. 33-2010 § 22)

 

5.34.080 Violation—Misdemeanor—Administrative penalty.
    Penalties for violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter 5.34 shall be as provided in Chapter 5.66 of this title. (Ord. 33-2010 § 23)

Chapter 5.36 PAWNBROKERS
5.36.010 License required.
    No person shall carry on the business of pawnbroker in the city without a valid pawnbroker license obtained from the City Clerk in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 34-2010 § 1)

 

5.36.020 General licensing authority.
    A.  In addition to the specific provisions of this chapter, the general and customary procedures and requirements for issuance and administration of licenses by the City Clerk shall apply to pawnbroker licenses.

    B.   The City Clerk, with the assistance of the Chief of the Cañon City Police Department, shall have authority to promulgate and employ reasonable regulations associated with the making and processing of applications for pawnbroker licenses and proceedings associated with the issuance, denial, suspension and revocation of pawnbroker licenses. (Ord. 34-2010 § 1)

 

5.36.030 Compliance with state law.
    The operations of pawnbrokers within the city shall be governed by the applicable provisions of state law, including specifically those set forth in Article 56 of Title 12, Colorado Revised Statutes, as supplemented by the provisions of this Chapter 5.36. Violations of applicable state law or of the provisions of this chapter shall be grounds for denial, revocation or suspension of any license issued or issuable hereunder. (Ord. 34-2010 § 1)

 

5.36.040 Records keeping and inspection requirements.
    A.  Records Keeping Requirement. Records keeping, reporting, sales procedures, document maintenance and submittals shall be governed by Article 56 of Title 12, C.R.S. and any local regulations adopted pursuant to authorization granted in this chapter.

    B.   Inspection of the Licensed Premises. The licensed premises, including any places where documents or inventory may be stored or maintained, shall be subject to inspection by law enforcement officers during all business hours and all other times of apparent activity, for the purpose of inspection or investigation. For examination of any books and records required to be kept by licensees, access shall only be required during business hours. Where any part of the licensed premises consists of a locked area, upon demand to the licensee, such area shall be made available for inspection without delay and, upon request by a law enforcement officer, such licensee shall open said area for inspection. (Ord. 34-2010 § 1)

 

5.36.050 Application and license fees.
    Application for a pawnbrokers license shall be made on forms provided by the City Clerk for such purpose. For a license to operate within the city limits of Cañon City, a pawnbroker shall pay a licensing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each calendar year or portion thereof. (Ord. 34-2010 § 1)

 

5.36.060 Renewals.
    Renewals of the licenses provided for in this Chapter 5.36 shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5.66 of this title. (Ord. 34-2010 § 1)

 

5.36.070 Violation—Misdemeanor.
    Penalties for violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter 5.36 shall be as provided in Chapter 5.66 of this title. (Ord. 34-2010 § 1)

Chapter 5.40 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS
5.40.010 Purpose.
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish reasonable restrictions on door-to-door peddlers in order to protect the citizens of the City of Cañon City from fraud, misrepresentation, crime, undo annoyance and loss of privacy, and to promote the public health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the City. This chapter recognizes that differences exist between persons who peddle for commercial purposes and those who canvass and solicit for noncommercial purposes. It is not the intent of this chapter to regulate the content of speech or expressive activities. To that end, this chapter employs the least restrictive means necessary to serve its purposes. (Ord. 16-2008 § 2)

 

5.40.020 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter, the following words have the meaning indicated:

    A.  “Canvasser” means a person who makes or attempts to make personal contact with a resident at his or her residence without a prior specific invitation from the resident or a prior specific appointment with the resident for the primary purpose of: (1) attempting to enlist support for or against a particular philosophy, ideology, political party, issue, candidate, or religion, even if incidental to such purpose the canvasser accepts the donation of money for or against such cause; or (2) distributing a handbill or flyer advertising a noncommercial event or service.

    B.   “Door-to-Door Sales” mean the selling, attempting to sell or the solicitation of orders for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise, services, magazines, contracts, policies of insurance, stocks, bonds, rights or anything of value at residences within the City.

    C.   “No Solicitation Sign” means a sign indicating a prohibition against peddling, soliciting and/or canvassing that contains any of the following groups of words: “No Solicitation”; “No Solicitors”; “No Peddlers”; “No Solicitors or Peddlers”; “No Trespassing”; or words of similar import. (See also Section 5.40.150 of this chapter regarding size, placement and location of no solicitation signs.)

    D.  “Peddler” means a person who makes or attempts to make personal contact with a resident at his or her residence without a prior specific invitation from the resident or a prior specific appointment with the resident for the primary purpose of engaging in door-to-door sales.

    E.   “Person” means a human being, but also includes individuals, firms, corporations, limited liability companies, partnerships and other entities that employ or otherwise engage peddlers, solicitors and/or canvassers to perform on their behalf.

    F.   “Residence” means the private residences of the inhabitants of the City, including, but not limited to, single-family residences, duplexes, condominium units, townhouse units, apartments and/or the yards, grounds or hallways thereof.

    G.  “Sales Tax,” “Sales Tax License” and “Sales Tax Return” shall have the meanings ascribed to such terms in Chapter 3.12 of the Cañon City Municipal Code, the City’s Sales and Use Tax Ordinance.

    H.  “Solicitor” means a person who attempts to make personal contact with a resident at his or her residence without prior specific invitation from the resident or a prior specific appointment with the resident for the primary purpose of attempting to obtain a donation to a particular patriotic, philanthropic, social service, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic, fraternal, charitable, political or religious purpose, even if incidental to such purpose there is the exchange of some good or service for a donation to the organization. (Ord. 16-2008 § 2)

 

5.40.030 Permits and licenses.
    A.  Peddler’s License Required. Each self-employed person who engages in door-to-door sales at residences within the City and each person (including natural persons and entities) who employs or otherwise engages any other person for salary, commission or other remuneration to conduct door-to-door sales at residences within the city, before such door-to-door sales have commenced, shall register, apply for and obtain a peddler’s license from the City Clerk and pay the license fee as provided by this chapter.

    B.   Peddler’s Permit Required. Each and every person who goes in or upon any residence within the city for the purpose of engaging in door-to-door sales, when not previously requested or invited to do so by the owner or occupant of the residence, shall register, apply for and obtain a peddler’s permit from the City Clerk and pay the permit fee as provided in this chapter before going in or upon such residence. (Ord. 16-2008 § 2)

 

5.40.040 Fees.
    A.  Peddler’s License. The annual license fee for each self-employed peddler and for each person (including natural persons and entities) who employs or otherwise engages any other person for salary, commission or other remuneration to conduct door-to-door sales shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the initial application, and fifty dollars ($50.00) for each subsequent year renewal if no substantial changes to the initial license application have occurred during the course of the previous licensing year. Substantial changes may result in additional fees being charged, up to and including the initial application fee, at the discretion of the City Clerk. Such license shall be issued for one calendar year or portion thereof.

    B.   Peddler’s Permit. The annual permit fee for each peddler engaging in door-to-door sales at residences within the City shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for the initial application, and thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for each subsequent year’s renewal if no substantial changes to the initial permit application have occurred during the course of the previous licensing year. Substantial changes may result in additional fees being charged, up to and including the initial application fee, at the discretion of the City Clerk. Such permit shall be issued for one calendar year or portion thereof.

    C.   A late renewal fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be charged for each renewal application received after the renewal deadline of January 31st, but before March 1st of each calendar year.

    D.  If any licensee shall fail to make timely application for renewal or otherwise comply with the requirements of this section, such licensee, if such licensee wishes to obtain a license, must then make application in the manner set forth for an initial license or permit and such application will be processed and considered in accordance with the provisions of this section. In such event, fees payable with respect to initial licenses and permits, and not renewals, shall apply.

    E.   Peddler’s permits shall serve as an identification card for each person to whom a permit has been issued. (Ord. 33-2010 § 24)

 

5.40.050 Application contents.
    A.  Each applicant for a license or permit shall file with the City Clerk an affidavit on a form supplied by the City Clerk stating or containing:

    1.   The full name of the applicant;

    2.   The business address of the applicant;

    3.   The business telephone numbers of the applicant;

    4.   The residence addresses, temporary and permanent, of the applicant;

    5.   The residence telephone numbers of the applicant;

    6.   A physical description of the applicant, including height, weight, color of eyes and color of hair;

    7.   The number and state of issuance of the applicant’s motor vehicle operator’s license or chauffeur’s license, if any, or other form of identification acceptable to the City Clerk;

    8.   The number on and state of issuance of the license plates or any motor vehicle owned, rented or being driven by the applicant and of any motor vehicle which the applicant intends to use in the course of door-to-door sales, a description of any such motor vehicle, and the name and address of the owner of such motor vehicle;

    9.   A list of all cities in which a peddler’s license or permit is presently held by the applicant;

    10. A statement as to whether the applicant is presently on parole or probation for any criminal violations (with additional details if the applicant is on parole or probation);

    11. A statement as to whether the applicant is required to register as a “convicted sex offender” pursuant to Section 16-22-103, C.R.S.;

 

    12. A brief explanation of the nature of the merchandise to be sold or other activity that requires a license or permit under this chapter. Copies of promotional sales brochures may satisfy this requirement;

    13. The names, business addresses, business telephone numbers, residence addresses and residence telephone numbers of all persons employing and/or supervising the applicant;

    14. If the applicant is a foreign corporation or an employee of such corporation, a statement listing the name, address and telephone number of an agent for process residing in the State;

    15. A statement that the applicant is a citizen of the United State of America or is otherwise legally in the United States, if such a statement is required by State or Federal law as a precondition to the issuance of the license or permit requested. (Proof that an applicant is legally in the United States may be required by such laws.);

    16. Before any peddler’s license shall be issued, the applicant for such license shall file a certificate of insurance evidencing that the applicant is covered by comprehensive general liability insurance in amounts equal to or greater than those minimum coverage amounts specified by the City Administrator or designee for the type of license to be issued pursuant to this chapter. Such certificate shall provide that the City of Cañon City is named as an additional insured. All such insurance must be maintained and remain in full force and effect during the period for which the license will be issued. Each insurance certificate shall provide that the holder of the insurance policy and the City will be notified by the insurer not fewer than thirty (30) days prior to any material decrease in coverage or cancellation of the policy;

    17. Any additional information or document reasonably requested by the City Clerk. (Ord. 33-2010 § 25; Ord. 16-2008 § 2)

 

5.40.060 License or permit—Investigation—Grounds for denial or revocation.
    A.  Upon receipt of an application for a permit or license required hereunder, the City Clerk shall make an investigation of the applicant’s character and responsibility by any means available and shall either issue or deny the permit or license within five (5) business days following the date upon which a complete application was filed with the City Clerk and the appropriate fee was paid.

    B.   The City Clerk may deny the issuance of a license or permit provided for in this chapter or revoke any previously-issued license or permit for any of the following reasons:

    1.   The applicant, licensee or permittee was convicted in a criminal court of record (in the city or elsewhere) of a crime having as an essential element fraud, deceit or misrepresentation arising from the door-to-door sales activities of the applicant within the five (5) year period immediately preceding the date of the denial or revocation;

    2.   The applicant, licensee or permittee violated or otherwise failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter;

    3.   A self-employed peddler or the employer of a peddler failed to: (a) obtain a sales tax license before engaging in business within the city; and/or (b) timely file with the City any required sales tax return; and/or (c) remit to the City any sales tax when due;

    4.   The applicant, licensee or permittee was convicted for crimes against the person or property of another, or institutionalization for mental illness which caused acts of violence against the person or property of another; provided, however, that the applicant’s rehabilitation shall be considered with respect to felony convictions or institutionalization occurring earlier than five (5) years preceding the date of application;

    5.   The applicant, licensee or permittee is legally obligated to register under the Colorado Sex Offender Registration Act pursuant to Section 16-22-103, C.R.S.; provided, however, that the applicant’s rehabilitation shall be considered with respect to felony convictions occurring earlier than five (5) years preceding the date of application.

    C.   For purposes of this section:

    1.   Crimes or acts of violence against the person of another shall include homicide, attempted homicide, rape, attempted rape, sexual assault, assault, battery and other similar felonies involving moral turpitude by whatever name; and

    2.   Crimes or acts against the property of another shall include theft, burglary, breaking and entering, larceny and other similar felonies involving moral turpitude by whatever name.

    D.  Persons whose applications for licenses or permits have been denied shall be notified in writing of the reason for such denial.

    E.   The provisions of this section pertaining to the revocation of a previously-issued license or permit shall be self-executing and the revocation shall be effective immediately. The City Clerk shall give notice of the revocation of a license or permit. Sufficient notice shall be given by personal service of the notice upon the licensee or permittee or by mailing the notice to the licensee or permittee at his or her last known address by certified mail, return receipt required. The last known address of any licensee or permittee shall be the address shown on his or her application, unless a written notice of change of address had been delivered to and received by the City Clerk prior to the date upon which the notice was mailed.

    F.   Upon written request to the City Clerk, any person whose license or permit was denied or revoked shall be entitled to an administrative hearing. The City Clerk, or another hearing officer designated by the City Clerk, shall serve as presiding officer. Any such hearing shall be conducted within ten (10) business days following the date the written request is filed. The presiding officer shall determine whether reasons for denial or revocation of the license or permit in fact exist, based upon the evidence and statements presented during the hearing. (Ord. 16-2008 § 2)

 

5.40.070 Appeals to City Administrator.
    Any person may appeal any decision made by the City Clerk (or by a hearing officer designated by the City Clerk) relating to their license or permit to the City Administrator pursuant to Section 2.52.010(C) of this Code. (Ord. 18-2020 § 4)

 

5.40.080 Licenses and permits are nontransferable.
    A.  No person shall transfer or attempt to transfer a peddler’s license to any other person.

    B.   No peddler’s license shall be used by any person other than the person to whom it was issued.

    C.   No person shall transfer or attempt to transfer a peddler’s permit to any other person.

    D.  No peddler’s permit shall be used by any person other than the person to whom it was issued. (Ord. 16-2008 § 2)

 

5.40.090 Records.
    A.  The City Clerk shall maintain records showing each license and permit issued pursuant to this chapter and the alleged violations of this chapter, if any, by each licensee and permittee; provided that no such records need be kept for longer than five (5) years.

    B.   Each person holding a license or permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall notify the City Clerk in writing of any change in the information reported on such person’s application for such license or permit no later than ten (10) days after such change occurs. (Ord. 16-2008 § 2)

 

5.40.110 Permits to serve as identification cards.
    A.  A peddler’s permit issued by the City Clerk shall also serve as an identification card and shall bear the words “Permitted Person” and include a photographic image of the permitted person.

    B.   At all times when engaged in door-to-door sales activities, each peddler must be in possession of his or her permit and conspicuously display such permit.

    C.   No person issued a permit shall alter, remove or obliterate any entry made thereon, nor deface such permit in any way. (Ord. 16-2008 § 2)

 

5.40.120 Construction.
    It is the intent of the City Council that each peddler who engages in door-to-door sales in the city have a valid permit before engaging in such activities and that each principal on behalf of whom a peddler is acting shall have both a valid sales tax license and a valid peddler’s license before such peddler engages in door-to-door sales activities in the city. (Ord. 16-2008 § 2)

 

5.40.130 Exemptions.
    A.  The following classes of persons shall not be required to obtain a license or permit otherwise required by this chapter: tax exempt and non-profit civic, religious, charitable or political organizations and natural persons authorized by such civic, religious, charitable or political organizations to function as solicitors or canvassers.

    B.   Organizations that employ or otherwise engage solicitors or canvassers to conduct activities door-to-door in the residential neighborhoods of the city are encouraged to register with the City Clerk for purposes of providing the City Clerk with information that may be used to reassure residents of the city that the solicitors and/or canvassers affiliated with such organizations appear to be operating in good faith for the benefit of the registered organization. No fee shall be charged to organizations that register with the City Clerk pursuant to this section. (Ord. 16-2008 § 2)

 

5.40.140 Conditions and regulations.
    A.  The following additional conditions and regulations also shall apply to the exercise of the privileges granted by a permit issued to a peddler under the provisions of this chapter.

    1.   Violation of Ordinances and Statutes. No person acting under authority of any permit issued under this chapter shall violate any City ordinance or any State or Federal statute while engaged in door-to-door sales activities within the city. Minor traffic violations are excepted from this provision.

    2.   Identification by Comparing Signature With That on Permit. Every peddler engaged in door-to-door sales activities shall display his or her permit and sign his or her name for comparison with the signature upon the permit or the permit application, upon the request of any police officer or other officer of the City.

    3.   Order to be Written in Duplicate. Any peddler acting under authority of any permit issued under this chapter who solicits orders for future delivery shall write each order at least in duplicate, plainly stating the quantity of each article or commodity ordered, the price to be paid therefor, the total amount ordered and the amount to be paid on or after delivery. One copy of such order shall be given to the customer.

    4.   Identification Upon Request. Every peddler engaged in door-to-door sales activities within the city shall, upon request, provide his or her name, business address and telephone number, and the name, business address and telephone number of the person, organization, or entity represented by such peddler to any person contacted at a residence by such peddler. (Ord. 16-2008 § 2)

 

5.40.150 Peddling, soliciting or canvassing unlawful where a “No Solicitation” sign posted.
    A.  Except as provided in Subsection B of this section, it is unlawful for any peddler, solicitor or canvasser to:

    1.   Enter upon any residence where a no solicitation sign that is visible from the right-of-way (public or private) has been clearly posted in the front yard. Any such sign shall be at least one square foot in size and the words thereon shall be displayed in letters that are at least two (2) inches in height.

    2.   Remain upon any residence or residential property where a no solicitation sign that is clearly visible is placed upon or within two (2) feet of any door or entranceway leading into the residence.

    3.   Use or attempt to use any entrance other than the front or main entrance to the residence, or step from the sidewalk or indicated walkway (where one exists) leading from the right-of-way to the front or main entrance of the residence, except by express invitation of the resident or occupant of the property.

    4.   Remove a no solicitation sign from the yard or other property of any person without the express permission of the owner of such property.

    B.   A peddler, solicitor, or canvasser may enter upon property posted with a no solicitation sign if he or she had an express invitation from, or a specific appointment with, the owner or occupant of the posted property authorizing him or her to enter upon such posted property at the time when such entry was made. (Ord. 16-2008 § 2)

 

5.40.160 Times when unsolicited contact is prohibited.
    Unless he or she has been invited and has a specific appointment with the owner or other occupant of a residence, no peddler, solicitor or canvasser shall enter upon any private residence, knock on doors, ring doorbells or otherwise disturb persons in their residences between the hours seven p.m. and nine a.m. (Ord. 16-2008 § 2)

 

5.40.170 Trespass laws not affected.
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to repeal or otherwise restrict or prohibit the enforcement of any ordinance or statute concerning trespassing on public or private property. (Ord. 16-2008 § 2)

 

5.40.180 Distribution of handbills and commercial flyers.
    A.  In addition to the other provisions of this chapter, a peddler, solicitor or canvasser leaving handbills or commercial flyers in and about the community shall observe the following regulations:

    1.   No handbill or flyer shall be left at or attached to any sign, utility pole, transit shelter or other structure within a public right-of-way.

    2.   No handbill or flyer shall be left at or attached to any privately owned property in a manner that causes damage to such privately owned property. (Ord. 16-2008 § 2)

 

5.40.190 Exceptions.
    This chapter shall not apply to a Federal, State or local government employee or a public utility employee engaged in the performance of his or her duties for his or her employer. (Ord. 16-2008 § 2)

 

5.40.200 Penalties.
    A.  Any person who violates any provision of Section 5.40.030, 5.40.080, 5.40.110, 5.40.140, 5.40.150, 5.40.160 or 5.40.180, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in an amount that does not exceed the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010.

    B.   A separate offense may be charged for each calendar day when any such violation occurs or continues to occur.

    C.   In addition to any penalty provided for in Subsection A, any person convicted of violating any provision of Section 5.40.030, 5.40.080, 5.40.110, 5.40.140, 5.40.150, 5.40.160 or 5.40.180 shall automatically forfeit any license or permit issued under the provisions of this chapter and such person shall be prohibited from obtaining a license or permit hereunder for a period of twenty-four (24) months. (Ord. 17-2013 § 10; Ord. 16-2008 § 2)

Chapter 5.42 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
5.42.010 Purpose and intent.
    The purpose and intent of this chapter is to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and design of sexually oriented businesses within the city, thereby reducing or eliminating the adverse secondary effects from such sexually oriented businesses. The provisions of this chapter are not intended to impose a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. It is not the intent of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment or the Colorado Constitution, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. (Ord. 30-2000 § 1)

 

5.42.020 Definitions.
    Words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings ascribed to them:

    “Adult arcade” means any commercial establishment to which the public is permitted or invited where, for any form of consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors, or similar machines, or other image or virtual reality producing machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, are used regularly to show films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic, digital or electronic reproductions describing, simulating or depicting “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”

    “Adult bookstore,” “adult novelty store,” or “adult video” means a commercial establishment that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:

    1.   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations however produced that depict or describe “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”; or

    2.   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with “specified sexual activities.”

    “Adult cabaret” means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, concert hall, auditorium or other commercial establishment that features:

    1.   Persons who appear nude or in a state of nudity or seminudity; or

    2.   Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or by the exhibition of “specified sexual activities.”

    “Adult motel” means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration and provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmission, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other media productions, however produced, which are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas,” and which commercial establishment has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of media production.

    “Adult motion picture theater” means a commercial establishment that is distinguished or characterized by the showing, for any form of consideration, of films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions, on more than one hundred days per year, that have an “X” rating or that have an emphasis on depicting or describing “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”

    “Adult theater” means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment that, for any form of consideration, regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by an emphasis on exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual activities.”

    “Commercial establishment” may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the depicting or describing “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” and still be categorized as a sexually oriented business. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as a sexually oriented business so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials that depict or describe “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.” The term “commercial establishment” includes clubs, fraternal organizations, social organizations, civic organizations or other similar organizations with paid memberships.

    “Employee” means a person who works or performs in and/or for a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage, or other compensation by the operator of said business.

    “Establishment of a sexually oriented business” means and includes any of the following:

    1.   The opening or commencement of any such business as a new business;

    2.   The conversion of an existing business into a sexually oriented business;

 

    3.   The addition of a different sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or

    4.   The relocation of a sexually oriented business.

    “Foyer” means an architectural element of a building that consists of an entry hall or vestibule that is completely enclosed and contains one door to provide access to areas outside of the building and a separate door to provide access to areas inside of the building.

    “Licensee” means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a sexually oriented business license. Licenses available to licensees are Type A and Type B licenses as more particularly described in Chapter 5.43 of this Code.

    “Licensing officer” means the City Clerk or designee.

    “Manager” means an operator, other than a licensee, who is employed by a sexually oriented business to act as a manager or supervisor of employees or is otherwise responsible for the operation of the business.

    “Nude model studio” means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays “specified anatomical areas” is provided for money or any form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculpted, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons.

    “Nudity” or “state of nudity” means:

    1.   The appearance of human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or the areola or nipple of the female breast; or

    2.   A state of dress which fails opaquely and fully to cover human buttocks, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region, or areola or nipple of the female breast.

    “Operator” means and includes the owner, license holder, custodian, manager, operator, or person in charge of any licensed premises.

    “Peep booth” means a room, semi-enclosure or other similar area located within a licensed premises wherein a person may view representations of “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities.”

    “Person” means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, association, or other legal entity.

    “Premises” or “licensed premises” means any premises that requires a sexually oriented business license and that is classified as a sexually oriented business, including parking lots and sidewalks immediately adjacent to the structure containing the sexually oriented business.

    “Principal business purpose” means as to any establishment, having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade the items listed in Subsections 1 and 2 of the definition of “adult bookstore,” “adult novelty store,” or “adult video store.”

    “Principal owner” means any person owning, directly or beneficially:

    1.   Ten percent or more of the membership interests in a limited liability company; or

    2.   In the case of any other legal entity, ten percent or more of the ownership interests in the entity.

    “Public park” means an area of land owned by a governmental entity and intended to be used for recreational purposes, but not including any such land that contains no improvements and is intended only for open space purposes, and not including any such land that is intended for use only for pathway purposes.

    “Seminude or seminudity” means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breasts, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices, which supporting straps or devices are used to support or enable the wearing of such clothing.

    “Sexually oriented business” means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty shop, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, or nude model studio. The definition of sexually oriented business shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state of Colorado engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.

    “Specified anatomical areas” as used in this chapter means and includes any of the following:

    1.   Human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola, that are not completely and opaquely covered; or

    2.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered.

    “Specified criminal acts” means sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, sexual assault, or crimes connected with another sexually oriented business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity, prostitution, or pandering.

    “Specified sexual activities” means and includes any of the following:

    1.   The fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts;

    2.   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;

    3.   Masturbation, actual or simulated;

    4.   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence; or

    5.   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in Subsections 1 through 4 of this definition.

    “Transfer of ownership” or “control of a sexually oriented business” means and includes any of the following:

    1.   The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;

    2.   The transfer of securities that constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or

    3.   The establishment of a trust, management arrangement, gift or other similar legal device that transfers ownership or control of the business, including a transfer by bequest or operation of law.

    The definitions set forth in this section shall apply with respect to the use of the same terms elsewhere in this Code, including, but not limited to Chapter 5.43 and Title 17, unless a different definition is specifically contained in such other chapter or title in this Code. (Ord. 21-2016 § 1; Ord. 30-2000 § 1)

 

5.42.030 Interior lighting regulations.
    A.  The interior portion of the premises of a sexually oriented business to which patrons are permitted access shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place (including peep booths) at an illumination of not less than five foot candles as measured at the floor level.

    B.   It shall be the duty of the licensee and employees present on the premises to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present on the premises. (Ord. 30-2000 § 1)

 

5.42.040 Location of sexually oriented businesses and design of same.
    A.  It is unlawful to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business outside of the “I district, Class 1 industrial” and the “C district, general commercial,” as those two zone districts are more fully described in Chapter 17.12 of this Code.

    B.   The location requirements set forth in Subsection C of this section shall apply as a further limitation in all zone districts where sexually oriented businesses are permitted pursuant to Subsection A of this section.

    C.   It is unlawful to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business within five hundred feet of:

    1.   Any church, as described in Chapter 17.08 of this Code;

    2.   Any school meeting all requirements of the compulsory education laws of the state of Colorado;

    3.   Any residential zone district, whether or not developed, established and identified in Section 17.12.010(A) and more particularly described in Sections 17.12.060 through 17.12.120 of this Code;

    4.   Any existing dwelling unit, whether single-family or multi-family, as those terms are defined in Chapter 17.08 of this Code, that is occupied by its owner or by persons authorized by the owner to occupy such dwelling unit or has been vacant for less than six months;

    5.   Any child care center or children’s home, as those terms are described in Chapter 17.08 of this Code;

    6.   Any public park, as described in this Chapter 5.42;

    7.   Any social facility or recreational facility, as those terms are described in Chapter 17.08 of this Code, which is regularly open to and used by children under the age of eighteen years;

    8.   Any training facility, as described in Chapter 17.08 of this Code, that is regularly open to and used by children under the age of eighteen years.

    D.  It is unlawful to cause or permit the operation, establishment, or maintenance of a sexually oriented business within one hundred feet of any other sexually oriented business.

    E.   All exterior windows in a sexually oriented business shall be opaque to such an extent that interior objects viewed from outside shall be so obscure as to be unidentifiable. Exterior windows in sexually oriented businesses shall not be used for any display or sign except for a sign that complies with the requirements of Chapter 17.30 of this Code.

    F.   All doors for ingress and egress to a sexually oriented business, except emergency exits used only for emergency purposes, shall be located on the front of the sexually oriented business. For purposes of this subsection, the front of a sexually oriented business shall be deemed to be that façade of the building that faces the front lot line of the lot or parcel on which the business is located. Every sexually oriented business shall have a foyer at every point of ingress or egress, except for emergency exits. (Ord. 30-2000 § 1)

 

5.42.050 Measurement of distance.
    A.  The distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest exterior structural wall of each business, or, in the case of a sexually oriented business operating within a condominium estate or leasehold estate, from the closest airspace boundary of such condominium estate or from the closest wall of such leasehold estate.

    B.   The distance between any sexually oriented business and any church, school, dwelling unit, child care center, children’s home, public park, social facility, recreational facility or training facility shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior structural wall of the sexually oriented business to the nearest property line of the premises of a church, school, dwelling unit, child care center, children’s home, public park, social facility, recreational facility or training facility. If the premises where the sexually oriented business is conducted is comprised of a condominium estate or leasehold estate, such distance shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest airspace boundary of the condominium estate or the nearest wall of the leasehold estate used as part of the premises where the sexually oriented business is conducted to the nearest property line of the premises of a church, school, dwelling unit, child care center, children’s home, public park, social facility, recreational facility or training facility.

    C.   The distance between any sexually oriented business and any residential or other zone district where sexually oriented businesses are prohibited shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior structural wall of the sexually oriented business to the nearest boundary line of the residential or other zone district where sexually oriented businesses are prohibited. If the premises where the sexually oriented business is conducted is comprised of a condominium estate or leasehold estate, such distance shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest airspace boundary of the condominium estate or the nearest wall of the leasehold estate used as part of the premises where the sexually oriented business is conducted to the nearest boundary line of the residential or other zone district where sexually oriented businesses are prohibited. (Ord. 30-2000 § 1)

 

5.42.060 Other locational regulations.
    A.  Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter that is in violation of Section 5.42.040 will be permitted to continue for a period of six months from the effective date hereof.

    B.   Upon application made by the owner of a sexually oriented business within four months of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A of this section, the City Administrator may, after a hearing, grant an extension of time during which a sexually oriented business in violation of Section 5.42.040 will be permitted to continue upon a showing, by competent evidence, that the owner of the business has not had a reasonable time to recover the initial financial investment in the business. At the hearing, the City Administrator shall hear such statements and consider such evidence as the City Attorney, the owner, occupant, lessee, or other party in interest, or any other witness shall offer that is relevant to issue of whether the owner of the business has had a reasonable time to recover the initial financial investment in the business. The City Administrator shall make findings of fact, from the statements and evidence offered, as to whether the owner of the business has had a reasonable time to recover the initial financial investment in the business. If the City Administrator grants an extension of time during which a sexually oriented business in violation of Section 5.42.040 will be permitted to continue, he or she shall issue an order to that effect which states exactly the period of the extension. A copy of the order shall be mailed to or served on the owner within thirty (30) days of the hearing. No extension of time shall be for a period greater than that reasonably necessary for the owner of the business to recover his or her initial financial investment in the business. A sexually oriented business in violation of Section 5.42.040 may continue during such extended period unless the business is sooner terminated for any reason, or voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or more. Such business shall not be enlarged, extended, or altered except that the business may be brought into compliance with this chapter. In performing his or her duties pursuant to this section, the City Administrator may retain independent counsel to advise him or her with regard to any matter.

    C.   A sexually oriented business which at the time it received its sexually oriented business license was in compliance with the location requirements of Section 5.42.040 does not violate that section if, when the sexually oriented business applies to renew its valid sexually oriented business license pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 5.43 of this Code, a church, school, dwelling unit, child care center, children’s home, public park, social facility, recreational facility or training facility is then located within five hundred (500) feet of the sexually oriented business or if, by virtue of a zone change or the annexation and zoning of new territory not previously in the city, a residential or other zone district where sexually oriented businesses are prohibited is then located within five hundred (500) feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid sexually oriented business license and does not apply to an application for a sexually oriented business license that is submitted as a result of the previous sexually oriented business license at the same location expiring or being revoked. (Ord. 30-2000 § 1)

 

5.42.070 Stage required in adult cabaret and adult theater.
    Any adult cabaret or adult theater shall have one or more separate areas designated as a stage in the diagram submitted as part of the application for the sexually oriented business license. Entertainers shall perform only upon a stage. The stage shall be fixed and immovable and located inside the building in which the adult use operates. No seating for the audience shall be permitted within three (3) feet of the edge of the stage. No members of the audience shall be permitted upon the stage or within three (3) feet of the edge of the stage. (Ord. 30-2000 § 1)

 

5.42.080 Conduct in sexually oriented business.
    A.  No licensee, manager or employee mingling with the patrons of a sexually oriented business, or serving food or drinks, shall be in a state of nudity. It is a defense to any prosecution for a violation of this subsection that an employee of a sexually oriented business exposed any specified anatomical area only during the employee’s bona fide use of a restroom or during the employee’s bona fide use of a dressing room that is accessible only to employees.

    B.   No licensee, manager or employee shall encourage or knowingly permit any person upon the premises to touch, caress, or fondle the genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or breasts of any person. (Ord. 30-2000 § 1)

 

5.42.090 Employee tips.
    A.  It is unlawful for any employee of a sexually oriented business to receive tips from patrons except as set forth in Subsection C of this section.

    B.   A licensee that desires to provide for tips from its patrons shall establish one or more boxes or other containers to receive tips. All tips for such employees shall be placed by the patron of the sexually oriented business into the tip box.

    C.   A sexually oriented business that provides tip boxes for its patrons as provided in this section shall post one or more signs to be conspicuously visible to the patrons on the premises, in bold letters at least one inch high to read as follows:

      All tips are to be placed in the tip box and not handed directly to employees. Any physical contact between a patron and employees is strictly prohibited.

(Ord. 30-2000 § 1)

 

5.42.100 Unlawful acts and penalties.
    A.  It is unlawful for an operator, licensee, manager or employee to violate any of the requirements of this chapter, or of Chapter 5.43, or knowingly to permit any patron to violate the requirements of this chapter or of Chapter 5.43.

    B.   Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter 5.42, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in an amount that does not exceed the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010.

    C.   A separate offense may be charged for each calendar day when any such violation occurs or continues to occur. (Ord. 17-2013 § 11; Ord. 30-2000 § 1)

 

5.42.110 Exemptions.
    The provisions of this chapter regulating nude model studios do not apply to:

    1.   A college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;

    2.   A private college or university that maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or

    3.   A business located in a structure that has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class; and where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. (Ord. 30-2000 § 1)

 

5.42.120 Regulation of peep booths.
    A.  It is unlawful for a person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business with peep booths to violate the following requirements of this section:

    1.   At least one employee must be on duty and situated at each manager’s station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that such employee shall be clearly visible from every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. If the premises has two (2) or more manager’s stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of the employee in at least one of the manager’s stations from each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager’s station. The view area shall remain unobstructed by any opaque coverings, two-way mirrors, doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials at all times, and no patron shall be permitted access to any area of the premises that has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to Chapter 5.43 of this Code.

    2.   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video display equipment. If the premises has two (2) or more manager’s stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager’s stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager’s station. The view area shall remain unobstructed by any opaque coverings, two-way mirrors, doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials at all times, and no patron shall be permitted access to any area of the premises that has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to Chapter 5.43 of this Code.

    3.   No peep booth may be occupied by more than one person at any one time.

    4.   No door, two-way mirror, screen, opaque covering or other covering shall be placed or allowed to remain on any peep booth, and no holes or openings shall be placed or allowed to remain in the wall between any two (2) adjacent peep booths. (Ord. 30-2000 § 1)

 

5.42.130 Hours of operation.
    A.  It is unlawful for a sexually oriented business to be open for business or for the licensee, manager or any employee of a licensee to allow patrons upon the licensed premises between the hours of two a.m. and seven a.m. (Ord. 30-2000 § 1)

 

5.42.140 Minimum age.
    A.  Except for such employees as may be permitted by law, it is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to be upon the premises of a sexually oriented business that operates pursuant to a “Type A” sexually oriented business license. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be upon the premises of a sexually oriented business.

    B.   It is unlawful for the operator, licensee, manager or any employee of the licensee to allow anyone under the age of twenty-one (21) years, except for such employees as may be permitted by law, to be upon the premises of a sexually oriented business operated pursuant to a “Type A” sexually oriented business license. It is unlawful for the operator, licensee, manager or any employee of the licensee to allow anyone under the age of eighteen (18) years upon the premises of a sexually oriented business. (Ord. 30-2000 § 1)

 

5.42.150 Signs for sexually oriented businesses.
    In addition to complying with all other sign regulations set forth in Chapter 17.30 of this Code, a sexually oriented business shall display a sign, clearly visible and legible at the entrance to the business, that gives notice of the adult nature of the sexually oriented business and of the fact that the premises is off limits to minors or those under the age of twenty-one (21) years, as the case may be. No sign for a sexually oriented business shall contain flashing lights, words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations that emphasize specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. (Ord. 30-2000 § 1)

Chapter 5.43 LICENSING OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
5.43.010 Definitions.
    Certain words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in Section 5.42.020. (Ord. 30-2000 § 2)

 

5.43.020 Sexually oriented business license required.
    A.  No sexually oriented business license shall be issued for any sexually oriented business located within any zone district other than the “I” district, Class 1 Industrial and the “C” district, general commercial.

    B.   No person shall operate a sexually oriented business without first having obtained a valid Type A or Type B sexually oriented business license issued by the City.

    1.   A Type A sexually oriented business license shall be required for sexually oriented businesses where alcoholic beverages or alcoholic liquors, as defined by the Colorado Liquor Code, and/or fermented malt beverages, as defined by the Colorado Beer Code, are allowed pursuant to a valid liquor license.

    2.   A Type B sexually oriented business license shall be required for all sexually oriented businesses where alcoholic beverages or alcoholic liquors, as defined by the Colorado Liquor Code, and/or fermented malt beverages, as defined by the Colorado Beer Code, are not allowed.

    C.   It is unlawful to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business when said person knows or reasonably should know that:

    1.   The business does not have a sexually oriented business license;

    2.   The business has a sexually oriented business license that is under suspension;

    3.   The business has a sexually oriented business license that has been revoked;

    4.   The business has a sexually oriented business license that has expired;

    5.   The business operates under a Type B sexually oriented business license and allows alcoholic beverages or alcoholic liquors, as defined by the Colorado Liquor Code, and/or fermented malt beverages, as defined by the Colorado Beer Code, on the premises;

    6.   The business is in violation of any applicable provision of Chapter 5.42 of this Code. (Ord. 30-2000 § 2)

 

5.43.030 Fees.
    A license fee and a manager’s license fee shall be paid upon submission of an application and annually thereafter as follows:

    A.  The license fee for either a Type A or a Type B sexually oriented business shall be five hundred dollars for any first license and two hundred fifty dollars for any annual renewal of such license prior to expiration or revocation of the first license or any renewal thereof. Any license applied for following a revocation or expiration of a previously-issued license shall be considered a first license for purposes of this paragraph.

    B.   The annual manager’s license fee shall be one hundred dollars. Such fee shall apply separately with respect to each new applicant for a manager’s license.

    C.   If any change to the licensed premises of a sexually oriented business requires an inspection for compliance with this chapter and/or Chapter 5.42, a premises modification fee of one hundred dollars shall be charged.

    D.  The city’s actual reasonable costs for criminal background checks of licensees and managers may be added to any fee otherwise payable hereunder. (Ord. 30-2000 § 2)

 

5.43.040 Application for sexually oriented business license.
    A.  The licensing officer is responsible for granting, denying, revoking, renewing, and suspending sexually oriented business licenses for proposed or existing sexually oriented businesses.

    B.   The City Planner or his or her designee is responsible for ascertaining whether a proposed sexually oriented business for which a sexually oriented business license application has been submitted complies with all locational requirements of Section 5.42.040.

    C.   The police chief or his or her designee is responsible for providing information on whether an applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act during the time periods set forth in Section 5.43.070(C)(1)(i).

    D.  The Building Official or his or her designee is responsible for inspecting a proposed sexually oriented business in order to ascertain whether it is in compliance with applicable building codes and ordinances.

    E.   Any person desiring to operate a sexually oriented business shall file with the licensing officer an original and three copies of a sworn sexually oriented business license application on the standard application form supplied by the licensing officer.

    F.   The completed application shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents:

    1.   If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name and any aliases, address, date of birth, Social Security number and submit satisfactory proof that he or she is twenty-one years of age or older in the case of a Type A sexually oriented business license or eighteen years of age or older in the case of a Type B sexually oriented business license.

    2.   If the applicant is a legal entity, the application shall state its complete name, the date and place of its organization, evidence that it is in good standing under the laws of the state in which it is organized, and if it is organized under the laws of a state other than Colorado, that it is registered to do business in Colorado, the full legal names and any aliases, address, date of birth, Social Security number and capacity of all officers, directors, managers, and principal owners, and the name of the registered agent and the address of the registered agent for service of process, if any.

    3.   If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, the sexually oriented business’ fictitious name must be stated.

    4.   Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to Subsections (F)(1) or (2) of this section has been convicted of a specified criminal act within the times set forth in Section 5.43.070(C)(1)(i) and if so, the specified criminal act involved, the date of conviction and the place of conviction.

    5.   Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to Subsections (F)(1) or (2) of this section has had a previous license under this or any other sexually oriented business ordinance from another city, city and county, or county where the license was previously denied, suspended, or revoked and, if so, the name of the City, city and county, or county where the license was previously denied, suspended or revoked, and the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the license was denied, suspended, or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation.

    6.   Whether the applicant or any other individuals listed pursuant to Subsection (F)(1) or (2) of this section has been a partner in a partnership or a principal owner of a corporation or other legal entity whose license has previously been denied, suspended, or revoked and, if so, the name of the City, city and county, or county where the license was previously denied, suspended or revoked, and the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the license was denied, suspended, or revoked, as well as the date of denial, suspension, or revocation.

    7.   Whether the applicant or any other individual listed pursuant to Subsections (F)(1) or (2) of this section holds any other licenses under this chapter or any other sexually oriented business ordinance from another city, city and county, or county and, if so, the name of such city, city and county, or county, and names and locations of such other licensed businesses.

    8.   The location of the proposed sexually oriented business including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone number(s).

    9.   Proof of the applicant’s right to possession of the premises wherein the sexually oriented business will be conducted.

    10. The applicant’s mailing address and residential address.

    11. A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The licensing officer may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. If the sexually oriented business has or will have a peep booth or booths subject to the provisions of Section 5.42.120, the sketch shall show the locations and dimensions of any manager’s stations and demonstrate that there is an unobstructed view from at least one of the manager’s stations of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access, excluding restrooms. The floor plan shall designate those rooms or other areas of the premises where patrons are not permitted and shall also designate the use of each room or other area of the premises.

    12. A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within thirty days prior to an initial application by a Colorado registered land surveyor depicting: (a) the property lines and the structures of the property to be certified; and (b) the location of the property lines of any residential zone district, church, school, dwelling unit, public park, child care center, children’s home, social facility, recreational facility or training facility, enumerated at Section 5.42.040(C) within five hundred feet of the property to be certified; and (c) the location of the property lines and structures on the property of any other sexually oriented business within one hundred feet of the property to be certified. For purposes of this section, a use shall be considered existing or established if it is in existence or pending at the time an application is submitted.

    13. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he or she must sign the application for a sexually oriented business license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each principal owner of the applicant must sign the application for a sexually oriented business license as applicant.

    G.  In the event that the licensing officer determines or learns at any time that the applicant has improperly completed the application for a proposed sexually oriented business, he or she shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and allow the applicant ten days to properly complete the application. The time period for granting or denying a sexually oriented business license shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is allowed an opportunity to properly complete the application.

    H.  The fact that a person possesses or is required to possess other types of state or city licenses does not exempt him or her from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business license. (Ord. 30-2000 § 2)

 

5.43.050 Duty to supplement application.
    A.  Applicants for a sexually oriented business license under Section 5.43.040 shall have a continuing duty promptly to supplement any application information required by that section in the event that said information changes in any way from what is stated on the application.

    B.   The failure to comply with said continuing duty to supplement an application within thirty days from the date of such change shall be grounds for suspension of a sexually oriented business license. (Ord. 30-2000 § 2)

 

5.43.060 Investigation and application.
    A.  Upon receipt of an application for a sexually oriented business license properly filed with the licensing officer and upon payment of the nonrefundable application fee, the licensing officer shall immediately stamp the application as received and send copies of the application to the City Planner, the Building Official and the police chief. The City Planner, the Building Official and the police chief, or their respective designees, shall promptly conduct an investigation of the applicant, application, and the proposed sexually oriented business in accordance with his or her responsibilities under this section. Investigations shall be completed within twenty days of receipt of the application by the licensing officer. At the conclusion of their investigations, the City Planner and the Building Official shall indicate on the copy of the application his or her approval or disapproval of the application, date it, sign it, and in the event of disapproval, state the reasons therefor. The police chief shall only be required to provide the information specified in Section 5.43.040(C), and shall not be required to approve or disapprove applications.

    B.   The City Planner and the Building Official may disapprove an application if he or she finds that the proposed sexually oriented business will be or is in violation of any provision of any statute, code, ordinance, regulation, or other law in effect in the city. After their investigations and review, the City Planner, the Building Official and the police chief shall immediately return the copy of the application to the licensing officer. The licensing officer shall not issue a sexually oriented business license unless signed copies of the application for the same have been delivered to said officer by the City Planner and the Building Official and unless the police chief has supplied said officer with the information specified in Section 5.43.040(C). (Ord. 30-2000 § 2)

 

5.43.070 Issuance of sexually oriented business license.
    A.  The licensing officer shall grant or deny an application for a sexually oriented business license within thirty days from the date of its proper filing. Upon the expiration of the thirty days, the applicant shall be licensed to begin operating the business for which the sexually oriented business license is sought, unless and until the licensing officer notifies the applicant, by first class mail to the address on the application, of a denial of the application and states the reason(s) for that denial.

    B.   Grant of Application for Sexually Oriented Business License.

    1.   The licensing officer shall grant the sexually oriented business license unless one or more of the criteria set forth in Subsection C of this section is present.

    2.   The sexually oriented business license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The sexually oriented business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it can be easily read at any time.

    C.   Denial of Application for Sexually Oriented Business License.

    1.   The licensing officer shall deny the application for any of the following reasons:

    a.   An applicant is under twenty-one years of age in the case of an application for a Type A sexually oriented business license or under eighteen years of age in the case of an application for a Type B sexually oriented business license.

    b.   An applicant is overdue on his or her payment to the City of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him or her in relation to a sexually oriented business.

    c.   An applicant has failed to provide information required by this article for the issuance of the sexually oriented business license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form and has refused to provide corrected information.

    d.   The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have been disapproved by an inspecting agency pursuant to the provisions of Section 5.43.060(B).

    e.   The application or sexually oriented business license fees have not been paid.

    f.    An applicant for the proposed business is in violation of or is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter.

    g.   The granting of the application would violate a statute, ordinance, or court order.

    h.   The applicant has or had a sexually oriented business license under this article, or under the regulatory provisions of another jurisdiction, that was suspended or revoked within the previous twelve months. In the case of a denial of an application due to the suspension or revocation of the applicant’s license in another jurisdiction, the applicant shall be entitled to a hearing before the City Administrator. After the heating, the City Administrator may grant the application without regard to the suspension or revocation of the applicant’s license in another jurisdiction if he finds that the grounds for suspension or revocation in that jurisdiction would not be grounds for suspension or revocation of a license pursuant to this chapter.

    i.    An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act or acts for which:

    1.   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;

    2.   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or

    3.   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanors.

    The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on disqualification of the applicant. An applicant who has been convicted of a specified criminal act or acts may qualify for a sexually oriented business license only when the time period required above has elapsed.

    2.   If the licensing officer denies the application, he or she shall notify the applicant, by first class mail to the address on the application, of the denial and state the reason(s) for the denial. A copy of such denial shall be forwarded to the City Attorney. (Ord. 30-2000 § 2)

 

5.43.080 Expiration of sexually oriented business license.
    A.  Each sexually oriented business license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in Section 5.43.040 of this chapter, including but not limited to a review of whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act or acts (for renewals, filing of the original survey shall be sufficient). Application for renewal of a sexually oriented business license shall be made at least thirty days before the expiration date of the sexually oriented business license.

    B.   If, subsequent to denial of renewal the licensing officer finds that the basis for denial of the renewal of the sexually oriented business license has been corrected, the applicant shall be granted a sexually oriented business license if no more than ninety days have elapsed since the date denial became final. (Ord. 30-2000 § 2)

 

5.43.090 Suspension of sexually oriented business license.
    A.  The licensing officer may suspend a sexually oriented business license for a period not to exceed one hundred fifty days, unless the period is extended by operation of Subsection B of this section, if he or she determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has:

    1.   Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter or any provision of Chapter 5.42 of this Code; or

    2.   Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this chapter; or

    3.   Knowingly allowed repeated disturbances of the public peace to occur within the licensed establishment or upon the premises of the licensed establishment involving patrons, employees, or the licensee; or

    4.   Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of a building, fire, health, or zoning code, ordinance, or regulation, whether federal, state, or local, said determination being based on investigation by the department, division, or agency charged with enforcing said rules or laws. In the event of such a statute, code, ordinance, or regulation violation, the licensing officer shall promptly notify the licensee of the violation and shall allow the licensee a twenty-day period in which to correct the violation. If the licensee fails to correct the violation before the expiration of the twenty-day period, the licensing officer shall forthwith suspend the sexually oriented business license and shall notify the licensee of the suspension; or

    5.   Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of the hours of operation provisions in Section 5.42.130; or

    6.   Transferred a sexually oriented business license contrary to Section 5.43.120. In the event of such suspension, the licensing officer shall forthwith notify the original licensee and the transferee of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect until the applicable provisions of Section 5.43.120 have been satisfied.

    B.   The suspension shall remain in effect until and including the last day in the licensing officer’s order and until the violation of the statute, code, ordinance, or regulation in question has been corrected. (Ord. 30-2000 § 2)

 

5.43.100 Revocation of sexually oriented business license.
    A.  The licensing officer shall revoke a sexually oriented business license upon determining that:

    1.   A cause of suspension in Section 5.43.090 of this article occurred and the sexually oriented business license has been suspended within the preceding twelve months; or

    2.   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process that tended to enhance the applicant’s opportunity for obtaining a sexually oriented business license; or

    3.   A licensee, manager or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances (as defined in Part 3 of Article 22 of Title 12, C.R.S.) on the premises; or

    4.   A licensee, manager or an employee has knowingly allowed acts of prostitution or negotiations for acts of prostitution on the premises; or

    5.   A licensee, manager or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee’s sexually oriented business license was suspended; or

    6.   A licensee has been convicted of a specified criminal act for which the time period set forth in Section 5.43.070(c)(1)(i) has not elapsed; or

    7.   On two or more occasions within a twelve-month period, a person or persons committed an offense, occurring in or on the licensed premises constituting a specified criminal act for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the sexually oriented business license; or

    8.   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the City or state for any taxes or fees; or

    9.   A licensee, manager or an employee has knowingly allowed any specified sexual activity to occur in or on the licensed premises.

    B.   When the licensing officer revokes a sexually oriented business license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one year from the date revocation became effective. (Ord. 30-2000 § 2)

 

5.43.110 Suspension or revocation hearing.
    A.  A licensee shall be entitled to a hearing before the City Administrator if the City seeks to suspend or revoke his or her sexually oriented business license based on a violation of this chapter or any provision of Chapter 5.42 of this Code. The business may continue to operate during the hearing process.

    B.   When there is probable cause to believe that a cause for suspension or revocation exists, the City Attorney may file a written complaint with the licensing officer setting forth the circumstances of the alleged violation.

    C.   The licensing officer shall provide a copy of the complaint to the licensee, together with notice to appear before the City Administrator for the purpose of a hearing on a specified date to show cause why the licensee’s sexually oriented business license should not be suspended or revoked.

    D.  At the hearing, the City Administrator shall hear such statements and consider such evidence as the Police Department or other enforcement officers, the owner, occupant, lessee, or other party in interest, or any other witness shall offer that is relevant to the violation alleged in the complaint. The City Administrator shall make findings of fact from the statements and evidence offered as to whether the violation occurred in or near the licensed establishment. If the City Administrator determines that a cause for suspension or revocation exists, he or she shall issue an order suspending or revoking the sexually oriented business license within thirty days after the hearing is concluded based on the findings of fact. A copy of the order shall be mailed to or served on the licensee at the address on the license. In performing his duties pursuant to this section, the City Administrator may retain independent counsel to advise him with regard any matter.

    E.   The order of the City Administrator made pursuant to Subsection D of this section shall be a final decision and may be appealed to the district court pursuant to Colorado Rule of Civil Procedure 106(a)(4). Failure of a licensee timely to appeal said order constitutes a waiver by him or her of any right he or she may otherwise have to contest the suspension or revocation of the sexually oriented business license.

    F.   The City Administrator shall have the power to administer oaths, issue subpoenas, and when necessary grant continuances. Subpoenas may be issued to require the presence of persons and production of papers, books, and records necessary to the determination of any hearing which the City Administrator conducts. It is unlawful for any person to fail to comply with any subpoena issued by the City Administrator. A subpoena shall be served in the same manner as a subpoena issued by the district court of the state of Colorado.

    G.  All hearings held before the City Administrator regarding suspension or revocation of a sexually oriented business license issued under this chapter shall be recorded stenographically or by electronic recording device. Any person requesting a transcript of such record shall post a deposit in the amount required by the City Administrator, and shall pay all costs of preparing such record.

    H.  In the event of suspension, revocation, or cessation of business, no portion of the sexually oriented business license fee shall be refunded. (Ord. 30-2000 § 2)

 

5.43.120 Transfer of sexually oriented business license.
    A.  A licensee shall not operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a sexually oriented business license at any place other than the address designated in the application for sexually oriented business license.

    B.   A licensee shall not transfer his or her sexually oriented business license to another person unless and until such other person satisfies the following requirements:

    1.   Obtains an amendment to the sexually oriented business license from the licensing officer that provides that he or she is now the licensee, which amendment may be obtained only if he or she has completed and properly filed an application with the licensing officer setting forth the information called for under Section 5.43.040 in the application; and

    2.   Pays a transfer fee equal to the amount of the application fee for a first license, as provided for in Section 5.43.030(A).

    C.   No sexually oriented business license may be transferred when the licensing officer has notified the licensee that suspension or revocation proceedings have been or will be brought against the licensee.

    D.  Any attempt to transfer a sexually oriented business license either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is declared void. (Ord. 30-2000 § 2)

 

5.43.130 Manager’s license required—Change of manager—Inactive status.
    A.  A manager or designee shall be on the premises of a sexually oriented business at all times during operation. It is unlawful for any person to work as a manager of a sexually oriented business without first obtaining a manager’s license for such premises.

    B.   In the event a manager ceases to be employed at the premises listed in his or her application, the manager shall immediately report such change to the licensing officer but in no event shall such change be reported later than ten days after cessation of employment.

    C.   Provided a manager has complied with the requirements of Subsection B of this section, his or her license shall remain in inactive status until it expires or is reactivated. A manager who is reemployed at the premises listed in the manager’s license may reactivate his or her license provided the licensing officer determines he or she still meets the requirements of Section 5.43.140. (Ord. 30-2000 § 2)

 

5.43.140 Application for manager’s license.
    A.  A manager shall submit an application for a manager’s license for each sexually oriented business the manager proposes to manage on a form to be provided by the licensing officer. The application shall contain the applicant’s name, address, date of birth, Social Security number, telephone number, address, the name and address of the sexually oriented business that manager proposes to manage and the information required in Section 5.43.040(F)(4).

    B.   The Police Department shall conduct an investigation of the applicant to determine if the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act within the times set forth in Section 5.43.070(c)(1)(i).

    C.   The licensing officer shall grant the application within twenty days of its filing unless:

    1.   The applicant is under the age of twenty-one in the case of a Type A sexually oriented business license or under the age of eighteen in the case of a Type B sexually oriented business license;

    2.   The applicant has failed to provide the information required by this section;

    3.   The license fee has not been paid;

    4.   The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act within the times set forth in Section 5.43.070(C)(1)(i). (Ord. 30-2000 § 2)

 

5.43.150 Expiration of manager’s license.
    A.  Each manager’s license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in Section 5.43.120, including but not limited to a review of whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act or acts. Application for renewal of a manager’s license shall be made at least thirty days before the expiration date of the manager’s license.

    B.   If, subsequent to denial of renewal the licensing officer finds that the basis for denial of the renewal of the manager’s license has been corrected, the applicant shall be granted a manager’s license if no more than ninety days have elapsed since the date denial became final. (Ord. 30-2000 § 2)

 

5.43.160 Suspension of manager’s license.
    A.  The licensing officer may suspend a manager’s license for a period not to exceed ninety days, unless the period is extended by operation of Subsection B of this section, if he or she determines that the manager has:

    1.   Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this article or any provision of Chapter 5.42 of this Code; or

    2.   Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this chapter; or

    3.   Knowingly allowed repeated disturbances of the public peace to occur within the licensed establishment or upon the premises of the licensed establishment involving patrons, employees, or the licensee; or

    4.   Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of the hours of operation provisions in Section 5.42.130.

    B.   The suspension shall remain in effect until and including the last day in the licensing officer’s order and until the violation of the statute, code, ordinance, or regulation in question has been corrected. (Ord. 30-2000 § 2)

 

5.43.170 Revocation of manager’s license.
    A.  The licensing officer shall revoke a manager’s license upon determining that:

    1.   A cause of suspension in Section 5.43.160 of this chapter occurred and the manager’s license has been suspended within the preceding twelve months; or

    2.   The manager gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process that tended to enhance the applicant’s opportunity for obtaining a manager’s license; or

    3.   The manager knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances (as defined in Part 3 of Article 22 of Title 12, C.R.S.) on the premises; or

    4.   The manager knowingly allowed acts of prostitution or negotiations for acts of prostitution on the premises; or

    5.   The manager knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the sexually oriented business license was suspended; or

    6.   The manager has been convicted of a specified criminal act for which the time period set forth in Section 5.43.070(C)(1)(i) has not elapsed; or

    7.   The manager has knowingly allowed any specified sexual activity to occur in or on the licensed premises.

    B.   When the licensing officer revokes a manager’s license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a manager’s license for one year from the date revocation became effective. (Ord. 30-2000 § 2)

 

5.43.180 Suspension or revocation hearing.
    A.  A manager shall be entitled to a hearing before the City Administrator if the City seeks to suspend or revoke the manager’s license based on a violation of this chapter or any provision of Chapter 5.42 of this Code. The manager may continue to manage a sexually oriented business during the hearing process.

    B.   When there is probable cause to believe that a cause for suspension or revocation exists, the City Attorney may file a written complaint with the licensing officer setting forth the circumstances of the alleged violation.

    C.   The licensing officer shall provide a copy of the complaint to the licensee, together with notice to appear before the City Administrator for the purpose of a hearing on a specified date to show cause why the licensee’s license should not be suspended or revoked.

    D.  At the hearing, the City Administrator shall hear such statements and consider such evidence as the Police Department or other enforcement officers, the owner, employer, occupant, lessee, or other party in interest, or any other witness shall offer that is relevant to the violation alleged in the complaint. The City Administrator shall make findings of fact from the statements and evidence offered as to whether the violation occurred in or near the licensed establishment. If the City Administrator determines that a cause for suspension or revocation exists, he or she shall issue an order suspending or revoking the manager’s license within thirty days after the hearing is concluded based on the findings of fact. A copy of the order shall be mailed to or served on the licensee at the address on the license.

    E.   The order of the City Administrator made pursuant to Subsection D of this section shall be a final decision and may be appealed to the district court pursuant to Colorado Rule of Civil Procedure 106(a)(4). Failure of a licensee timely to appeal said order constitutes a waiver by him or her of any right he or she may otherwise have to contest the suspension or revocation of the manager’s license.

    F.   The City Administrator shall have the power to administer oaths, issue subpoenas, and when necessary grant continuances. Subpoenas may be issued to require the presence of persons and production of papers, books, and records necessary to the determination of any hearing which the City Administrator conducts. It is unlawful for any person to fail to comply with any subpoena issued by the City Administrator. A subpoena shall be served in the same manner as a subpoena issued by the district court of the state of Colorado.

    G.  All hearings held before the City Administrator regarding suspension or revocation of a manager’s license issued under this chapter shall be recorded stenographically or by electronic recording device. Any person requesting a transcript of such record shall post a deposit in the amount required by the City Administrator, and shall pay all costs of preparing such record.

    H.  In the event of suspension, revocation, or cessation of business, no portion of the manager’s license fee shall be refunded. (Ord. 30-2000 § 2)

 

5.43.190 Notice.
    Any notice required by this chapter shall be deemed sufficient if it is deposited in first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address on the application and shall be effective upon mailing. (Ord. 30-2000 § 2)

 

5.43.200 Judicial review.
    After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application, or suspension or revocation of a license, such act shall be a final decision. Therefore, the applicant or licensee may seek judicial review of such administrative action pursuant to Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. The court shall promptly review such administrative action. (Ord. 30-2000 § 2)

 

5.43.210 Inspection.
    A.  An applicant or licensee or manager shall permit representatives of the licensing officer, Building Official, the City Planner, the Police Department, the County Health Department and the Fire Department to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law at any time it is occupied or open for business.

    B.   It is unlawful for any person, applicant, licensee, or manager who operates a sexually oriented business or his or her agent to refuse to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time that it is occupied or open for business. (Ord. 30-2000 § 2)

Chapter 5.46 SECONDHAND DEALER AND FLEA MARKET BUSINESSES
5.46.010 License required.
    No person shall conduct or carry on business as a secondhand dealer and flea market business operator in the city without holding a valid secondhand dealer and flea market business license obtained from the City Clerk in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 35-2010 § 1)

 

5.46.020 General licensing authority.
    A.  In addition to the specific provisions of this chapter, the general and customary procedures and requirements for issuance and administration of licenses by the City Clerk shall apply to secondhand dealer and flea market business licenses.

    B.   The City Clerk, with the assistance of the Chief of the Cañon City Police Department, shall have authority to promulgate and employ reasonable regulations associated with the making and processing of applications for secondhand dealer and flea market business licenses and proceedings associated with the issuance, denial, suspension and revocation of such licenses. (Ord. 35-2010 § 1)

 

5.46.030 Compliance with state and local law.
    A.  The operations of secondhand dealer and flea market businesses within the city shall be governed by the applicable provisions of state law, including specifically those set forth in Sections 18-13-114 through 18-13-118 and, in part, Article 56 of Title 12, Colorado Revised Statutes, as supplemented by the provisions of this Chapter 5.46.

    B.   Words and terms used in this chapter shall have the same definitions and meanings as are given to such words and terms in Section 18-13-114(5), C.R.S., as from time to time amended.

    C.   Violations of applicable state law or of the provisions of this chapter shall be grounds for denial, revocation or suspension of any license issued or issuable pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 35-2010 § 1)

 

5.46.040 Records keeping and inspection requirements.
    A.  Records Keeping Requirement. Records keeping, reporting, sales procedures, document maintenance and submittals shall be governed by Sections 18-13-114 through 18-13-118, C.R.S. In addition to any local regulations adopted pursuant to authorization granted in this chapter as to the reporting of items bought or offered for resale, compliance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 5.36 of this Title 5, and Section 12-56-103, C.R.S. shall be required of all persons holding or required to hold a license issued pursuant to this chapter.

    B.   Inspection of the Licensed Premises. The licensed premises, including any places where documents or inventory may be stored or maintained, shall be subject to inspection by law enforcement officers during all business hours and all other times of apparent activity, for the purpose of inspection or investigation. For examination of any books and records required to be kept by licensees, access shall only be required during business hours. Where any part of the licensed premises consists of a locked area, upon demand to the licensee, such area shall be made available for inspection without delay and, upon request by a law enforcement officer, such licensee shall open said area for inspection. (Ord. 35-2010 § 1)

 

5.46.050 Application and license fees.
    Application for a secondhand dealer and flea market business license shall be made on forms provided by the City Clerk for such purpose. The licensing fee for a secondhand dealer and flea market business license shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each calendar year or portion thereof, payable upon application for such license. (Ord. 35-2010 § 1)

 

5.46.060 Renewals.
    Renewals of the licenses provided for in this Chapter 5.46 shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5.66 of this title. (Ord. 35-2010 § 1)

 

5.46.070 Violations—Penalties.
    Penalties for violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter 5.46 shall be as provided in Chapter 5.66 of this title. (Ord. 35-2010 § 1)

Chapter 5.52 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANT DISEASE CONTROL
5.52.010 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter.

    A.  “Communicable disease” means any disease or insect infestation causing harm, death or eventual death to trees, shrubs or plants.

    B.   “Owner” means and includes the record owner, whether a person, firm or corporation, any agent or representative of the record owner, and any occupant of any lot or parcel of land within the city.

    C.   “Parking” means that portion of any deeded or platted street or other road which is adjacent to but not physically occupied by a roadway.

    D.  “Parks Director” means the Parks Director or designee of the City.

    E.   “Person” means any natural person, firm, corporation, contractor or subcontractor, or tree service, or any agent or representative of any natural person, firm, corporation, contractor or subcontractor or tree service.

    F.   “Public place” means and includes any street, alley, parking, parkway, public parks or grounds, or other area in the city dedicated, deeded, used or held for public use. (Ord. 33-2010 § 29; prior code § 5.60.010)

 

5.52.020 Rules and regulations.
    The Parks Director or designee shall, with the approval of the Council, issue such rules and regulations as may be required for the orderly, safe and effective trimming, pruning, removal and planting of trees. (Ord. 33-2010 § 29; prior code § 5.60.080)

 

5.52.030 Planting on public grounds—Permit required.
    No person shall plant, move or install any tree or shrub in any street, avenue, public highway, public parks or public place of the city without first applying for and obtaining a permit. Each planting permit shall contain the same information and is subject to the same limitations as the trimming permit described in Section 5.52.050. (Prior code § 5.60.040)

 

5.52.040 Planting specifications.
    The Parks Director or designee shall issue, and make available to the public during regular business hours, rules, regulations and specifications for the placement or planting of trees, shrubs and bushes on the public rights-of-way, streets, avenues, parkings or any other public place. (Ord. 33-2010 § 29; prior code § 5.60.050)

 

5.52.050 Trimming on public grounds—Permit requirements.
    It is unlawful for any person to trim, prune or remove any tree located in any public place, including any parking adjacent to the premises of any owner of private property, without first securing a license pursuant to this section and obtaining a permit to do so from the Parks Director or designee. Each such permit, which shall be issued without charge, shall state the type of work for which the permit is issued, the variety, number and location of the trees to which such permit relates, and the expiration date of such permit. It shall be issued upon the condition that the permittee, in the performance of such work, shall comply with all regulations issued by the Parks Director or designee relating to the trimming, pruning, and removal of trees. (Ord. 33-2010 § 30; prior code § 5.60.020)

 

5.52.060 License—Required when—Fee and issuance conditions.
    A.  No person shall engage in or solicit the business of trimming, pruning or removing of trees within the city on public or private property without first obtaining a license therefor from the City Clerk. No such license shall be issued unless and until the following items have been filed with the City Clerk:

    1.   Proof the applicant has passed a written and/or practical test as set forth in Section 5.52.061 of this chapter;

    2.   A certificate of insurance evidencing that the applicant for such license is covered by comprehensive general liability insurance in amounts equal to or greater than those minimum coverage amounts specified by the City Administrator or designee for the type of license to be issued pursuant to this chapter. Such certificate shall provide that the City of Cañon City is named as an additional insured. All such insurance must be maintained and remain in full force and effect during the period for which the license will be issued. Each insurance certificate shall provide that the holder of the insurance policy and the City will be notified by the insurer not fewer than thirty (30) days prior to any material decrease in coverage or cancellation of the policy;

    3.   A copy of the vehicle registration of and proof of insurance on each and every vehicle that will be used in the performance of services for which the license is being applied;

    4.   Other documents as deemed necessary by the City Clerk.

    B.   The fee for such license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per year or fraction thereof, payable annually in advance, and each license shall expire on December 31st of the year in which the same is issued.

    C.   Persons who spray or apply pesticides to shrubs, trees or any parts of trees for hire shall be licensed by the State Department of Agriculture. (Ord. 33-2010 § 31)

 

5.52.061 Testing—Fee and requirement.
    A.  Before a license is issued, the license applicant must pass a written and/or practical test administered by the Parks Director or designee. Each licensee must pass the written and/or practical test at least every five (5) years, or as deemed necessary by the Parks Director or designee.

    B.   The fee for such test shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) payable each time the test is administered by the Parks Director or designee. (Ord. 33-2010 § 32)

 

5.52.065 Renewals.
    Renewals for licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5.66 of this title. (Ord. 33-2010 § 33)

 

5.52.070 License—Suspension and revocation.
    A.  Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter is subject to suspension or revocation by the City Administrator for any violation of this chapter or for violation of rules or regulations adopted or issued hereunder.

    B.   Upon proof of any such violation, the City Administrator may suspend or revoke any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The City Administrator may summarily suspend any such license with respect to situations suggesting that the licensee has acted or is acting in a manner that endangers the lives, health or safety of the inhabitants of the City; provided that the licensee shall be given notice of such summary suspension and a right to a hearing not later than fourteen (14) days following the date of the suspension. The City Administrator shall cause complaints regarding the activities of any licensee to be investigated in a manner and to a degree necessary to indicate whether and to what extent violations may have occurred or be occurring. (Ord. 33-2010 § 34; prior code § 5.60.060)

 

5.52.080 Tree services—Vehicle identification.
    Tree services operating within the city shall clearly identify each piece of vehicular equipment used on the job with their company’s name. The lettering shall be a minimum of three inches in height and be visible from both sides of each piece of equipment at all times. (Prior code § 5.60.090)

 

5.52.090 Diseased or infested trees—Inspection.
    The Parks Director or designee shall have the power to inspect any trees, logs or branches existing upon any property within the city. The Parks Director or designee shall from time to time conduct surveys to determine if any Dutch Elm or other communicable disease or insect infestation exists in the city which may be detrimental to or endanger the good health and well-being of trees within the city. (Ord. 33-2010 § 29; prior code § 5.60.100)

 

5.52.100 Diseased or infested trees—Notice to abate.
    A.  Upon discovery of any Dutch Elm or other communicable disease, European elm bark beetle or other insect infestations, dead or dying elm or other trees, or stacked or stockpiled elm wood or branches existing upon any privately owned property located within the city which endangers the growth, health, life or well-being of other trees, or which is capable of causing an epidemic of Dutch Elm or other communicable disease or insect infestation, the Parks Director or designee shall at once notify in writing the owner, agent or occupant of the premises upon which the same is located of the condition thereof, and direct such owner, agent or occupant to eradicate, remove or otherwise control such condition.

    B.   The notice referred to in Subsection A of this section shall be in writing, and shall advise the addressee of the existence of Dutch Elm or other communicable disease, European elm bark beetle or other insect infestations, dead or dying elm or other trees, or stacked or stockpiled elm wood or branches, the location thereof designated by street address or legal description, and shall inform the addressee that he or she shall within twenty (20) days of service of the notice remove the tree, trees or wood to an approved sanitary landfill or burn the tree, trees or wood immediately, with proper permit.

    C.   Such notice shall be served personally in accordance with the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure or by mailing, by certified or registered mail, to the owner of the premises at the address of the owner maintained in the office of the Fremont County Assessor in the event the owner, agent or occupant of the premises cannot with reasonable diligence be located within the corporate boundaries of the city. Such notice will be effectively served when personally served or when deposited in the United States mail, properly addressed, postage prepaid.

    D.  Failure to comply with terms of the written notice shall render the owner, agent, or occupant of the premises liable to the penalty provisions of Section 5.52.140. (Ord. 33-2010 § 29; prior code § 5.60.110)

 

5.52.110 Diseased or infested trees—Abatement by City when—Costs.
    In the event that the owner, agent, or occupant of any premises fails or refuses to comply with the terms of the written notice provided for in Subsections B through D of Section 5.52.100, the Parks Director or designee may enter upon the premises and cause to be removed, treated or otherwise cared for by any approved manner, any infected or infested trees, logs or branches, in order to eradicate or control the same or to prevent the spreading of the communicable disease or insect infestation, the cost of which shall be borne by the owner, agent or occupant of such premises. (Ord. 33-2010 § 29; prior code § 5.60.120)

 

5.52.120 Abatement by City—Cost assessment.
    A.  Assessment of costs of control, removal or abatement of infected or infested trees by the City after the Parks Director or designee shall complete or cause to be completed the work authorized by Section 5.52.110, may be certified by the Council, by ordinance, to the Fremont County Treasurer, State of Colorado, for collection by the Treasurer in the same manner as general property taxes are collected.

    B.   The City Clerk shall give notice to all property owners whose property is proposed to be assessed for unpaid costs of control, removal or abatement of infected or infested trees by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, once, not less than ten (10) days prior to the Council meeting at which the assessing ordinance shall be considered on first reading. The notice shall include:

    1.   The name of the property owner;

    2.   The legal description of the parcels of real property to be assessed;

    3.   The amount of the proposed assessment, the amount of any penalty fee, and the interest rate to be charged on unpaid assessments;

    4.   The date when the assessing ordinance will be considered by the Council on first reading;

    5.   That all objections to any proposed assessment will be heard by the Council at the meeting at which such ordinance is to be considered, or at some subsequent meeting thereof before final action upon such ordinance.

    C.   The City Clerk shall mail the notice by ordinary mail, postage prepaid, to owners of all real property whose real property may be assessed, at their last known address determined by the City Clerk from telephone directories, city directories and records in the office of the County Assessor, at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the public hearing, a copy of the notice being published. (Ord. 33-2010 § 29; prior code § 5.60.130)

 

5.52.130 Injuring or defacing public trees unlawful.
    No person shall move any building or other object as to injure or interfere with any tree or shrub standing in any street, public highway, public park or ground or any other public place. No person shall attach or place any advertisement, announcement or notice upon, or print upon, or attach wires, cables, mailboxes, reflectors or any other device to any tree or shrub situated in any street, highway, public park or ground, or any other public place. (Prior code § 5.60.070)

 

5.52.140 Violation—Misdemeanor—Administrative penalty.
    Penalties for violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter 5.52 shall be as provided in Chapter 5.66 of this title. (Ord. 33-2010 § 35; Ord. 15-1993 § 1)

Chapter 5.56 MEDICAL MARIJUANA FACILITIES
5.56.010 Purpose and legislative intent.
    Although the possession and use of marijuana is and remains unlawful under Federal law, Section 14 of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution (“Amendment 20”) provides an exception to prosecution for patients and their care-givers under state criminal laws when marijuana is possessed and used for medicinal purposes by a patient who has been diagnosed with a debilitating medical condition. Amendment 20 does not, however, contain any provision clearly authorizing the cultivation, sale or distribution of medical marijuana to patients by facilities that are not care-givers. In order to address that omission, the Colorado General Assembly adopted the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, Article 43.3 of Title 12, C.R.S., which provides for the licensing and regulation of certain medical marijuana facilities by state and local licensing authorities. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the licensing and regulation of medical marijuana facilities and businesses authorized and contemplated in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code for the benefit of patients who qualify to obtain, possess and use marijuana for medical purposes under Amendment 20, while promoting compliance with other state laws that prohibit trafficking in and the use of marijuana for non-medical purposes. Nothing in this chapter is intended to promote or condone the sale, distribution, possession or use of marijuana in violation of any applicable state law. Compliance with the requirements of this chapter shall not provide a defense to criminal prosecution under any applicable law. (Ord. 18-2010 § 1)

 

5.56.020 Definitions.
    The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them:

    A.  “City Clerk” means the City Clerk of the City of Cañon City, or the City Clerk’s duly authorized designee.

    B.   “Marijuana” shall have the same meaning as the term “usable form of marijuana” as set forth in Article XVIII, Section 14(1)(i) of the Colorado Constitution, or as may be more fully defined in any applicable state law or regulation.

    C.   “Licensed Medical Marijuana Facility” means the “licensed premises” occupied by a “medical marijuana center,” an “optional premises cultivation operation” or a “medical marijuana-infused products manufacturer,” as those terms are described in Subsections (3), (8), (10) and (12) of Section 12-43.3-104, C.R.S. Prior to July 1, 2011, “Licensed Medical Marijuana Facility” also shall mean the premises occupied by any “established, locally approved business for the purpose of cultivation, manufacture or sale of medical marijuana or medical marijuana-infused products,” as described in Section 12-43.3-103, C.R.S., that is established and operated in full compliance with the restrictions and requirements set forth in this Chapter 5.56 and applicable provisions of the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code.

    D.  “Laws of the State of Colorado” shall mean and include: Section 14 of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution; the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, Article 43.3 of Title 12, C.R.S.; other Colorado statutes, including, but not necessarily limited to, Section 18-18-406.3, C.R.S. and Section 25-1.5-106, C.R.S.; applicable regulations promulgated by CDPHE and the State Licensing Authority; and all applicable final decisions of Colorado’s appellate courts.

    E.   “Licensed Child Care Facility” means any child care center as defined at Section 17.08.010(C), that existed at the time of the establishment of the medical marijuana facility.

    F.   “Medical Use” shall have the same meaning as is set forth in Article XVIII, Section 14(1)(b) of the Colorado Constitution, or as may be more fully defined in any applicable state law or regulation.

    G.  “Patient” shall have the same meaning as is set forth in Article XVIII, Section 14(1)(d) of the Colorado Constitution, or as may be more fully defined in any applicable State law or regulation.

    H.  “Primary Care-Giver” shall have the same meaning as is set forth in Article XVIII, Section 14(1)(f) of the Colorado Constitution, the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code and any other applicable state law or regulation.

    I.    “Registry Identification Card” shall have the same meaning as is set forth in Article XVIII, Section 14(1)(f) of the Colorado Constitution, the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code and any other applicable state law or regulation.

    J.    “School” means a public or private preschool or a public or private elementary, middle, junior high, or high school.

    K.  Unless defined in this chapter or the context clearly indicates otherwise, any word or term used in this chapter that is defined in Article XVIII, Section 14(1)(f) of the Colorado Constitution or in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code shall have the same meaning that is ascribed to such word or term in the Colorado Constitution or in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code. (Ord. 16-2011 § 1; Ord. 18-2010 § 1)

 

5.56.030 License required.
    A.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to cultivate, sell or otherwise distribute any marijuana for medical use in the City of Cañon City without first obtaining a license to operate as a licensed medical marijuana facility pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. This licensing requirement shall apply regardless of whether or not a business that cultivates, manufactures or sells medical marijuana products has commenced operation prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; provided that any such business that was issued a retail sales tax license by the City and commenced operation prior to June 1, 2010 may continue operations until August 15, 2010. Thereafter, such business may continue to operate only if a medical marijuana facility license application provided for in this Chapter 5.56 for such business is filed on or before August 15, 2010 and the applicant is operating in compliance with all applicable requirements of this chapter and the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code. Under such circumstances, such facility may continue in operation pending final action by the City Clerk on the application. Any such preexisting medical marijuana facility that does not or cannot meet the licensing requirements set forth in this chapter shall be denied a license. The business of any such applicant that is denied a license shall be terminated immediately upon such denial.

    B.   The licensing requirements set forth in this chapter and in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other licensing and permitting requirements imposed by any other federal, state, or local law. For example, a licensed medical marijuana facility also must obtain state and local retail sales tax licenses and must comply with applicable building code and permit requirements. (Ord. 18-2010 § 1)

 

5.56.040 Local Licensing Authority.
    A.  For the purpose of regulating and controlling the licensing of the cultivation, manufacture, distribution and sale of medical marijuana in this city, there is hereby created the Local Licensing Authority of the City of Cañon City, which shall be the City Clerk.

    B.   The Local Licensing Authority shall have such powers and duties as are provided for in this chapter and in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code.

    C.   The City Clerk shall be assisted by the City Attorney, the Chief of Police, the Deputy City Clerk and such other personnel as may be designated by the City Administrator in the performance of the powers and duties of the Local Licensing Authority. (Ord. 18-2010 § 1)

 

5.56.050 General licensing procedures.
    A.  In addition to the provisions of this chapter, the general and customary procedures and requirements for issuance and administration of licenses by the City Clerk shall apply to medical marijuana facility licenses.

    B.   The City Clerk shall have authority to promulgate and employ reasonable regulations associated with the making and processing of applications for medical marijuana facility licenses. The City Clerk also may promulgate regulations concerning the processes and procedures associated with the issuance, renewal, denial, suspension and/or revocation of such licenses that supplement and are not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. Such regulations shall be written and shall become effective when copies of the same have been provided to City Council and made available to the public on the City’s official bulletin board and website, or upon a later effective date set forth in the regulations. (Ord. 18-2010 § 1)

 

5.56.060 Application.
    A.  Application for a medical marijuana facility license shall be made to the City Clerk upon forms provided by the City Clerk for that purpose. A complete application must include all information that is required by the state with respect to any license that may be issued pursuant to the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code and such additional information as may be requested by the City Clerk in writing.

    B.   Proof of ownership or legal possession of the proposed licensed premises for the term of the proposed license must be presented to the City Clerk before any medical marijuana facility license permitted by this chapter may be issued. If the licensed premises will be leased, rather than owned, by the applicant, the written consent by the owner of the property to the licensing of the premises as a medical marijuana facility must be submitted by the applicant to the City Clerk as part of a complete application. A fully-executed lease may satisfy this requirement if it clearly indicates that the owner knows the leased premises will be used as a licensed medical marijuana facility.

    C.   An application must include an operating plan for the proposed medical marijuana facility including the following information:

    1.   A description of the products and services to be provided by the medical marijuana facility, including an indication of whether or not the facility proposes to engage in the retail sale of medical marijuana-infused products for human consumption.

    2.   A floor plan showing all interior dimensions of the licensed premises and the layout of the medical marijuana facility. Such floor plan also shall show the principal uses of the floor area depicted therein, including a depiction of where any services other than the dispensing of medical marijuana are proposed to occur on the licensed premises.

    3.   A security plan indicating how the applicant intends to comply with the requirements of Subsection 5.56.080(H), including an indication of whether or not the applicant intends to utilize licensed security guards.

    4.   Any information regarding security required for a licensed premises under the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code.

    5.   An area map, drawn to scale—with a radius of one-quarter mile from the boundaries of the proposed licensed premises—showing the proximity of the licensed premises to: any school; any licensed child care facility; any alcohol or drug treatment facility; the principal campus of any college, university or seminary; or any other medical marijuana facility, the location of which is not by law required to be kept confidential.

    6.   Any information and/or documentation not included in the foregoing five (5) subsections that is or will be required in an application to be filed with the State Licensing Authority for any state license that may be issued in accordance with the provisions of the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code.

    7.   Any additional document(s) or information reasonably requested by the City Clerk including, but not limited to: (a) corporate or partnership documents (such as Articles of Incorporation, LLC formation documents and partnership agreements) describing the structure of an entity that is an applicant and indentifying all persons holding a ten percent (10%) or greater ownership interest (including shareholders, members or partners in such entity); and (b) financial documents identifying the source(s) of funds used to establish the facility.

    D.  Any application for a medical marijuana facility license shall be accompanied by the application fee, criminal background check fee, and annual fee as required by Section 5.56.110 or in any resolution adopted pursuant to said Section 5.56.110. No application shall be deemed complete or be processed in the absence of the payment of such fees.

    E.   Upon receipt of an application for a medical marijuana facility license, the City Clerk shall circulate the application to the Community Development Department (including the Planning and Building Divisions thereof), the Finance Department and the Police Department to determine whether the proposed facility is or will be in full compliance with any and all laws, rules and regulations administered by these respective City departments. The failure of any such department to report back to the City Clerk within ten (10) days shall be deemed a recommendation for approval of the license by such department.

    F.   Unless an application is under concurrent review by the State Licensing Authority and the Local Licensing Authority, the City Clerk shall perform a criminal background investigation for each person subject to a criminal background check under the provisions of the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code in connection with any license application permitted thereunder. The applicant shall pay all costs of such background checks.

    G.  The City Clerk and the Chief of Police, or their designee, shall perform an inspection of the proposed licensed premises to determine compliance with any applicable requirement of this chapter.

    H.  The City Clerk shall deny any application for a license that is not complete or otherwise in full compliance with this chapter, any other applicable City law or regulation, or any applicable state law or regulation governing medical marijuana facilities. The City Clerk also shall deny any application that contains any false or incomplete information, but shall allow an applicant reasonable opportunity to correct deficiencies in applications that fail to include complete information before denying such applications. (Ord. 18-2010 § 1)

 

5.56.070 Persons prohibited as licensees and managers.
    A.  No license provided for by this chapter shall be issued to or held by:

    1.   Any persons that would not qualify for a license pursuant to the minimum licensing requirements set forth in Part 3 of the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code.

    2.   Any person who fails to provide evidence of ownership or possession of a proposed licensed premises.

    3.   Any person who proposes a licensed premises that does not satisfy the location and distance requirements set forth in this chapter.

    B.   No licensed premises shall be owned, operated or managed by any person who is not a person of good moral character, as that term is used and defined in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code.

    C.   Any person licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be obligated to perform in accordance with all applicable provisions of the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code in addition to the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 18-2010 § 1)

 

5.56.080 Local restrictions and requirements.
    A.  Permitted Locations for Sales. All medical marijuana facility licenses shall be issued for a specific fixed location which shall be designated the licensed premises. Except as provided in Subsection E, all sales, deliveries and other transfers of medical marijuana products by a licensee shall be made at the licensed premises.

    B.   Distance from Schools. No medical marijuana facility shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any school that existed at the time of the establishment of the facility; provided that any medical marijuana facility established prior to January 1, 2010 and operated in full compliance with state and local law shall not be subject to this requirement until January 1, 2012.

    C.   Distance from Certain Child Care Facilities.

    1.   No medical marijuana facility shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any residential child care facility, as defined in Title 26 of the Colorado Revised Statutes.

    2.   No medical marijuana facility shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of any licensed child care center, as defined in this chapter, having an average daily enrollment (Monday through and including Friday) of not fewer than twenty-five (25) children under the age of sixteen (16) years.

    D.  Distance from Public Parks. No medical marijuana facility shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any public park.

    E.   Distance from Other Medical Marijuana Facilities. No licensed medical marijuana facility, other than a licensed “optional premises cultivation operation” (or functional equivalent) or a “medical marijuana-infused products manufacturer” (or functional equivalent) operated by the same person who also holds a related business license to cultivate, manufacture or sell medical marijuana products (such as a “medical marijuana center” or its functional equivalent) shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of another licensed medical marijuana facility existing at the time of the establishment of the facility. For purposes of this subsection, a medical marijuana facility that is not yet open for business shall be considered to be “existing” at a specific location only if an application for a medical marijuana facility license at such location was filed with and accepted by the City Clerk on or before July 1, 2010. Under such circumstances, such proposed medical marijuana facility shall continue to be considered to be existing until such application has been withdrawn by the applicant or denied by final action of the City. To the extent permitted by applicable law, the City Clerk shall maintain a list of locations with respect to which medical marijuana facility license applications have been filed and are pending.

    F.   No Mobile Facilities. No medical marijuana facility shall be located in a movable or mobile vehicle or structure and no medical marijuana product shall be delivered in the city unless such delivery is by a medical marijuana facility licensed by the City and such delivery is specifically permitted by the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code. No delivery from any medical marijuana facility located outside the city shall be made to any patient or care-giver within the city.

    G.  Measurement of Distance. Any distance specified in Subsection B, C, D or E of this section shall be computed by direct measurement from the nearest property line of the lot or parcel upon which a school or other facility referenced in Subsection B, C, D or E is situated to the nearest property line of the land used or proposed for use as a medical marijuana facility, using a route of direct pedestrian access, measured as a person would walk safely and properly, without trespassing, with right angles at crossings and with the observance of traffic regulations and lights.

    H.  No Facilities in Residential Zone Districts. No licensed medical marijuana facility shall be established or operated within the boundaries of any residential zone district of the city or within the boundaries of the central business district, as those boundaries existed at the time of the establishment of the facility, except that a facility established and operating on January 1, 2010 in the central business district may continue to operate at its current location in such district until January 1, 2012 if such facility is operated in compliance with all applicable state and local law.

    I.    Security Measures. Each licensed premises shall be monitored and secured twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week, including, at a minimum, the following security measures:

    1.   Installation and use of security cameras, of sufficient quality to produce useable images with identifiable features, to monitor all areas of the licensed premises where persons may gain or attempt to gain access to marijuana or cash maintained by the medical marijuana facility. Recordings from security cameras shall be maintained for a minimum of one hundred twenty (120) hours in a secure off-site location, and for such longer periods as are requested in writing by any peace officer performing law enforcement duties and functions within the city. The failure of such system (camera(s) and recording equipment) to capture and preserve images and activities at a licensed marijuana facility may be grounds for denial, revocation or suspension of a medical marijuana facility license.

    2.   Installation and use of a safe for overnight storage of any processed marijuana, and cash on the licensed premises, with the safe being incorporated into the building structure or securely attached thereto.

    3.   Installation of a monitored user alarm system in accordance with any applicable requirements of this Code.

    4.   To the extent the licensee utilizes contracted security guards (in lieu of its own employees) to patrol the licensed premises, any such guards shall be duly licensed in accordance with applicable requirements of this Code.

    5.   Each licensed premises also shall conform to any safety and security requirements set forth in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code and any regulations promulgated by the State Licensing Authority.

    J.    Ventilation System. Every licensed medical marijuana facility where marijuana plants are cultivated or kept in an enclosed environment shall have a ventilation system approved by the City.

    K.  No Products to be Visible From Public Places. Marijuana plants, products, accessories, and associated paraphernalia contained in a medical marijuana facility shall not be visible from a public sidewalk, public street or right-of-way, or any other public place.

    L.   No Beer or Alcohol on Premises. No fermented malt beverages and no alcohol beverages, as defined in the Colorado Beer Code and the Colorado Liquor Code, respectively, shall be kept, served or consumed on the premises of a medical marijuana facility.

    M.  Posting of Owner/Contact Information. The name and contact information for the owner or owners and any manager of the medical marijuana facility shall be conspicuously posted in the facility, together with the name and contact information of any person designated by the owner to be contacted in the event of an emergency.

    N.  Modification of Premises. No change shall be made to the floor plan of the interior of any licensed premises unless such modification of the premises is approved by the City Clerk prior to the time the change is made. Requests for such modifications shall be made on forms provided or permitted by the City Clerk. The City Clerk may charge a processing and inspection fee to cover any processing and/or inspection costs (including the cost of City employee time) associated with a request for the modification of a licensed premises. No later than ten (10) days following any authorized modification of licensed premises, the licensee shall amend the floor plan required under Section 5.56.050(A)(7) and file such amended floor plan with the City Clerk.

    O.  Restrictions Regarding Signage. The following requirements regarding signage shall apply to all medical marijuana facilities:

    1.   All signage associated with a medical marijuana facility will meet the general standards established in Chapter 17.30 of this Code.

    2.   In addition, no sign associated with a medical marijuana facility shall use the word “marijuana,” “cannabis,” or any other word or phrase commonly understood to refer to marijuana unless such word or phrase is immediately preceded by the word “medical” or the message of such sign includes the words “for medical use” or “for medicinal purposes” in letters that are no smaller than the largest letter on the sign. (Ord. 10-2017 § 1; Ord. 16-2011 §§ 2, 3; Ord. 6-2011 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 18-2010 § 1)

 

5.56.090 Procedural requirements.
    A.  Issuance or Denial of License. No license authorized under this chapter shall be issued unless:

    1.   All applicable requirements of the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code have been satisfied;

    2.   All conditions imposed upon the applicant by this chapter as prerequisites to the issuance of the license have been met;

    3.   The required license fees and associated costs have been paid;

    4.   The use to which the premises are proposed to be put shall conform to the requirements of Title 17 pertaining to zoning;

    5.   All other applicable specific requirements of City law have been met;

    6.   The applicant is not in arrears in any administrative or court fines, assessments, sales tax reporting and/or payment obligations, or fees, owed to the City of Cañon City, and has no outstanding warrants for his or her arrest in any jurisdiction; and

    7.   No fraudulent, misrepresented, or false statement of material or relevant fact is contained within the application.

    B.   Opportunity for Hearing. If it shall come to the attention of the City Clerk that one or more of the above grounds exists, the application shall be denied. Otherwise the license shall be granted. In the event that the application is denied, the City Clerk shall furnish the applicant a copy of the order and the reasons supporting the denial upon the written request of the applicant. Any applicant whose application was denied without a hearing shall be entitled to a hearing on such application upon written request to the City Clerk. Such hearing shall be conducted within ten (10) days of the City Clerk’s receipt of the written request, unless a later hearing date is requested by the applicant. The City Clerk or the City Clerk’s designee shall be the hearing officer at any such hearing. When the hearing officer is a person other than the City Clerk, the City Clerk shall adopt the findings and decisions of such hearing officer.

    C.   Posting. Every license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be posted during the period such license is valid. Such license shall be posted upon the wall of the principal room or office of the facility. When such license expires, it shall be removed. No license not in full force and effect shall remain posted.

    D.  Expiration. No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall extend beyond two (2) years from the date of its issuance and shall expire on the date specified on the license. No license issued for any period after July 1, 2011 will be valid unless a state license of the same type shall also be issued in accordance with the provisions and requirements of the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code. (Ord. 18-2010 § 1)

 

5.56.100 Suspension and revocation.
    A.  Prior to July 1, 2011, in addition to any other penalties prescribed by the Cañon City Municipal Code, the City Clerk may, on his or her own motion or on complaint, and after investigation and a show-cause hearing at which the licensee shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard, suspend or revoke any license previously issued by him or her for any violation of any of the following provisions, requirements, or conditions:

    1.   The licensee has failed to pay the annual license fee; or that

    2.   The licensee has made any false statement in the application for a license as to any of the facts required to be stated in such application; or that

    3.   The licensee has failed either to file the required reports or to furnish such information as may be reasonably required by the City Clerk under the authority vested in the City Clerk by the provisions of this chapter; or that

    4.   The licensee, either knowingly or without the exercise of due care to prevent the same, has violated: any terms or provisions of this Chapter 5.56; any provision of any license issued pursuant to this chapter; or any regulation or order lawfully made under and within the authority of this chapter relating to the license; or that

    5.   Any fact or condition exists which, if it had existed or had been known to exist at the time of the application for such license, would have warranted the City Clerk in refusing originally to issue such license; or that

    6.   The licensee, or any of the agents, servants, or employees of the licensee, have violated any rule or regulation promulgated by the City Clerk under this Code relating to medical marijuana facility licenses; or that

    7.   The licensee has failed to maintain the premises in compliance with the requirements of the City’s Zoning Ordinance and/or any building code provision applicable to the licensed premises; or that

    8.   The licensee, or any of the agents, servants or employees of the licensee, have violated any ordinance of the City or any state law on the premises or have permitted such a violation on the premises by any other person; or that

    9.   The licensee, or any of the agents, servants or employees of the licensee have violated any applicable provision of the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code.

    B.   No suspension under this Subsection B shall be for a longer period than six (6) months. Notice of suspension or revocation, as well as any required notice of a show-cause hearing, shall be given by mailing the same in writing to the licensee at the licensee’s last address of record with the City Clerk.

    C.   Any final decision of the City Clerk denying, suspending or revoking a license, following a hearing permitted in this section, may be appealed to a district court within thirty (30) days following the date of such decision pursuant to the provisions of Rule 106(a)(4), Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure.

    D.  Effect of Termination. Upon the expiration, revocation, surrender or other termination of a license, for whatever reason under this chapter, the license shall be deemed null and void, together with all the privileges associated with it. During the period that a license is suspended, no licensee shall exercise any of the privileges associated with the license. (Ord. 18-2010 § 1)

 

5.56.110 Application and license fees.
    A.  Initial application and license fees for medical marijuana facilities are as follows:

 

1. a.

New license application fee (first submittal)

$1,500.00

 b.

New license application fee (for associated facilities or licenses)

$500.00

2.

Criminal background check fee, per person checked

actual costs

3. a.

License fee (pre-July 1, 2011 effective date)

$500.00

 b.

License fee (post-July 1, 2011 effective date)

$1,000.00

4.

Renewal application fee

$500.00

5.

Change of manager

$150.00 (plus actual background check fees)

6.

Modification of premises and/or other activities for which a fee is permitted, but for which a fixed amount is not set in this section

up to $250.00

7.

Change of corporate structure

$150.00 per person (plus actual background check fees)

8.

Changes in financial interest

$100.00 minimum, or actual cost if more than $100

 

    B.   City Council, by resolution, may increase or decrease any fee or cost or otherwise modify any other provision set forth in Subsection A. Any such increase, decrease or other modification shall be evidenced by an appendix to this section. (Ord. 18-2010 § 1)

Chapter 5.60 COMMUNITY MARIJUANA CULTIVATION FACILITIES
5.60.010 Purpose and legislative intent.
    Article XVIII, Sections 14 and 16 of the Colorado Constitution allow for the cultivation of marijuana for personal use and such cultivation may occur within residential dwellings. The City desires to create a mechanism for residents of Cañon City and the immediately surrounding areas that are within the boundaries of the Cañon City Fire District to cultivate both recreational and medical marijuana in a licensed facility and to encourage the relocation of residential cultivation to the industrial zone district for preservation of the public’s health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1)

 

5.60.020 Definitions.
    “Assistance” means the providing of information, guidance and advice on the process of cultivating marijuana, including information on the best methods for cultivation and harvesting, the provision of licensee-controlled automatic watering and lighting systems and proper disposal of marijuana byproducts. Assistance shall not include the act of cultivating or harvesting marijuana on behalf of another, advice as to what type of marijuana to cultivate or the appropriate dosage for a user.

    “Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility” means a premises licensed to provide designated individual areas for cultivating marijuana for personal use and assistance to those individuals cultivating marijuana within the facility.

    “Cultivation” or “cultivate” means the process by which a person grows a marijuana plant.

    “Cultivation area” means the area where marijuana is cultivated within the Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility.

    “Good cause” means: (1) the licensee has violated, does not meet, or has failed to comply with any of the terms, conditions or provisions of this chapter or any provision of this Code; (2) the licensee has failed to comply with any special terms or conditions that were placed on its license at the time the license was issued, or that were placed on its license in prior disciplinary proceedings or that arose in the context of potential disciplinary proceedings; or (3) the licensee’s Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility has been operated in a manner that adversely affects the public health, welfare or safety of the immediate neighborhood in which the facility is located. Evidence to support such a finding can include: (i) offenses against the public peace, as defined in Title 9 of the Cañon City Municipal Code; (ii) drug-related criminal conduct within the premises or in the immediate area surrounding the premises arising out of the operation of the facility; or (iii) criminal conduct directly related to or arising from the operation of the Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility.

    “Good moral character” means having a personal history that demonstrates honesty, fairness, and respect for the rights of others and for the law.

    “Individual cultivator” means an individual who has a written agreement with a licensee under this chapter to cultivate marijuana in the cultivation area within a Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility.

    “License” means a document issued by the City officially authorizing an applicant to operate a Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility pursuant to this chapter.

    “Licensee” means the person to whom a license has been issued pursuant to this chapter.

    “Licensed premises” means the premises specified in an application for a license under this chapter, which is owned or in possession of the licensee and within which the licensee is authorized to operate a Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility.

    “Marijuana” means all parts of the plant of the genus cannabis whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or its resin, including marijuana concentrate. Marijuana does not include industrial hemp, nor does it include fiber produced from the stalks, oil, or cake made from the seeds of the plant, sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination, or the weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or other product.

    “Marijuana accessories” means any equipment, products, or materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, composting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, vaporizing, or containing marijuana, or for ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana into the human body.

    “Marijuana products” means concentrated marijuana products and marijuana products that are comprised of marijuana and other ingredients that are intended for use or consumption, such as but not limited to, edible products, ointments and tinctures.

    “Medical marijuana” means marijuana that is grown and consumed for a purpose authorized by Colo. Const., Art. 18, § 14 but shall not be considered a nonprescription drug for purposes of C.R.S. §§ 12-42.5-102(21) or 39-26-717, or an over-the-counter medication for purposes of C.R.S. § 25.5-5-322.

    “Medical marijuana business” means a medical marijuana center, optional premises cultivation operation, or medical marijuana-infused products manufacturer as defined in the Medical Marijuana Code.

    “Medical Marijuana Code” means Article 43.3 of Title 12, Colorado Revised Statutes.

    “Person” means a natural person, partnership, association, company, corporation, limited liability company or organization.

    “Recreational marijuana” means marijuana that is grown and consumed pursuant to the Colo. Const., Art. 18, § 16 but that is not sold in a retail marijuana establishment, as defined by the Retail Marijuana Code, C.R.S. § 12-43.4-101 et seq.

    “Retail Marijuana Code” means Article 43.4 of Title 12, Colorado Revised Statutes.

    “Unrecognizable” means marijuana or Cannabis plant material rendered indistinguishable from any other plant material. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1)

 

5.60.030 Applicability.
    A.  This chapter shall be construed to permit community marijuana cultivation facilities within the City as defined by this chapter.

    B.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to permit a retail marijuana establishment within the City as defined in the Retail Marijuana Code and this chapter.

    C.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to permit a medical marijuana business within the City, as defined by the Medical Marijuana Code and this chapter.

    D.  All standards set forth in this chapter are the minimum requirements of the City, and, as such, each approved facility shall meet all minimum standards. The intent of these minimum standards is to ensure an appropriate level of safeguards and oversight to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1)

 

5.60.040 License required.
    It shall be unlawful for any person to establish or operate a Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility in the City without first having obtained a license for such facility from the Local Licensing Authority. Such license shall be kept current at all times and a failure to maintain a current license shall constitute a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1)

 

5.60.050 Local licensing authority.
    A.  For the purpose of regulating and controlling the licensing of the community marijuana cultivation facilities in this City, there is hereby created the Local Licensing Authority of the City of Cañon City, which shall be the City Council.

    B.   The Local Licensing Authority shall have such powers and duties as are provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1)

 

5.60.060 Limitation on licenses.
    A.  No more than three active licenses for community marijuana cultivation facilities are permitted within the City at any given time.

    B.   During the one hundred twenty (120) days after the effective date of this chapter, any facility existing as of January 1, 2016 that was cultivating at least two hundred fifty (250) plants in a nonresidential zone in a manner generally consistent with the provisions of this chapter may apply for a license under this chapter.

    1.   These applicants are not required to submit Phase 1 and 2 applications but one application with all the required information in Sections 5.60.070 and 5.60.080.

    2.   These applications shall be reviewed pursuant to the procedures in Section 5.60.080.

    C.   One hundred twenty (120) days after the effective date of this chapter, and only if not all the licenses permitted under this section have been issued, applicants not meeting the criteria of Subsection B above may apply for a license under this chapter. The City shall post notice on its website indicating that Phase 1 applications for a Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility license shall be accepted for a sixty (60) day period. At the end of the sixty (60) day period, the City shall review the applications as provided for in Section 5.60.070. After the time period described in Section 5.60.070(D), the City shall randomly select applicants who will have the opportunity to submit a Phase 2 application.

    D.  Once the maximum number of Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility licenses has been issued, the City shall not accept any further applications for such use until an existing license is either revoked or expires. When the number of licensed community marijuana cultivation facilities is less than this limit provided for in this section for any reason, including the cessation of operation of a Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility either by license revocation or expiration, notice shall be posted on the City’s website as provided for in Section 5.60.060(C) and the City shall process applications as provided in that section and Sections 5.60.070 and 5.60.080. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1)

 

5.60.070 New license applications—Phase 1.
    A.  A person seeking a new license issued pursuant to this chapter shall submit a Phase 1 application to the City on forms provided by the City. The purpose of the Phase 1 application is to determine whether an applicant can be entered into the random selection process in Section 5.60.060(C). At the time of the Phase 1 application, each applicant shall pay a nonrefundable Phase 1 application fee to the City in an amount to be determined by the City by separate resolution to defray the costs incurred by the City for reviewing the Phase 1 application.

    B.   In the Phase 1 application, the applicant shall include the following:

    1.   For the applicant, one of the following forms of identification:

    a.   a valid driver’s license;

    b.   an identification card, issued by any state for purpose of proving age using requirements similar to those in C.R.S. §§ 42-2-302 and 42-2-303;

    c.   a United States military identification card;

    d.   a valid passport;

    e.   a valid alien registration card; or

    f.    an enrollment card issued by the government authority of a federally recognized tribe.

    2.   For the applicant and all persons having a financial interest in the Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility that is the subject of the application or, if the applicant is an entity, having financial interest in the applying entity, the following information shall be supplied:

    a.   name, address, date of birth;

    b.   an acknowledgment and consent that the City will conduct a background investigation, including a criminal history check which shall include CCIC and NCIC;

    c.   bank statements and tax records, from the three (3) years prior to the submission of the application, and any other information required by the City;

    d.   explanation of funding sources used to finance the applicant’s Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility.

    3.   If the applicant is a business entity, information regarding the entity, including, without limitation, the name and address of the entity, its legal status, and proof of registration with, or a certificate of good standing from, the Colorado Secretary of State, operating or shareholder agreements, partnership agreements.

    C.   Review of Phase 1 Applications.

    1.   The Community Development Director shall review a Phase 1 application for completeness and the results of the criminal background check. The Community Development Director shall reject a Phase 1 application if any of the information required as part of the application was not submitted and/or if any of the persons subject to the criminal background check have discharged a sentence for a felony conviction in the previous ten (10) years. After review of a Phase 1 application, the Community Development Director shall notify the applicant in writing of the results of the review.

    2.   If an application is complete, the Community Development Director shall notify the applicant that they will be entered into the random selection process in Section 5.60.060(C).

    3.   If an application is rejected, the applicant may appeal the Community Development Director’s decision to the City Administrator by filing an appeal with the City within ten (10) days of the notification of the rejection by the Community Development Director. The notice of appeal shall specify the grounds for the appeal and the relief sought by the appellant. Upon receipt of an appeal, the City Administrator shall hold a hearing on the appeal within ten (10) days of the receipt of the appeal. The City shall provide at least five (5) days’ notice to the appellant of the hearing. The City Administrator shall make a determination of the appeal within five (5) days of the hearing and shall notify the appellant of the decision in writing.

    D.  Once the sixty (60) day period provided for in Section 5.60.060(C) has ended, the Community Development Director has reviewed all Phase 1 applications, the appeal deadline in Subsection C above has expired, and all appeals, if any, have been decided, the City may conduct the random selection of applicants for Phase 2 applications as provided for in Section 5.60.060(C). (Ord. 2-2017 § 1)

 

5.60.080 New applications—Phase 2.
    A.  If the applicant is randomly selected pursuant to Section 5.60.060(C) the applicant shall provide the following information for a Phase 2 application on a form provided by the City within one hundred and twenty (120) days from the date of notification of the applicant’s selection:

    1.   For the applicant, all employees, including the proposed manager of the Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility, and all persons having a financial interest in the Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility that is the subject of the application or, if the applicant is an entity, having financial interest in the applying entity:

    a.   fingerprints for a FBI criminal background check, and

    b.   suitable evidence of proof of lawful presence and good moral character and reputation that the City may request;

    2.   the name and complete address of the proposed Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility;

    3.   a copy of any deed, lease, contract or other document reflecting the right of the applicant to possess the proposed licensed premises along with the conditions of occupancy of the premises, and if by leasehold or similar means, the lease shall specifically recognize and authorize the applicant’s use of the premises for the licensed purposes; provided that if the lease does not specifically authorize the use of the premises for the licensed purposes, the applicant shall provide a notarized statement from the owner of such property authorizing the use of the property for the licensed purposes;

    4.   proof of general liability and property insurance of sufficient amount, as determined by the City, to adequately cover any damage or destruction to the facility and the personal property, including plants contained inside;

    5.   updated bank statements and tax records from the time of the Phase 1 application and any other information required by the City;

    6.   a “to scale” diagram of the premises, showing, without limitation, a site plan, floor layout and all areas in which marijuana will be stored and cultivated, including the cultivation area demonstrating egress and ingress within the facility, all entry ways and exits to the facility, and, if applicable, loading zones;

    7.   any additional information that the Local Licensing Authority reasonably determines to be necessary in connection with the investigation and review of the application;

    8.   a comprehensive business operation plan for the Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility which shall contain, without limitation, the following:

    a.   a security plan meeting the requirements of Section 5.60.220 of this chapter;

    b.   a description of how the facility will provide assistance to individual cultivators and if applicable, how supplies will be stored and/or provided to individual cultivators;

    c.   a signage plan that is in compliance with all applicable requirements of Section 5.60.210 of this chapter;

    d.   a lighting and electrical plan prepared by a licensed electrical engineer, showing the electrical layout, fans, pumps, duct size of air intake and exhaust, location of intakes and termination of exhausts, any other electrical loads including conductors, subpanels, and all existing and proposed exterior and interior lighting levels including those used for all clones and immature marijuana plants;

    e.   a plan for removing odor emissions in compliance with Section 5.60.270 of this chapter;

    f.    a plan for the disposal of marijuana and related byproducts in compliance with the requirements of Section 5.60.280 of this chapter.

    B.   With the Phase 2 application, the applicant shall pay a Phase 2 non-refundable application fee, in an amount to be determined by the City by separate resolution, to defer the costs of reviewing the Phase 2 application, and other costs, including but not limited to, inspection, administration, and enforcement of community marijuana cultivation facilities. In addition, the applicant shall also pay the applicable licensing fee in an amount to be determined by the City by separate resolution that may be refunded to the applicant if the Phase 2 application is denied.

    C.   The applicant may request in writing an extension of the deadline to submit a Phase 2 application from the City Administrator. The request shall be received at least fifteen (15) days prior to the deadline. The City Administrator may grant one extension under this subsection if the applicant demonstrates an inability to file a Phase 2 application due to circumstances beyond the applicant’s control and that the applicant has attempted to substantially comply with the application requirements.

    D.  A license issued pursuant to this chapter does not eliminate the need for the licensee to obtain other required permits or licenses related to the operation of the Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility, including, without limitation, any development approvals or building permits required by the Cañon City Municipal Code.

    E.   Upon receipt of a Phase 2 application, the Community Development Director shall review the application for completeness and conformity with the requirements of this chapter. If the application is incomplete, the Community Development Director shall notify the applicant in writing of the application’s deficiencies within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the application. The applicant shall have sixty (60) days from the date of notification of any deficiencies by the Community Development Director to remedy the deficiencies.

    F.   At the time of a Phase 2 application under this chapter, the applicant shall submit an application for a use permitted by special review pursuant to Chapter 17.24 of this Code. A Phase 2 application and an application under Chapter 17.24 of the Code shall be processed concurrently. An incomplete application for a use permitted by special review shall be processed in the same manner as an application for Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility as provided by in Subsection E above. A Phase 2 application pursuant to this chapter shall only be considered complete if the application for a use permitted by special review is also considered complete.

    G.  If the applicant fails to remedy the deficiencies within the period provided for in Subsection F above, the Community Development Director shall deny the application and notify the applicant of the denial.

    H.  Determination that the application is incomplete or denial of an application, because it is incomplete are appealable to the City Administrator pursuant to Section 5.60.070(C).

    I.    Once the appeal period in Subsection F above has run or the appeal has been determined by the City Administrator, the City may randomly select another applicant to submit a Phase 2 application.

    J.    Upon the determination of a complete Phase 2 application, the Local Licensing Authority shall schedule a public hearing on the application, which shall include both the Phase 1 and 2 applications submitted by the applicant, to be held not less than thirty (30) days after the determination of completeness. The Local Licensing Authority shall cause a notice of such hearing to be posted in a conspicuous place upon the proposed licensed premises and published in a newspaper of general circulation within the City not less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such posted notice given by posting shall include a sign of suitable material in dimensions and with lettering as required by the Community Development Department. Both the posted and the published notice shall state the type of license applied for, the date of the hearing, the name and address of the applicant, and such other information as may be required to fully apprise the public of the nature of the application.

    K.  Not less than five (5) days prior to the date of the public hearing for a new license, the Community Development Director shall cause the preliminary findings based on its investigation to be known in writing to the applicant and other parties in interest. The Local Licensing Authority shall deny any application that does not meet the requirements of this chapter. The Local Licensing Authority shall also deny any application that contains any false, misleading or incomplete information. The Local Licensing Authority shall also deny or refuse to issue a license for good cause. Denial of an application for a license shall not be subject to further administrative review but only to review by a court of competent jurisdiction. At any time prior to commencement of the public hearing, licensee may withdraw its application, and the public hearing shall be cancelled.

    L.   Before entering a decision approving or denying the application for a license, the Local Licensing Authority may consider, except where this chapter specifically provides otherwise, the facts and evidence gathered as a result of its investigation, as well as any other facts pertinent to the application and any other pertinent matters affecting the qualifications of the applicant for the conduct of the type of business proposed. The Local Licensing Authority shall issue its decision within ninety (90) days of the receipt of the complete license application. Such decision shall be by resolution and shall state the reasons for the decision. The resolution shall be sent via certified mail to the applicant at the address shown in the application.

    M.  The City shall, prior to issuance of the license, perform an inspection of the proposed licensed premises, to determine compliance with any applicable requirements of this chapter or other applicable requirements of the Cañon City Municipal Code. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1)

 

5.60.090 Renewal applications.
    All renewal applications shall be submitted on forms provided by the City. Renewal applications shall contain the information required in both Phase 1 and Phase 2 applications. Renewal applications shall not be subject to the random selection process in Section 5.60.060(C). (Ord. 2-2017 § 1)

 

5.60.100 Location and use criteria.
    A.  Prior to the issuance of a license for a Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility, the Local Licensing Authority shall determine whether the proposed location of the Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility complies with the requirement of this chapter.

    B.   Community marijuana cultivation facilities shall only be located in the Light Industrial District and only operated as a use permitted by special review.

    C.   No Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility shall be located:

    1.   within one thousand (1,000) feet of any educational institution or school, whether public or private, licensed child care facility or public park; or

    2.   within any building or structure that contains a residential unit or any other businesses.

    D.  The distances described in this section shall be computed by direct measurement from the nearest property line of the land used for the above purposes to the unit within a building or structure housing the Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility.

    E.   No part of the licensed premises may be leased or subleased for any purpose other than the cultivation of marijuana and management of the Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility.

    F.   Each Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility shall be operated from a permanent location. No Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility shall be permitted to operate from a moveable, mobile or transitory location or structure.

    G.  The suitability of a location for a Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility shall be determined at the time of the issuance of the first license for such facility. The fact that changes in the neighborhood that occur after the issuance of the first license might render the site unsuitable for a Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility under this section shall not be grounds to suspend, revoke or refuse to renew the license of a Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility so long as the license for the facility remains in effect. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1)

 

5.60.110 Persons prohibited as licensees and employees.
    A.  No license shall be issued to, held by, or renewed by any of the following:

    1.   Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders are not of good moral character satisfactory to the Local Licensing Authority;

    2.   Any partnership, association or company, any of whose officers are not of good moral character satisfactory to the Local Licensing Authority;

    3.   Any person employing, assisted by, or financed in whole or in part by any other person who is not of good moral character and reputation satisfactory to the Local Licensing Authority;

    4.   Any employee of any local, state, or federal law enforcement agency, prosecuting officer, and state or Local Licensing Authority or any of its members, inspectors or employees;

    5.   Any natural person under twenty-one (21) years of age;

    6.   Any person who has discharged a sentence for a felony conviction in the previous ten (10) years;

    7.   Any entity whose directors, shareholders, partners or other persons having a financial interest in said entity do not meet the criteria set forth above;

    8.   Any person who employs another person at a Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility who has not submitted fingerprints for a criminal record history check or whose criminal record history check reveals the employee is ineligible; or

    9.   Any person who has made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement on his or her application.

    B.   No licensee shall employ or contract with any person to perform work functions directly related to the possession and cultivation of marijuana for a licensed Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility, who meets any of the following criteria:

    1.   Any person who is not of good moral character satisfactory to the Local Licensing Authority;

    2.   Any person who is under twenty-one (21) years of age;

    3.   Any person who has discharged a sentence for a felony conviction in the last ten (10) years; or

    4.   Any employee of any local, state, or federal law enforcement agency, prosecuting officer, and state or Local Licensing Authority or any of its members, inspectors or employees.

    C.   Consideration of Convictions. In investigating the qualifications described herein, the Local Licensing Authority may have access to criminal history record information furnished by a criminal justice agency subject to any restrictions imposed by such agency. In the event the Local Licensing Authority takes into consideration information concerning the applicant’s criminal history record, the Local Licensing Authority shall also consider any information provided by the applicant regarding such criminal history record, including but not limited to evidence of rehabilitation, character references, and educational achievements, especially those items pertaining to the period of time between the applicant’s last criminal conviction and the consideration of the application for a license. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1)

 

5.60.120 Issuance of license—Duration—Renewal.
    A.  Upon issuance of a license, the City shall provide the licensee with one original of such license for the Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility. Each such copy shall show the name and address of the licensee, and the address of the facility at which it is to be displayed.

    B.   Each license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only as provided in this chapter. All renewals of a license shall be for no more than one year.

    C.   An application for the renewal of an existing license shall be made to the Local Licensing Authority not more than sixty (60) days and not less than thirty (30) days prior to the date of expiration of the license. A licensee may submit to the Local Licensing Authority a late renewal application on the prescribed forms and pay a non-refundable late application fee in an amount set by City Council via resolution for a renewal application made less than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the expiration of the license. All other provisions concerning renewal applications apply to a late renewal application. The timely filing of a completed renewal application or a late renewal application shall extend the current license until a decision is made on the renewal.

    D.  A licensee whose license expires shall cease to operate a Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility until all necessary new licenses have been obtained. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1)

 

5.60.130 Authority to impose conditions on license.
    The Local Licensing Authority shall have the authority to impose such reasonable terms and conditions on a license as may be necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and to obtain compliance with the requirements of this chapter and applicable law. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1)

 

5.60.140 Annual licensing fee.
    Upon the application for a license or any renewal of a license, the licensee shall pay to the City a fee in an amount determined by City Council to be sufficient to cover the annual cost of inspections and other administrative actions for the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this chapter and any other applicable state or local laws or regulations. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1)

 

5.60.150 Display of license.
    A.  Each license shall be limited to use at the premises specified in the application for such license.

    B.   Each license shall be continuously posted in a conspicuous location at the facility. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1)

 

5.60.160 Management of licensed premises.
    Licensees who are natural persons shall either manage the licensed premises themselves or employ a separate and distinct manager on the premises and report the name of such manager to the Local Licensing Authority. Licensees that are entities shall employ a manager on the premises and report the name of the manager to the Local Licensing Authority. All managers shall be natural persons who are at least twenty-one (21) years of age. All managers shall meet the criteria in Section 5.60.110 of this chapter. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1)

 

5.60.170 Change in manager—Change in financial interest.
    A.  Each licensee shall report any change in managers to the Local Licensing Authority within thirty (30) days after the change. Such report shall include all information required for managers under Sections 5.60.070 and 5.60.080 of this chapter.

    B.   Each licensee shall report in writing to the Local Licensing Authority any transfer or change of financial interest in the license holder or in the Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility that is the subject of the license. Such report shall be filed with the Local Licensing Authority within thirty (30) days after any such transfer or change.

    C.   A change in financial interest application shall be required for any transfer of the capital stock of a corporation or any other interest, as well as any transfer of a controlling interest in the corporation whenever a sufficient number of shares have been transferred to effectuate the transfer of a controlling interest. No person having or acquiring a financial interest in the Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility that is the subject of a license shall be a person who does not meet the criteria in Section 5.60.110 of this chapter.

    D.  A change in financial interest application fee, as set by City Council, shall be paid at the time of the application. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1)

 

5.60.180 Transfer of ownership—Change of location.
    A.  For a transfer of ownership, a license holder shall apply to the Local Licensing Authority on forms provided by the City. In considering whether to permit a transfer of ownership, the Local Licensing Authority shall consider only the requirements of this chapter. The Local Licensing Authority shall hold a hearing on the application for a transfer of ownership, but such hearing shall not be held until a notice of such hearing has been posted on the premises of the licensed Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility for a period of at least ten (10) days prior to such hearing, and the applicant has been provided at least ten (10) days prior notice of such hearing.

    B.   Licensees with a Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility within the City may transfer their license to another location within the City so long as the applicant and the new location conform to the requirements of this chapter and the Cañon City Municipal Code. A change in location application shall be filed with the City on forms provided by the City. In considering whether to permit a change in location, the Local Licensing Authority shall consider the requirements of this chapter. The Local Licensing Authority may hold a hearing on the application for a change in location, but such hearing shall not be held until a notice of such hearing has been posted on the proposed premises of the licensed Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility for a period of at least ten (10) days prior to such hearing, and the applicant has been provided at least ten (10) days prior notice of such hearing. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1)

 

5.60.190 Hours of operation—Public access.
    A.  A Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility may only be accessible from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., seven (7) days a week.

    B.   No person under the age of twenty-one (21) shall be permitted within a Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility, unless the person is under the age of twenty-one (21) and has a valid medical marijuana patient registration card issued pursuant to the rules and regulations promulgated by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment.

    C.   Except as provided for in Section 5.60.310, access to the non-cultivation areas of a Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility by persons who are not individual cultivators shall be supervised by the licensee or licensee’s employees; however, access to the cultivation area by persons who are not individual cultivators is not permitted. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1)

 

5.60.200 Size of cultivation area.
    The size of the cultivation area may be up to seventy-five percent (75%) of the licensed premises subject to the applicable building and fire codes. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1)

 

5.60.210 Signage and advertising.
    All signage and advertising for a Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility shall comply with this chapter and other applicable provisions of this Code. No off site premises signage is permitted. Advertisements, signs, displays or other promotional material depicting marijuana uses or symbols shall not be shown in any manner which is visible to the public from roadways, pedestrian sidewalks or walkways, or from other public areas. No signage associated with a Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility shall use the word “marijuana,” “cannabis,” or any other word or phrase commonly understood to refer to marijuana such as “reefer,” “ganja,” “weed” or other similar slang references to marijuana or cannabis. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1)

 

5.60.220 Security requirements.
    A.  Security measures at a Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility shall include at a minimum the following:

    1.   Video surveillance system.

    a.   Video surveillance system shall include cameras installed to monitor all entrances, parking areas, and the interior and exterior of the premises to discourage and facilitate the reporting of criminal acts and nuisance activities occurring at the licensed premises and shall be able to monitor the entire cultivation area.

    b.   Cameras shall be positioned as to ensure that they are capturing clear and certain images of any individual and activity occurring and shall have low light capability, auto iris and auto focus features. Cameras should support either a MPEG or H.264 format.

    c.   Video surveillance equipment shall include at a minimum digital or network video recorders, video monitors, digital archiving devices and a minimum of one monitor on premises capable of viewing video. Internet services associated with the video surveillance system shall have a minimum speed of two (2) mbps.

    d.   Videos shall be of a minimum resolution of 640 x 1080 pixels.

    e.   The system shall be equipped with a failure notification system that provides, within one hour, notification to the licensee or an authorized representative of any prolonged surveillance interruption or failure and have sufficient battery power to support a minimum of one hour of recording time in the event of a power outage.

    f.    Video surveillance equipment and recordings shall be stored in a locked secured area that is accessible only by the licensee and licensee’s employees. Storage of video should be on hard disk drive of at least two (2) terrabytes, RAID Compatible Enterprise Series or better.

    g.   All security recordings shall be preserved for at least forty (40) days by the licensee and shall be in a format that can be easily accessed for viewing by Cañon City Police Department upon request for inspection.

    2.   Secured Storage. A secured room with no windows or a locking safe permanently affixed to the premises.

    3.   Exterior Lighting. Exterior lighting that illuminates the exterior walls of the licensed premises and complies with applicable provisions of this chapter and other applicable provisions of this Code.

    4.   Exterior Access. Exterior doors should have commercial grade, non-residential door locks. All exterior doors shall only be accessible by keys or key code in the possession of the licensee and licensee’s employees but shall include a panic bar hardware with an alarm on the inside of the door to allow for egress.

    5.   Alarm System. A fully operational alarm system activated at all times when the license premises is closed for business on all exterior doors and any perimeter windows. The alarm system shall be able to detect any movement within the indoor area on the licensed premises, be programmable to notify a security company that will notify the licensee, licensee representative or authorized personnel in the event of a breach or if unavailable, law enforcement and to have at least two (2) operational manual triggers located inside the licensed premises that are linked with the alarm system that immediately notifies a security company and law enforcement. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1)

 

5.60.230 Required notices.
    A.  There shall be posted in a conspicuous location inside each Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility, at least one legible sign containing the following warnings:

    1.   that on-site consumption of marijuana, marijuana products and alcohol is illegal;

    2.   that loitering in or around a Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility is prohibited by law;

    3.   that possession and distribution of marijuana is a violation of federal law; and

    4.   that no one under the age of twenty-one (21) years is permitted on the premises, unless the person has a valid medical marijuana patient registration card issued pursuant to the rules and regulations promulgated by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment.

    B.   There shall be posted in a conspicuous location at the exterior of each Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility near the entrance, one legible sign warning that the facility is monitored by video cameras. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1)

 

5.60.240 On-site consumption of marijuana and alcohol—Manufacturing.
    A.  The use, consumption, ingestion or inhalation of marijuana or marijuana products on or within the licensed premises of a Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility is prohibited.

    B.   The use, possession, or consumption of any alcohol beverages on or within the licensed premises of a Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility is prohibited.

    C.   The manufacturing of any marijuana products or marijuana concentrate on or within the licensed premises of a Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility is prohibited.

    D.  The extraction of tetrahydrocannabinol (“THC”) or any other cannabinoid within the licensed premises of a Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility is prohibited. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1)

 

5.60.250 Cultivation, growing and processing by licensees.
    A.  No Remuneration. Marijuana cultivated on the licensed premises may not be transferred to another person for remuneration.

    B.   The licensee or the licensee’s employees may not cultivate marijuana on behalf of any other person on the licensed premises. The licensee or the licensee’s employees may only provide assistance to individuals cultivating marijuana.

    C.   Cultivation Areas.

    1.   Cultivation of marijuana may only occur within the cultivation area. Only individual cultivators, the licensee or licensee’s employees shall have access to this cultivation area.

    2.   The restricted access area shall be physically separated from any areas of general access.

    3.   Marijuana that is being processed or dried may be contained within the cultivation area.

    D.  Lease of areas within cultivation area.

    1.   Individual cultivators shall lease space within the cultivation area for the cultivation of marijuana for personal use. Such leased areas within the cultivation area shall be delineated in such a manner to ensure compliance with this chapter.

    2.   Licensee and licensee’s employees shall be solely responsible for ensuring that individual cultivators’ marijuana is protected from interference and theft by other individual cultivators. Failure to do so may be grounds for a revocation of a license.

    3.   All portions of the cultivation area leased by a primary caregiver shall comply with all rules and regulations promulgated by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment and any applicable state law.

    E.   Individuals cultivating recreational marijuana may only cultivate six (6) plants in conformity with Colo. Const. Art. 18, §16(3)(b).

    F.   Individuals cultivating medical marijuana pursuant to the rules and regulations promulgated by the Colorado Department of Public Health may only cultivate six (6) plants in conformity with Colo. Const. Art. 18, § 14(4)(a)(II). Notwithstanding the limitation in this subsection, a qualified individual or a qualified individual’s primary caregiver may cultivate up to sixteen (16) plants, provided the individual’s number of plants is compliant with a recommendation by a physician pursuant to Colo. Const. Art. 18, § 14(4)(b).

    G.  Individual cultivators must be residents residing within the boundaries of the Cañon City Fire District. If an individual cultivator ceases to be a resident residing within the boundaries of the Cañon City Fire District, all plants owned by that cultivator shall be removed from the licensed premises immediately. The licensee shall be responsible for confirming and reaffirming on a periodic basis the residency of individual cultivators and maintaining records demonstrating the residency.

    H.  Residency shall be determined by the location of the individual cultivator’s primary home. A primary home is that home or place in which a person’s habitation is fixed and to which the person, whenever absent, has the present intention of returning after a departure or absence therefrom, regardless of the duration of such absence. A primary home is a permanent building or part of a building and may include, by way of example, a house, condominium, apartment, room in a house, or manufactured housing. No rental property, vacant lot, vacant house or cabin, or other premises used solely for business purposes shall be considered a primary home. Entering the armed forces or attending school outside of the boundaries of Cañon City Fire District shall not automatically terminate residency unless upon review of the totality of the circumstances, it is determined that the individual cultivators primary home has changed. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1)

 

5.60.260 Tracking marijuana.
    A.  All licensees shall operate a tracking system to track the weight of marijuana that leaves the facility and the number of plants that are brought into and removed from the facility.

    B.   All tracking systems shall include the measurement of the weight of the unprocessed marijuana by a scale prior to the marijuana being transported out of the facility. The scale used to weigh the marijuana to be transported out of the facility shall be of a type provided or approved by the City. Calibration of the scale shall be performed at least annually by the licensee and all testing and results shall be recorded. All weighing shall be observed by the licensee or licensee’s employees and recorded in the tracking system.

    C.   The tracking system shall record the name of the individual cultivator, the weight of marijuana, the number of plants being cultivated, and the date and time the marijuana is being transported out of the facility. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1)

 

5.60.270 Visibility of activities—Paraphernalia—Control of emissions.
    A.  All activities of a Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility shall be conducted indoors, except for outside construction or maintenance related to the license premises.

    B.   No marijuana shall be visible from outside the licensed premises.

    C.   Sufficient measures and means of preventing smoke, odors, debris, dust, fluids and other substances from discharging from a Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility shall be provided at all times. Such measures should include, at a minimum, carbon filters and scrubbers.

    D.  In the event that any odors, debris, dust, fluids or other substances are discharged a Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility, the owner of the subject premises and the licensee shall be jointly and severally liable for such conditions and shall be responsible for immediate, full clean-up and correction of such condition. If the licensee fails to clean up or correct such a condition, the City may abate the condition pursuant to Section 8.38.080 of the Cañon City Municipal Code.

    E.   Any off-site odor from a Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility shall not exceed a ratio adopted by the Air Control Division of the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment, as may be amended from time to time, for areas used predominately for commercial purposes, when measured from any location along the building exterior of the licensed premises, as measured by an instrument, device or method designated by the Colorado Air Pollution Division to be used in the determination of the intensity of an odor.

    F.   Lighting used to cultivate marijuana shall be contained solely within the interior of the facility and shall not emit any light that is visible from the outside of the facility. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1)

 

5.60.280 Disposal of marijuana byproducts.
    A.  Liquid Waste. Liquid waste from a Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility shall be disposed of in compliance with the applicable Water Quality Control Division statutes and regulations.

    B.   Solid Waste. Disposal of hazardous and chemical waste shall be conducted in a manner consistent with federal, state and local laws. Solid waste disposal shall be conducted in accordance with this section.

    C.   Waste Shall Be Made Unusable and Unrecognizable. Marijuana waste must be made unusable and unrecognizable prior to leaving the Licensed Premises.

    D.  Methods to Make Waste Unusable and Unrecognizable. Marijuana waste shall be rendered unusable and unrecognizable through one of the following methods:

    1.   Grinding and incorporating the marijuana waste with non-consumable, solid wastes listed below such that the resulting mixture is at least fifty (50) percent non-marijuana waste:

    a.   Paper waste;

    b.   Plastic waste;

    c.   Cardboard waste;

    d.   Food waste;

    e.   Grease or other compostable oil waste;

    f.    Bokashi or other compost activators;

    g.   Other wastes approved by the City that will render the marijuana waste unusable and unrecognizable; and

    h.   Soil.

    E.   After waste is made unusable and unrecognizable, licensees shall only dispose of marijuana waste in a secured waste receptacle in possession and control of the licensee. Licensee or licensee’s contracted agent shall be solely responsible for the disposal of waste under this section. After the marijuana waste is made unusable and unrecognizable, then the rendered waste shall be:

    1.   Disposed at a solid waste site and disposal facility that has a Certificate of Designation from the local governing body;

    2.   Deposited at a compost facility that has a Certificate of Designation from the Department of Public Health and Environment; or

    3.   Composted on-site at a facility owned by the generator of the waste and operated in compliance with the Regulations Pertaining to Solid Waste Sites and Facilities (6 CCR 1007-2, Part 1) in the Department of Public Health and Environment. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1)

 

5.60.290 Business license required.
    At all times while a license is in effect the licensee shall possess a valid business license. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1)

 

5.60.300 Required books and records.
    A.  Every licensee shall maintain an accurate and complete record of the following:

    1.   all leases and maximum allowable plants for each individual cultivator, including proof of residency within the boundaries of the Cañon City Fire District.

    2.   a daily log of all individuals who enter the licensed premises.

    3.   the tracking system as described in Section 5.60.260.

    4.   calibration of all scales as described in Section 5.60.260.

    B.   All records required to be kept under this chapter shall be kept in the English language, in a legible manner and shall be preserved and made available for inspection for a period of three (3) years. Information inspected by the Cañon City Police Department or other City departments pursuant to this chapter shall be used for regulatory and law enforcement purposes only and shall not be a matter of public record.

    C.   The City may, at any time and within its sole discretion, perform an audit of the licensee’s facility records. Licensee shall cooperate with any such audit.

    D.  Financial records submitted as part of the application or renewal process and/or obtained by the City through any inspection or audit shall be considered confidential and not subject to disclosure under the Colorado Open Records Act, C.R.S. § 24-72-100.1 et seq. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1)

 

5.60.310 Inspection of licensed premises.
    As a condition of every license under this chapter, all licensed premises shall be subject to inspection at any time by the Local Licensing Authority, the Cañon City Police Department, by law enforcement officers, or such other departments or individuals duly authorized by the City for the purpose of investigating and determining compliance with the provisions of this chapter and any other applicable state and local laws or regulations. Said inspection may include, but need not be limited to, the inspection of records. Where any part of the licensed premises consists of a locked area, such area shall be made available for inspection, without delay, upon request. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1)

 

5.60.320 Nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of license.
    A.  The Local Licensing Authority may, after notice and hearing, suspend, revoke or refuse to renew a license for good cause, including suspension or revocation of the licensee’s license. The Local Licensing Authority is authorized to adopt rules and procedures governing the conduct of such hearings.

    B.   The Local Licensing Authority may, in its discretion, revoke or elect not to renew any license if it determines that the licensed premises has been inactive, without good cause, for at least three (3) months. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1)

 

5.60.330 Violations and penalties.
    In addition to the possible denial, suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of a license under the provisions of this chapter, any person, including, but not limited to, any licensee, manager or employee of a Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility, or any customer of such facility, who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be subject to the following penalties:

    A.  Any person convicted of having violated any provision of this chapter shall be punished as set forth in Section 1.28.010 of the Cañon City Municipal Code.

    B.   The operation of a Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility without a valid license issued pursuant to this chapter may be enjoined by the City in an action brought in a court of competent jurisdiction, including the Cañon City Municipal Court.

    C.   The operation of a Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility without a valid license issued pursuant to this chapter is also deemed to be a nuisance pursuant to Title 8 of the Cañon City Municipal Code. (Ord. 12-2019 § 13; Ord. 2-2017 § 1)

 

5.60.340 No City liability—Indemnification.
    A.  By accepting a license issued pursuant to this chapter, the licensee waives and releases the City, its officers, elected officials, employees, attorneys and agents from any liability for injuries, damages or liabilities of any kind that result from any arrest or prosecution of a Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility owners, operators, employees, clients or customers for a violation of state or federal laws, rules or regulations.

    B.   By accepting a license issued pursuant to this chapter, all licensees, jointly and severally if more than one, agree to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, its officers, elected officials, employees, attorneys, agents, insurers and self-insurance pool against all liability, claims and demands on account of any injury, loss or damage, including, without limitation, claims arising from bodily injury, personal injury, sickness, disease, death, property loss or damage, or any other loss of any kind whatsoever arising out of or in any manner connected with the operation of the Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility that is the subject of the license. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1)

 

5.60.350 No waiver of governmental immunity.
    In adopting this chapter, the City Council is relying on and does not waive or intend to waive by any provision of this chapter, the monetary limitations or any other rights, immunities and protections provided by the Colorado Governmental Immunity Act, C.R.S. § 24-10-101, et seq., C.R.S., as from time to time amended, or any other limitation, right, immunity, or protection otherwise available to the City, its officers or its employees. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1)

 

5.60.360 Other laws remain applicable.
    A.  Any licensee may be required to demonstrate, upon demand by the Local Licensing Authority, the Cañon City Police Department, by law enforcement officers, or such other departments or individuals duly authorized by the City, that the source and quantity of any marijuana found upon the licensed premises are in full compliance with any applicable state or local law or regulation.

    B.   If the State prohibits the cultivation of marijuana in a facility like the type described in this chapter, any license issued hereunder shall be deemed immediately revoked by operation of law, with no ground for appeal or other redress on behalf of the licensee.

    C.   The issuance of any license pursuant to this chapter shall not be deemed to create an exception, defense or immunity to any person in regard to any potential criminal liability the person may have for the cultivation, possession, sale, distribution or use of marijuana. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1)

 

5.60.370 Review.
    City Council, or a designated committee, shall review this chapter at least once every two (2) years from its effective date. Failure to perform such a review shall not void or repeal this chapter. Nothing in this section shall prevent City Council from reviewing this chapter more frequently. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1)

Chapter 5.66 PROCEDURAL MATTERS PERTAINING TO LICENSES
5.66.010 Applicability.
    Unless otherwise provided to the contrary elsewhere in this Municipal Code, the provisions and conditions set forth in this chapter shall apply with respect to all licenses issued pursuant to Chapters 5.08, 5.24, 5.32, 5.34, 5.36, 5.40, 5.46, 5.52, 9.10 and 17.30 of the Cañon City Municipal Code. (Ord. 33-2010 § 43)

 

5.66.020 Term of licensure.
    Licenses and permits issued pursuant to the provisions of any chapter enumerated in Section 5.66.010 shall be effective for the calendar year or portion thereof specified on the license. (Ord. 33-2010 § 43)

 

5.66.030 Renewals.
    A.  Each license issued pursuant to the provisions of any chapter enumerated in Section 5.66.010 shall be renewed no later than January 31st of the calendar year that follows the year such license was issued. Renewals shall be requested by filing an application on forms supplied by the City Clerk (including any certificates and/or information required by this Code and requested by the City Clerk) and paying the applicable renewal fee to the City Clerk.

    B.   In addition to the license renewal fee, a late renewal fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be charged for each renewal received after January 31st and before March 1st of each calendar year.

    C.   Any person or business submitting an application for renewal on or after March 1st of any calendar year shall be charged, in addition to the licensing fee, a one hundred dollar ($100.00) administrative penalty fee for renewal. (Ord. 33-2010 § 43)

 

5.66.040 Penalties for violations and administrative penalty fee option.
    A.  Any person who violates any provision of any chapter enumerated in Section 5.66.010, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in an amount that does not exceed the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010.

    B.   In lieu of Municipal Court proceedings where the penalties provided for in Subsection A may be imposed, any person, firm or corporation operating without an appropriate license as required under any chapter enumerated in Section 5.66.010 shall be given the option and opportunity to apply for such license by filing a complete application, paying the applicable license fee, and also paying an administrative penalty fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). No Municipal Court proceedings respecting charges for operating without a valid license or permit will be initiated or continued upon the City’s receipt of such application and payment of the licensing fee and administrative penalty fee. (Ord. 17-2013 § 12; Ord. 33-2010 § 43)

 

5.66.050 Suspensions, revocations or denials.
    In addition to any other penalties imposed pursuant to state law or the City Municipal Code, the licensing official may, on his or her own motion or on complaint, and after investigation and a show-cause hearing at which the licensee shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard, suspend, revoke or deny any license previously issued or applied for on grounds that the applicant violated provisions, requirements, or conditions of Chapters 5.08 – Auctioneers; 5.24 – Trash, Garbage, Refuse and Rubbish Collection; 5.32 – Merchant Patrol and Security Guard Services and Security Guards; 5.34 – Mobile Home Parks; 5.36 – Pawnbrokers; 5.46 – Secondhand Dealer and Flea Market Businesses; 9.10 – Alarm Companies; and Section 17.30.100 – Outdoor Advertisers. (Ord. 33-2010 § 43)

Title 6 ANIMALS
Chapter 6.04 ANIMALS AND LIVESTOCK
Chapter 6.08 DOGS
Chapter 6.10 DOGS BANNED FROM CEMETERIES
Chapter 6.11 DEER HARVESTING PROGRAM

Chapter 6.04 ANIMALS AND LIVESTOCK
6.04.010 Animal defined.
    “Animal,” when used in this chapter, means and shall be construed to include horses, mules, cattle, sheep, swine, fowl and goats, as well as all other animals, except dogs and cats. (Prior code § 6.04.010)

 

6.04.020 Cruelty to animals prohibited.
    Any person who shall, in this city, cruelly beat, injure or otherwise abuse any dumb animal is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 6.04.020)

 

6.04.030 Hitching animals to trees, hydrants or other items.
    Whoever shall, in this city, hitch or fasten any horse or other animal to a hydrant, to any ornamental or shade tree, lamppost, or any ornamental fence or railing, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 6.04.030)

 

6.04.040 Hitching or grazing animals in public places.
    No person shall hitch, tie, herd, picket, stake out or otherwise fasten any animal whatever in any place upon any public street or upon any public ground in the city, for the purpose of such animal eating grass or any other feed, or so as to get into or in anywise interfere with or damage any ditch in the city; provided, that this section shall not be deemed to apply in case of any animal which is being used for business or pleasure in the premises, for a reasonable length of time and in a manner not to obstruct the highway; and in no case shall any such animal be so hitched or otherwise fastened so as to enable it to get upon any sidewalk in the city. (Prior code § 6.04.040)

 

6.04.050 Animals at large—Nuisance.
    No animals shall run at large within the corporate limits of the city, and any animal so found running at large is declared a public nuisance. (Prior code § 6.04.070)

 

6.04.060 Animals at large—Owner in violation.
    Any owner of any animal or animals running at large within the city limits is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 6.04.060)

 

6.04.070 Nuisance abatement—Impoundment authority.
    The members of the City police force, and every citizen of the City, are authorized and empowered to abate such nuisance by impounding in the City pound or humane shelter any such animal, or delivering same to the City pound keeper or person in charge of the pound or shelter. (Prior code § 6.04.080)

 

6.04.080 Impoundment—Notice required.
    A.  The Chief of Police, or his authorized agent, when any such animal is impounded, if the owner is not known, shall forthwith give notice thereof by posting notices, one at the entrance of the pound or shelter, and one at the post office of the City, giving the location of the pound or shelter, and shall give, immediately, seven days’ notice of sale, and publish same in a newspaper of general circulation within the city.

    B.   The notice shall contain, as near as may be, a description of the animal or animals impounded, giving color, sex and brand, and stating that, unless the animal or animals are claimed and the costs of feeding and advertising same are paid to the Chief of Police prior to the date named in the notice, which date shall be at least eight days from the date of first publication, he will sell such animal or animals at public sale.

    C.   If the owner is known, the notice shall be served on him only, either personally or by registered letter. (Prior code § 6.04.090)

 

6.04.090 Impoundment—Release conditions—Fee.
    The animal impounded pursuant to this chapter may be redeemed by the owner within the time specified in the notice provided for in this chapter, and by payment to the Chief of Police, between the hours of seven a.m. and five p.m., of all costs then accrued on account of the feeding, advertising and impounding. The Chief of Police shall then authorize release of the animal. (Prior code § 6.04.100)

 

6.04.100 Sale of unclaimed impounded animals.
    A.  If the animal or animals are not claimed within the time named, the Chief of Police shall, on the day named in the notice, proceed to sell the animal or animals at public auction to the highest bidder for cash. The sale shall commence at ten a.m.

    B.   The proceeds of such sale shall first be applied to the payment of the cost of feeding and advertising, and any surplus shall be turned over to the Director of Finance of the City.

    C.   The owner of the animal or animals so sold may, within a year from the date of such sale, obtain the surplus from the Director of Finance by making satisfactory proof of the ownership of such animal or animals. (Prior code § 6.04.110)

 

6.04.110 Unauthorized release from impoundment.
    Any person who opens the pound for the purpose of releasing any animal therein, except on the authority of the Chief of Police, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 6.04.120)

 

6.04.120 Violation—Penalty.
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 6.04.130)

Chapter 6.08 DOGS
6.08.010 Definitions.
    For all purposes under this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be construed as follows:

    A.  “Animal Control Officer” means any person employed by the City to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and any and all Police Officers of the City.

    B.   “City” means the City of Cañon City, Colorado.

    C.   “Destructive dog” means and includes any dog that injures or destroys or molests the property of persons, other than the owner, including particularly, among all other property, gardens, shrubbery, trees, vines, flowers, grass, and seed beds.

    D.  “Dog” means any dog, whether male or female, regardless of age, except that for purposes of licensing, registration and vaccinations, “dog” shall mean a male or female dog that is at least four months old.

    E.   “Dog kennel” means a “kennel,” as described in Chapter 17.08 of this Code, in which dogs are kept.

    F.   “Noisy dog” means and includes any dog that barks, yelps or howls loudly and at frequent intervals, or continuously, or for extended periods of time.

    G.  “Owner” means and includes any person, partnership, corporation, organization or other entity, without regard to residency, that owns, keeps, harbors, possesses, has an interest in, or has temporary or permanent control or custody of a dog within the city, including but not limited to any dog running at large at any place within the city.

    H.  “Pound” means the enclosure provided by the City for keeping dogs, or a humane shelter not operated by the City for impounding animals.

    I.    “Registration period” means and includes the biannual period commencing on the first day of January of each even-numbered year and ending on the thirty-first day of December of each odd-numbered year. The first such registration period shall commence on January 1, 1982, and end on December 31, 1983. Each registration period shall be designated by the calendar year in which such period ends.

    J.    “Run at large” and “running at large” means any dog when off or away from the premises of the owner, possessor or keeper thereof and not under the control of such owner, possessor or keeper, or his agent or servant, or member of his immediate family, by leash, cord or chain of not more than ten (10) feet in length.

    K.  “Vicious dog” means any dog which at any place in the city, whether on public or private property, attacks or bites a human being or other domestic animal or livestock, with the exception of fowl, or engages in or is harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of fighting as described and prohibited in Section 18-9-204, C.R.S., or any animal trained for fighting; provided, however, that no dog shall be deemed vicious solely by reason of having attacked, threatened, attempted to bite or bitten under the following circumstances:

    1.   When a dog is used by an authorized peace officer while the officer is engaged in the performance of peace officer duties;

    2.   When a person attacked such dog or engaged in such conduct reasonably calculated to provoke such dog to attack, threaten, or bite such person or another person or animal;

    3.   When any person is engaged in unlawfully entering into or upon any vehicle in which such animal is kept or confined;

    4.   When any person or other domestic animal or livestock, except fowl, is engaged in the unauthorized entry into or upon the fenced or enclosed portion of the premises upon which such animal is kept;

    5.   When any person is engaged in attacking or molesting another person;

    6.   Any affirmative defenses contained in Section 18-9-204.5(3)(h), C.R.S., as amended; or

    7.   Any exclusions contained in Section 18-9-204.5(6), C.R.S., as amended. (Ord. 25-2018 § 1; Ord. 19-2003 § 1; Ord. 21-87 § 8; prior code § 6.10.010)

 

6.08.020 Licensing, registration and vaccination.
    A.1. All dogs in the city shall be licensed and registered by their owners:

    a.   Between January 1st and March 1st for the current registration period in the event the dog was licensed and registered for the preceding year by the City; and

    b.   Within thirty (30) days after the owner acquires ownership of a dog not licensed and registered, and within thirty (30) days after the dog reaches the age of four (4) months.

    2.   Dog licenses shall be issued, and the registration of dogs shall be made by any veterinarian licensed by the state, upon forms furnished to the veterinarian by the City, upon the payment of the veterinarian’s charge, if any, for inoculating the dog with an antirabies vaccine, a veterinarian’s processing fee of two dollars ($2.00), and a license fee, as follows:

    a.   For any dog licensed during an even-numbered year, the sum of twenty-two dollars and fifty cents ($22.50) for each unspayed female, and twelve dollars and fifty cents ($12.50) for each male dog and each spayed female dog for each registration period; and

    b.   For any dog licensed during an odd-numbered year, the sum of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each unspayed female dog, and seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50) for each male dog and each spayed female dog for the remaining term of the registration period.

    3.   No dog shall be licensed and registered unless the dog, at the time of the issuance of the license, shall have been inoculated with a triennial antirabies vaccine approved by the State Department of Health, within a period of six (6) months next preceding the issuance of the license. The veterinarian who licenses and registers a dog shall certify that the dog has been inoculated within the time and with a vaccine specified hereinabove.

    4.   A duplicate original of each registration, which shall contain the name and address of the owner, the type of vaccine with which the dog was inoculated, the name, age, breed, color and sex of the dog, together with a duplicate original of the veterinarian’s inoculation certificate, and the license fees collected by the veterinarian, shall be forwarded by him to the Director of Finance, monthly.

    B.   Whenever a registered dog changes ownership, within thirty (30) days thereafter the new owner shall again register such dog in the manner required by this chapter and shall pay a processing fee as provided for in Subsection A of this section.

    C.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs whose owners are non-residents temporarily within the city, nor to dogs brought into the city for the purpose of participating in any dog show; provided, however, that if a dog whose owner is a nonresident shall remain in the city more than thirty (30) days, such dog shall be licensed and registered within thirty (30) days after being brought into the city. (Ord. 2-2005 § 1; prior code § 6.10.020)

 

6.08.030 Tags.
    A.  The veterinarian who licenses and registers a dog shall issue to the owner or party registering the dog a standard tag of the World Health Organization, serially numbered and supplied to the veterinarian by the City, which tag shall designate the year the registration shall expire. The veterinarian shall record the number of such tag in the registration record of the dog for which such tag was issued.

    B.   Every dog so registered shall at all times wear the tag issued, except when confined in an enclosure.

    C.   Any owner may procure a new standard dog tag to replace one which has been lost upon the application to any veterinarian who issues dog licenses, by showing to such veterinarian the dog’s registration and upon paying a fee to the veterinarian of two dollars ($2.00). When a new tag is issued, the veterinarian shall record the number of the new tag upon the registration record of such dog, and forward a copy of the registration record to the City Clerk. (Prior code § 6.10.030)

 

6.08.040 Kennel license requirements.
    A.  Every person, firm or corporation desiring to keep or maintain a kennel shall make application for licensing therefor to the City Clerk. Such license may issue for a period of one year, stating the name of the applicant and size of the place or places where the kennel is proposed to be kept. The applicant shall file with the City Clerk the written consent of all property owners residing within three hundred (300) feet in any direction from the place or places of the proposed kennel and shall pay to the Director of Finance a license fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per year. The City Clerk shall thereupon issue a kennel license to the applicant, which shall expire one year from date of issuance thereof unless sooner revoked for violation of this chapter.

    B.   No person, firm or corporation shall maintain a kennel of more than twenty-five (25) dogs, nor permit any dog or dogs belonging to such kennel to run at large. If any person or persons, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this subsection holds a kennel license, the same shall be and be deemed revoked upon conviction as aforesaid.

    C.   No person or persons, firm or corporation shall keep any such kennel without having procured a license therefor, as provided in this section, and if any person or member or agent of a firm, or officer or agent of a corporation, violates any provision of this section in respect to the keeping or maintaining of a kennel, he or she shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day that a kennel is kept and maintained in violation of the provisions hereof shall be deemed a separate offense.

    D.  The provisions of this section are specifically subject to the provisions contained in the zoning ordinance of the City. (Ord. 3-1989; Ord. 1-1988 § 7; prior code § 6.10.120)

 

6.08.050 Running at large prohibited.
    It is unlawful for the owner of any dog to permit the same to run at large, either within the corporate limits of the City or in areas outside the City the use of which the City has jurisdiction and authority to regulate, including, but not limited to, Temple Canyon Park, Red Canyon Park and Royal Gorge Park. (Prior code § 6.10.040)

 

6.08.060 Rabies—Impoundment—Quarantine.
    A.  Any dog within the city which is known to have or is suspected of having bitten or injured any person so as to cause a breaking of the skin, or any dog within the city which, in the opinion of any licensed physician or any licensed veterinarian of the state, appears to be infected with rabies, and when such fact shall be made known or reported to the Animal Control Officer or any police officer of the City, such dog shall be impounded and closely confined as directed by the City Administrator for a period of ten (10) days; and if during such period such dog displays symptoms of illness, its disposition shall be determined by a licensed physician or veterinarian employed by the City.

    B.   A dog which is known to have been exposed to an animal infected with rabies shall be impounded, and the disposition of such dog shall be made as directed by a licensed physician or veterinarian employed by the City or, when permitted by such physician or veterinarian, shall be closely confined by its owner in a sufficiently fenced, locked area, or in the county shelter, or at a private kennel, all at the expense of the owner and in accordance with the directions of such physician or veterinarian for a period of not less than six (6) months from the date of exposure.

    C.   If the owner of any such dog cannot be determined or located, then such dog shall be confined under the direction of such physician or veterinarian, and if such dog is not claimed, then such physician or veterinarian may order such dog destroyed.

    D.  All costs of the confinement of any dog confined under the provisions of this section, and all costs incurred in destroying such dog and examining the dog or any part thereof shall be the expense of the owner of the dog. (Prior code § 6.10.110)

 

6.08.070 Noisy, destructive or vicious dog—Nuisance.
    A.  No person, firm or corporation shall own, keep, harbor or possess any noisy, destructive or vicious dog, or any dog which is not registered in accordance with this chapter.

    B.   Noisy dogs and vicious or destructive dogs shall be deemed nuisances.

    C.   Upon a complaint made to the Animal Control Officer as to any such dog, the Animal Control Officer shall investigate the truth of the complaint and, if he or she shall find it sustained, shall file in the Municipal Court a complaint charging violation of this section by the owner of such dog. If such owner shall be found guilty of the offense charged in such complaint, the dog as to which such complaint shall be made shall be conclusively proved to be a noisy, vicious or destructive dog, as the case may be, for all purposes under this chapter (Prior code § 6.10.050)

 

6.08.080 Impoundment authorized when.
    A.  The Animal Control Officer shall impound any dog running at large, or which is proven, in the manner provided in Section 6.08.070, to be a vicious or destructive dog, even though such dog is under the direct supervision and control of a person while it is off the premises occupied by its owner.

    B.   The Animal Control Officer shall also impound any dog proved to be a noisy dog in the manner provided in Subsection B of Section 6.08.070 upon any complaint made to the Animal Control Officer as to any such dog, subsequent to the complaint mentioned in Subsection B of Section 6.08.070.

    C.   The Council of the City shall have the authority to contract with third parties to provide facilities for the impoundment provided for in this section. (Prior code § 6.10.060)

 

6.08.090 Impounded dogs—Listing.
    The Animal Control Officer shall list with the budget and accounting officer of the county and with the Clerk of the City all dogs impounded, giving the names of the owners, if known, and if unknown, a description of each dog so impounded; and the filing of such list with the Budget and Accounting Officer of the County and the Clerk of the City shall be deemed to be notice to the owner of such impoundment, and no other notice need be given by the Animal Control Officer or the City. (Prior code § 6.10.090)

 

6.08.100 Impounded dogs—Care and feeding.
    The Animal Control Officer, or contractor housing the animals, shall cause all dogs impounded to be properly fed and watered until redeemed or disposed of as provided in this chapter. (Prior code § 6.10.080)

 

6.08.110 Impounded dogs—Redemption.
    A.  Any dog impounded, other than a vicious or destructive dog, may be redeemed by its owner at any time within five (5) days after being impounded, during the hours of seven a.m. until five p.m., upon payment to the Chief of Police the fee for the dog’s kennel care, as provided in Subsection B of this section, and in the event the impounded dog is not then currently licensed and registered under the provisions of this chapter, upon payment of the additional sum to the Chief of Police for the license fee provided in Subsection (A)(2) of Section 6.08.020. The owner of the unlicensed and unregistered dog shall, within five (5) days of its redemption:

    1.   Obtain a certificate from a veterinarian licensed in the state, certifying that the dog has been inoculated with the vaccine and within the time prescribed by Subsection (A)(3) of Section 6.08.020; and

    2.   Furnish a copy of the veterinarian’s certificate to the Chief of Police, who shall then provide to the owner the tag provided for in Subsection A of Section 6.08.030.

    B.   Fees for kennel care of impounded dogs shall be the sum of twelve dollars and fifty cents ($12.50) for the first twenty-four (24) hours or fraction thereof, and five dollars ($5.00) for each additional twenty-four (24) hours or fraction thereof.

    C.   Any dog not redeemed within the five (5) day period provided for in Section 6.08.090 may be disposed of as directed by the City Administrator or by such other person as the City Administrator may designate. (Ord. 2-2005 § 2; prior code § 6.10.100)

 

6.08.120 Vicious or noisy dogs—Destruction when.
    The Animal Control Officer may kill any vicious dog running at large, at any time or place, when there is a grave and imminent danger of its doing harm or injury to any person; and if a dog which proves to be noisy, vicious or destructive is impounded, the Animal Control Officer, or contractor housing the animal, may kill the same after five (5) days from the filing of the list provided for in Section 6.08.090, unless the owner shall dispose of such dog within five (5) days after the same shall be impounded, in such manner that the inhabitants of the city shall be assured that any such dog shall no longer molest the inhabitants of the City. (Prior code § 6.10.070)

 

6.08.130 Cruelty or poisoning prohibited.
    No person or persons shall treat any dog in a cruel or inhumane manner, or poison any dog or dogs, or distribute poison in any manner or place whatsoever within the city, with the intent or purpose of poisoning any dog or dogs. (Prior code § 6.10.130)

 

6.08.140 Violation—Penalty.
    A.  The owner of any dog which is found running at large or found off or away from the premises of the owner, possessor or keeper thereof, and not under the control of such owner, possessor or keeper or its agent, servant or member of his or her immediate family, by leash, cord or chain of not more than ten (10) feet in length, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in accordance with the following schedule:

    1.   Upon conviction of a first offense within any twelve (12) month period, by a fine of thirty dollars ($30.00);

    2.   Upon conviction of a second offense occurring within twelve (12) months of the date of the first offense, by a fine of sixty dollars ($60.00);

    3.   Upon conviction of a third or any subsequent offense occurring within twelve (12) months of the date of the first offense, by a fine in an amount that is not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00), nor more than the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010.

    B.   Any person or persons, firm or corporation whose dog has not been properly licensed as provided for in Section 6.08.020, and whose dog is not confined in an enclosure, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in accordance with the following schedule:

    1.   Upon conviction of a first offense within any twelve (12) month period, by a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00);

    2.   Upon conviction of a second offense occurring within twelve (12) months of a prior offense, by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00);

    3.   Upon conviction of a third or any subsequent offense occurring within twelve (12) months of the date of the first offense, by a fine in an amount that is not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00), nor more than the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010.

    C.   Any person (or persons) who owns, keeps, harbors or possesses any noisy, destructive or vicious dog in violation of Section 6.08.070 is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in an amount that is not less than forty-five dollars ($45.00), nor more than the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010.

    D.  Any fine or penalty provided for in this chapter shall be in addition to any shelter fees as provided for in Section 6.08.110 for impounding the dog.

    E.   Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter 6.08, for which a penalty is not otherwise specifically provided, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in an amount that does not exceed the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010. (Ord. 17-2013 §§ 13—16; Ord. 2-2005 § 3; Ord. 15-1993 § 1)

Chapter 6.10 DOGS BANNED FROM CEMETERIES
6.10.010 Definitions.
    For purposes of this chapter:

    A.  “Cemetery” means and includes Lakeside Cemetery, Greenwood Cemetery and any other cemetery owned or operated by the City, regardless of whether such cemetery is within or outside of the corporate boundaries of the city.

    B.   “Dog” means and includes any dog, male or female, of any age.

    C.   “Owner” means and includes any person or persons, firm or corporation who owns, keeps, harbors or possesses a dog which enters into or remains upon the grounds of a cemetery. (Ord. 10-2000 § 1)

 

6.10.020 Prohibition against dogs in cemeteries.
    It is unlawful for the owner of any dog to permit that dog to enter into or remain upon the grounds of any cemetery. Signs advising of this prohibition may be placed at or near all entrances to all cemeteries and elsewhere within all cemeteries. (Ord. 10-2000 § 1)

 

6.10.030 Limited exception to general requirement.
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, it is not unlawful for a disabled person, such as a visually impaired person, who routinely relies upon a specially trained dog for assistance in performing normal life functions, to enter into and remain upon the grounds of a cemetery while accompanied by such specially trained dog. (Ord. 10-2000 § 1)

 

6.10.040 Applicability of other laws.
    A.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the owner of a dog from being charged and convicted of any violation described in Chapter 6.08 in addition to a violation of Section 6.10.020. Any dog found running at large in a cemetery may be captured and impounded in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 6.08.

    B.   When the owner of any dog found on the grounds of a cemetery refuses to voluntarily remove such dog from the cemetery upon the request of any parks or cemetery employee, any police officer, or any Animal Control Officer, such dog shall be subject to immediate impoundment in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 6.08. (Ord. 10-2000 § 1)

 

6.10.050 Violation—Penalty.
    The owner of any dog who violates any provision of this chapter, upon conviction of such violation, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined and otherwise punished in accordance with the following schedule:

    A.  For the first offense occurring within any twelve (12) month period, the fine shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00);

 

    B.   For the second offense occurring within any twelve (12) month period, the fine shall be fifty dollars ($50.00);

    C.   For the third or any subsequent offense occurring within any twelve (12) month period, the owner shall be punished by a fine in an amount that is not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor more than the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010.

    D.  All calculations of time for purposes of Subsections A through C of this section shall be based upon dates of violations, and not upon dates of convictions. (Ord. 17-2013 § 17; Ord. 10-2000 § 1)

Chapter 6.11 DEER HARVESTING PROGRAM
6.11.010 Deer Harvesting Program.
    A.  In an effort to reduce the overpopulation of deer in the City, the Council of Cañon City hereby establishes a Deer Harvesting Program wherein Colorado Parks and Wildlife will issue additional deer hunting rifle and archery licenses to allow additional individuals to harvest deer within City limits by crossbow, recurve bow, or compound bow.

    B.   Any individuals wishing to participate in the Deer Harvesting Program must first obtain a deer hunting rifle or archery license from Colorado Parks and Wildlife subject to Colorado Parks and Wildlife hunter competency and safety guidelines.

    C.   Hunters possessing a lawful deer rifle or archery hunting license must comply with all state regulations while participating in this Deer Harvesting Program. In addition, each hunter participating in the Program:

    1.   Shall shoot from an elevated stand with a minimum height of four (4) feet, except for hunters who are eligible for a mobility-impaired hunting license pursuant to Colorado Parks and Wildlife Regulations;

    2.   Shall acquire written or verbal permission from private landowners prior to hunting or dressing on private property;

    3.   Is prohibited from hunting on private property that is less than one acre; and

    4.   Is prohibited from targeting, wounding, or killing the rare albino deer species.

    D.  Nothing in this section is intended to supersede Section 9.56.010 of this Code relating to the discharging of weapons.

    E.   Nothing in this section is intended to supersede state regulations relating to hunting, including, but not limited to, state license requirements. (Ord. 36-2018 § 1)

Title 7 (RESERVED)

Title 8 NUISANCES
Chapter 8.10 PURPOSE AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 8.12 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 8.14 NUISANCE PROHIBITED
Chapter 8.16 TRASH DISPOSAL
Chapter 8.18 OFFENSIVE TRADE OR BUSINESS
Chapter 8.20 OFFENSIVE DISCHARGES
Chapter 8.22 OFFENSIVE LOCATIONS
Chapter 8.24 CONDITION OF STABLE; FERTILIZER; BUILDINGS
Chapter 8.26 LITTERING
Chapter 8.28 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
Chapter 8.30 INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES
Chapter 8.32 DEAD ANIMALS
Chapter 8.34 OUTSIDE STORAGE
Chapter 8.36 WEED AND VEGETATIVE PLANT MANAGEMENT STANDARDS
Chapter 8.38 SIDEWALKS AND GUTTERS
Chapter 8.40 UNIFORM CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
Chapter 8.42 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES

Chapter 8.10 PURPOSE AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
8.10.010 Purpose, scope and authority.
    A.  It shall be the policy of the City to promote the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the City and, therefore, the City Council declares that every nuisance shall be unlawful, and shall be restrained, prevented, abated and enjoined. This title governs the prohibition and control of nuisances throughout the City. Authority to enforce the provisions of this title is vested in any authorized City Community Services Officer. Community Services Officers shall have the same authority as peace officers with respect to the limited matters addressed in this title.

    B.   Whenever any action, activity, operation, condition or circumstance is described in this title or in any other title of this Code as a nuisance, the enforcement and abatement tools, processes and remedies authorized and otherwise provided for in this title shall be available to Community Services Officers charged with the responsibility and authority to identify and thereafter take action intended to restrain, prevent, or cause the abatement of such nuisances. Sanctions and remedies available to the Municipal Court pursuant to this title shall also be available to the Municipal Court with respect to nuisances described in other sections of this Code. (Ord. 12-2019 § 3)

 

8.10.020 Voluntary compliance—Discretionary authority of Community Services Officers.
    In furtherance of the City’s policy of encouraging voluntary compliance, any person deemed or alleged to be in violation of, or not in compliance with, any of the provisions of this title shall, to the extent possible or practical, in the sole discretion of the Community Services Officer, be notified of such alleged violation or lack of compliance prior to the initiation of either abatement or enforcement proceedings, and shall be offered an opportunity to bring the property or use of the property into compliance. Community Services Officers are authorized to exercise discretion in the investigation and enforcement of violations of this title in furtherance of this policy. (Ord. 12-2019 § 3)

 

8.10.030 Right of entry.
    A.  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce this title, or whenever a Community Services Officer has reasonable cause to believe there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a nuisance, the Community Services Officer shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If entry is refused, the officer shall give the responsible party, or if the responsible party cannot be located after a reasonable effort, he or she shall leave at the building or premises, a written notice of intent to inspect not sooner than twenty-four (24) hours after the time specified in the notice. The notice shall state that the responsible party has the right to refuse entry and that in the event such entry is refused, inspection may be made only upon issuance of a search warrant by a Municipal Judge of the City, or by a judge of any other court having jurisdiction.

    B.   The Community Services Officer may appear before the Municipal Judge and upon a showing of probable cause shall obtain a search warrant entitling him or her to enter the building or upon the premises, using such reasonable force as may be necessary to gain entry. The person applying for such warrant shall not be required to demonstrate specific knowledge of the condition of the particular structure or premises at issue in order to obtain a search warrant, but must show some factual or practical circumstances that would cause an ordinary prudent person to act. The Municipal Court Judge or any Associate Judge of the Municipal Court of the City shall have the power to issue search warrants upon a proper showing of probable cause as provided in this subsection.

    C.   Whenever an emergency situation exists in relation to the enforcement of any of the provisions of this title, a Community Services Officer may enter into any building or upon any premises within the City, using such reasonable force as may be necessary. An emergency situation includes any situation of imminent danger of loss of, or injury or damage to, life, limb, property or threat to public safety. It is unlawful for any owner or occupant of the building or premises to deny entry to any Community Services Officer or to resist reasonable force used by the officer acting pursuant to this section. (Ord. 12-2019 § 3)

Chapter 8.12 DEFINITIONS
8.12.010 Interpretation.
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this title, shall be broadly interpreted to achieve the purposes intended. It is the intent of the City Council that the definitions not be considered mutually exclusive and liberal construction is deemed necessary by the City Council in order to fulfill the public purpose of this title, which is to ensure that the City is maintained in a clean, safe, healthy and attractive condition. (Ord. 12-2019 § 3)

 

8.12.020 Words and terms.
    A.  “Abate” shall mean to bring into compliance, halt, eliminate or remedy.

    B.   “Advisory commission” means the City Council or those individuals appointed by City Council to advise on matters of undesirable plant management.

    C.   “Alien plant” means a plant species which is not indigenous to the State nor to the native plant community in which it is found.

    D.  “Approved trash receptacle” means and includes any durable, leak-proof container with a tight-fitting cover, any securely tied or sealed refuse bag made of heavy paper or plastic material and designed for outdoor storage of trash, recyclables, and/or any container that might be specified in regulations adopted pursuant to Section 8.16.030. When and where permitted under this chapter, commercial containers also are approved trash receptacles.

    E.   “Biological management” means the use of an organism to disrupt the growth of undesirable plants.

    F.   “Business dumpster” means a commercial container having a capacity of more than ninety-six (96) gallons, but less than or equal to three (3) cu/yards, including recycling dumpsters.

    G.  “Chemical management” means the use of herbicides or plant growth regulators to disrupt the growth of undesirable plants.

    H.  “City Administrator” means the City Administrator of the City of Cañon City or his or her designee.

    I.    “Community Services Officer” shall mean the City Administrator or the City Administrator’s designee, including, but not limited to, any person employed by the City as a Community Services Officer, the City Engineer, the City’s Building Official, any City building property inspector or any other City official or employee charged with enforcing the provisions of this title.

    J.    “Commercial container” means a dumpster or other container having a capacity exceeding ninety-six (96) gallons used for the containment of large quantities of trash and, in certain circumstances, construction waste. For purposes of this chapter, there are two (2) types of commercial containers, “business dumpsters” and “construction dumpsters.”

    K.  “Construction dumpster” means a commercial container having a capacity greater than three (3) cu/yards, including containers commonly known as “rear-loaders” or “roll-off containers.”

    L.   “Construction waste” means waste material associated with or resulting from the construction, remodeling, repair or demolition of a house, dwelling unit, building or other structure.

    M.  “Control” means preventing a plant from forming viable seeds or vegetative propagules.

    N.  “Cultural control” means those methodologies or management practices conducted to favor the growth of desirable plants over undesirable plants, including, but not limited to, maintaining an optimum fertility and plant moisture status in an area, planting at optimum density and spatial arrangement in an area, and planting species most suited to an area.

    O.  “Effectively screened” means screening utilized in an outdoor storage area that may be accomplished through the use of materials such as solid fencing, dense vegetation, or earth berms; provided that the effect of such screening is that any and all personal property and/or other materials in the outdoor storage area are not visible to a person standing upon any public street, alley, sidewalk or right-of-way or to any person standing at ground level upon any adjoining piece of property.

    P.   “Garbage” means waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food or wild animal carcasses, and wastes from handling, storage and sale of produce.

    Q.  “Hazardous materials” means any substance, material, or waste which poses a hazard to persons or property and which is or becomes regulated by any local governmental authority, the State of Colorado, or the United States Government, including, but not limited to, any oil or petroleum compounds, flammable substances, explosives, radioactive materials, asbestos, or any material or substance which is designated as a hazardous or regulated substance.

    R.   “Integrated management” means the planning and implementation of a coordinated program utilizing a variety of methods for management of undesirable plants, which methods may include, but are not limited to, education, preventive measures, good stewardship, and control methods. The purpose of integrated management is to achieve healthy and productive plant communities by the least environmentally damaging methods.

    S.   “Junk” means scrap brass, scrap copper, scrap iron, scrap lead, scrap tin, scrap zinc and all other scrap metals and alloys, bones, rags, used cloth, used rope, used rubber, used tinfoil, used bottles, old or used machinery of any type, used tools, used appliances, used fixtures, used utensils, used lumber, used boxes or crates (fabricated of any material), used pipe or pipe fittings, used conduit or conduit fittings, inoperable motor vehicles, used tires and other manufactured goods that are so worn, deteriorated or obsolete as to make them unusable in their existing condition.

    T.   “Junkyard” has the same meaning as provided in Title 17 of this Code.

    U.  “Land” means any lot or parcel of land within the City, including the following, as may exist:

    1.   Area from the edge of the rear or side boundary of such lot or parcel to the center of the alley.

    2.   Area from the edge of the front or side boundary of such lot or parcel to and including the curb and gutter, if any, or to the edge of the pavement if no curb or gutter exists.

    3.   Rights-of-way for roads and ditches shall be deemed to constitute “land.”

    V.  “Landscaping” means a combination of living plants, such as trees, shrubs, vines, groundcover, flowers, vegetable plants, sod or grass; and may include natural features, such as rock, stone and bark; and structural features, including, but not limited to, fountains, reflecting pools, art work, screen walls, fences and benches. Uncontrolled weeds shall not be considered as landscaping. Sidewalks, whether paved or gravel, which serve as functional links between parking areas and principal structures, or which serve as general public access routes around a principal structure, or between a principal structure and a public street or alley, is not landscaping. Other sidewalks or paths which serve as casual access to or through landscape areas on private property may be considered nonliving landscape features.

    W.  “Litter” means and includes any and every waste material, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, excrement, urine, offal composed of animal matter or vegetable matter or both, or any noxious or offensive matter whatever, including, but not limited to, any discarded dead animal, fishing line, bait, chemical, chemical compound, petroleum product or compound, automobile part or accessory, tire, wheel, junk, paper, cardboard, can, lid, bottle, cap, carton, wrapper, box, wooden object, plastic object, clothing, cloth, metal object, rubber object, leather object, hide, feathers, grass clippings, leaves, cut weeds, branches cut from trees or bushes, brick, cinderblock, building material, paint, concrete, soil, sand, gravel, stone, glass, asphalt, ashes, cigarette, cigar, food or food product, solvent, dye, beverage, and liquid except water.

    X.  “Management plan” means the undesirable plant management plan developed by City Council, using integrated management.

    Y.  “Mechanical control” means those methodologies or management practices that physically disrupt plant growth, including, but not limited to, filling, mowing, burning, flooding, mulching, hand-pulling and hoeing.

    Z.   “Motor vehicle” shall have the same meaning as defined pursuant to Title 42 of the Colorado Revised Statutes.

    AA. “Motor vehicle, Extensively damaged” means a motor vehicle that has significant visible damage including, but not limited to, broken or missing windows, a broken or missing windshield, significant body damage which would make the motor vehicle un-drivable or a missing wheel, tire, motor or transmission.

    BB. “Motor vehicle, Inoperable” means any motor vehicle that does not have a current license plate and registration sticker lawfully affixed thereto or that is in a condition of being extensively damaged, junked, wrecked, wholly or partially dismantled, discarded, abandoned, flat tire(s), or unable to perform the functions or purpose for which it was originally constructed.

    CC. “Native plant” means a plant species which is indigenous to the State.

    DD. “Non-residential zone district” means General Commercial Zone District, Central Business Zone District, and/or Class 1 Industrial Zone District.

    EE. “Noxious plant” means an alien plant or parts thereof, which meets one (1) or more of the following additional criteria:

    1.   It aggressively invades or is detrimental to economic crops or native plant communities;

    2.   It is poisonous to livestock;

    3.   It is a carrier of detrimental insects, diseases or parasites; or

    4.   The direct or indirect effect of the presence of such plant is detrimental to the environmentally sound management of natural or agricultural ecosystems.

    FF. “Noxious plant infestation” means the direct or indirect presence of a noxious plant on any land that has a detrimental effect on the environmentally sound management of the natural or agricultural ecosystem of the land and the surrounding area.

    GG. “Nuisance” includes, but is not limited to, the following:

    1.   The conducting or maintaining of any business, occupation or activity prohibited by Colorado statute or regulation, or by any provision of this Code;

    2.   Any building, structure or land open to or used by the general public, the condition of which presents a substantial danger or hazard to public health or safety;

    3.   Any unlawful pollution or contamination of the surface or subsurface of any land within the City or of any water intended for human consumption;

    4.   Any activity, operation or condition which, after being ordered abated, corrected or discontinued by a lawful order of an agency or officer of the State of Colorado or of any Community Services Officer, continues to be conducted or continues to exist in violation of any Colorado statute or regulation or in violation of any provision of this Code;

    5.   Any activity, operation, condition, building, structure, place, premises or thing which is injurious to the health or safety of the citizens of the City, or which is indecent or offensive to the senses so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property;

    6.   Any activity, operation, condition, building, structure, place, premises or thing that has been declared to be a nuisance in any other chapter or section of this Code or in the Charter of Cañon City;

    7.   Any violation of the Uniform Housing Code adopted by the City;

    8.   Any violation of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings adopted by the City;

    9.   Any condition which, in the reasonable judgment of a Community Services Officer, constitutes a nuisance within the scope of this title;

    10. The unlawful cultivation, manufacturing, sale, offer for sale, or distribution of medical marijuana without a license; or

    11. The unlawful cultivation, manufacturing, sale, offer for sale, or distribution of retail marijuana without a license.

    HH. “Occupant” means and includes any person who occupies the whole or a part of a building, premises, or land, whether alone or with others, whether for residential or commercial purposes. “Occupant” means and includes the terms “tenant” and “lessee.”

    II.   “Owner” means and includes:

    1.   Any owner or holder of any legal or equitable estate in real property, including a dominant or servient tenement, except a future or reversionary interest and except the interest of a public trustee, lienholder, mortgagee, or beneficiary of a deed of trust; or

    2.   The owner of record, as reflected by the records of the office of the county assessor.

    JJ.  “Person” includes a natural person, association, corporation, partnership, limited liability company and any other legal entity capable of owning, using, or occupying real or personal property.

    KK. “Place of collection” means a place for the collection of trash that is adjacent to or abuts the traveled portion of a public street or alley where trash may be temporarily placed for collection by a trash hauler without interfering with the movement of vehicles or pedestrians.

    LL. “Place of storage” means a place established in Chapter 8.16 for the storage of trash receptacles, business and construction dumpsters on private property during periods when the trash receptacle is not in the place of collection as allowed by Chapter 8.16.

    MM. “Plant growth regulator” means a substance used for controlling or modifying plant growth processes without appreciable phytotoxic effect at the dosage applied.

    NN. “Property, private” means any property, including any improvements thereon, that is not public property. Private property includes any privately owned vacant lot or parcel.

    OO. “Property, public” means any property, right-of-way or other real or personal property owned or controlled by any public entity.

    PP. “Refuse” means any grass clippings, leaves, hay, straw, manure, shavings, excelsior, paper, ashes, boxes, glass, cans, bottles, garbage, waste and discarded building and construction materials, including, but not limited to, plaster, broken concrete, bricks, cinderblocks, stones, wood, roofing material, wire or metal binding, sacks or loose discarded or unused material; all trash of any kind or nature whatsoever; and any other materials commonly known as trash or refuse of any kind or character or by any means known.

    QQ. “Residential zone district” means Rural Living Zone District, Low Density Residential Zone District, Low Density, Small Lot Residential Zone District, Medium Density Residential Zone District, High Density Residential Zone District, Mobile Home Park Zone District, Mobile Home Subdivision Zone District, and/or Planned Development Zone District.

    RR. “Responsible party” means any person who makes or causes any nuisance to exist, or who has possession or control of any real property or premises, whether as owner, occupant or tenant, where any nuisance is found, or, in the case of a motor vehicle, as owner or operator of the same.

    SS. “Right-of-way” or “ROW” means an area of land that is dedicated for public or private use to accommodate a transportation system and/or necessary public utility infrastructure (including, but not limited to, stormwater easements and conveyances, water lines, sewer lines, power lines, and gas lines).

    TT. “Trailer” means a wheeled vehicle, without motive power, which is designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle and to carry its cargo load wholly upon its own structure and which is generally and commonly used to carry and transport property over the streets and highways, including, but not limited to, any camper trailer, semitrailer, trailer, trailer coach or utility trailer, as defined by the applicable Model Traffic Code, as amended.

    UU. “Trash” means any type of refuse or garbage, including, but not limited to, animal and vegetable waste and waste material resulting from the handling, storage, preparation, cooking, consumption of sale of food or foodstuffs, ashes, debris, yard and household waste and other portable solid waste material, but does not include construction waste or hazardous material.

    VV. “Unsheltered” means located outside a garage or other building in such a manner as to be visible to a person standing upon any public street, alley, sidewalk or right-of-way or to any person standing at ground level upon any adjoining piece of property.

    WW. “Undesirable plant” means a noxious plant species that is designated as undesirable by this chapter or by City Council or by the advisory commission.

    XX. “Undesirable plant management” means the planning of an integrated program to manage undesirable plant species.

    YY. “Weed” means any unsightly or noxious plant or vegetation in excess of eight (8) inches in height which is out of place at the location where the same is growing and which is regarded as a common nuisance. The word “weed” shall not include flower gardens, plots of shrubbery, vegetable gardens, and grain plots.

    ZZ. “Vegetative growth” includes all plant material, grass, weeds, shrubs, bushes, trees or parts thereof, whether growing or not, that constitute or could present a fire hazard, mosquito breeding site, source of contamination of waters of the state, obstruction of the public right-of-way, or menace to the public health, safety or welfare.

    AAA. “Vision clearance area” shall have the same meaning as “vision triangle” in Section 12.12.020 and as described in Section 17.20.200 of this Code. (Ord. 12-2019 § 3)

Chapter 8.14 NUISANCE PROHIBITED
8.14.010 General provisions.
    A.  It shall be unlawful for any person:

    1.   To create, operate, maintain, conduct or permit any nuisance.

    2.   To interfere with or prevent, or attempt to interfere with or prevent, the abatement of any nuisance by an officer or agent of the City acting pursuant to a provision of this title or pursuant to a court order.

    B.   Every day, or portion thereof, any nuisance exists or continues, shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 12-2019 § 3)

Chapter 8.16 TRASH DISPOSAL
8.16.020 Limitations regarding trash haulage for compensation.
    Except for those who are exempt under Section 5.24.020(B), no person other than a trash hauler holding a valid trash haulage license issued pursuant to Chapter 5.24 of this Code is authorized to collect, remove, haul or transport, for compensation, trash generated by others to or from any private property or public property within the city. (Ord. 13-2018 § 1)

 

8.16.030 Additional regulations.
    The City Council may adopt, by resolution, reasonable rules and regulations to govern the manner and time for the preparation, collection, removal, and/or haulage of trash and the characteristics and locations of containers, dumpsters, receptacles and other vessels that may be used for the outside storage of such materials prior to collection. The violation of any regulation adopted pursuant to and in compliance with the provisions of this section shall be a violation of this chapter; provided that the resolution through which such regulation was adopted is appended to this chapter and otherwise made available for public inspection. (Ord. 13-2018 § 1)

 

8.16.040 General regulations.
    A.  All trash that is stored outdoors, including, but not limited to, trash located at a place of collection, shall be contained in an approved trash receptacle. All trash stored outdoors shall be stored and secured so that it is not susceptible to being spilled or spread by animals, wind, rainfall, stormwater or other elements or forces and in a manner so that it does not become a potential threat to the health, safety, welfare and/or reasonable enjoyment of surrounding properties.

    B.   No trash receptacle shall be placed on a sidewalk, a public or private right-of-way, or in any other location that interferes with the regular flow of vehicles or pedestrian movement on the traveled portions of any street, alley or other public right-of-way. Trash receptacles may be in a public or private right-of-way for collection, as provided for in this chapter, but may not be located on the sidewalk or impede the regular flow of vehicles or pedestrian movement on the traveled portions of any street, alley or other public right-of-way. No place of storage for a trash receptacle may be in a public right-of-way, unless expressly permitted in this chapter.

    C.   Yard waste and other similar waste material that is of such size and nature that it cannot readily be placed or stored in an approved trash receptacle may be carefully placed or stacked in neat bundles at a place of collection. Such bundles shall meet the size and weight requirements of the trash hauler servicing that place of collection and shall not be located at a place of collection in the front yard area of any property for longer than twenty-four (24) hours prior to collection.

    D.  It shall be the duty of every person owning, using, managing or occupying any property that is actively used for residential, business, commercial or industrial purposes to maintain one or more approved trash receptacles of sufficient size and number to contain the trash that will accumulate from one regular collection date to the next regular collection date. Under most circumstances, regular trash collection dates should be one week apart. (Ord. 13-2018 § 1)

 

8.16.050 Trash disposal sites.
    No trash collected or hauled within the city shall be disposed of anywhere within the city other than at a site, such as a transfer station, specifically established and operated for the purpose of receiving trash in accordance with all applicable zoning laws and public health regulations that are enforceable within the city. If no such site lawfully exists within the boundaries of the city, such materials shall be disposed of outside of the city, but only at places lawfully established for such purpose. (Ord. 13-2018 § 1)

 

8.16.060 Certain trash receptacles—Residential zones.
    A.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no approved trash receptacle used in a residential zone district of the city for regular trash service shall have a capacity exceeding two (2) cubic yards.

    B.   The place of storage for trash receptacles of ninety-six (96) gallons or less under this section may be at any location on a property, subject to the limitations in Section 8.16.040(B) of this chapter.

    C.   The place of storage for business dumpsters under this section shall be a place on the property which is located behind front façade of the principal structure, as that line extends across the entire property to the edge of the public right-of-way, including sidewalks, subject to the limitation in Section 8.16.040(B).

    D.  On scheduled trash collection days, the trash receptacle must be located in a place of collection, no earlier than twenty-four (24) hours prior to collection and must be moved back to its place of storage location within twenty-four (24) hours of the trash collection. This limitation shall not apply if the place of collection and the place of storage for a trash receptacle of ninety-six (96) gallons or less are the same under subsection B above.

    E.   Persons may obtain an exemption to the requirements of subsection D above, upon the execution of an affirmation on forms provided by the City that the person is not physically able to move the trash receptacle to and from the place of collection. Persons with this exemption must comply with all other provisions of this chapter.

    F.   Persons may obtain an exemption from the requirements of subsection C above, upon application to the City, based upon unique property conditions, including, but not limited to, topography and/or lot size or configuration. Upon application, City staff shall verify the unique conditions and ability of owner to place the trash receptacle in the place of storage as required by this section and may approve the application, may designate an alternative place of storage on the property which complies with the spirit of this chapter but addresses the property’s unique conditions or deny the application. Persons with this exemption must comply with all other provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 13-2018 § 1)

 

8.16.070 Use of business dumpsters—All zones.
    A.  Notwithstanding the limitation on the size of business dumpsters in residential zones set forth in Section 8.16.060(A), business dumpsters may be located on private property and used as approved trash receptacles by any of the following:

    1.   Commercial businesses located within any non-residential zone district;

    2.   Commercial businesses which a principal use and lawfully located within any residential zone district;

    3.   Churches, meeting halls and other buildings and facilities owned, operated or occupied by religious, charitable, fraternal, civic and/or other tax-exempt organizations in any zone district;

    4.   Apartment buildings and other multi-family structures and/or complexes having four (4) or more residential units in any zone districts;

    5.   Mobile home parks, wherever lawfully located within the city;

    6.   Approved multiple-use structures in TMU zone districts;

    7.   Public buildings, structures and facilities in any zone district;

    8.   Residential properties where livestock are allowed and lawfully kept.

    B.   Business dumpsters permitted pursuant this section are subject to the following restrictions:

    1.   On scheduled trash collection days, the business dumpster must be located in a place of collection, no earlier than twenty-four (24) hours prior to collection and must be moved back to its place of storage within twenty-four (24) hours of the trash collection.

    2.   Business dumpsters used in residential zone districts are subject to Section 8.16.060(C) through (F) of this chapter.

    3.   Business dumpsters used in non-residential zone districts:

    a.   The place of storage for business dumpsters under this section shall be a place on the property which is located behind front façade of the principal structure, as that line extends across the entire property to the edge of the public right-of-way, including sidewalks, subject to the limitation in Section 8.16.040(B); and

    b.   Every effort shall be made to screen all business dumpsters so they are not visible from any adjacent residential property or public rights-of-way, except alleys.

    4.   Persons may obtain an exemption from the requirements of subsection (3)(a) above, upon application to the City, based upon unique property conditions, including, but not limited to, topography and/or lot size or configuration. Upon application, City staff shall verify the unique conditions and ability of owner to place the trash receptacle in the place of storage as required by this section and may approve the application, may designate an alternative place of storage on the property which complies with the spirit of this chapter but addresses the property’s unique conditions or deny the application. Persons with this exemption must comply with all other provisions of this chapter.

    C.   A business dumpster may be temporarily placed on private property at any location, for no more than thirty (30) days, at an unscreened location to assist with the cleanup of such property or for some other temporary purpose.

    D.  A business dumpster may be utilized for construction and placed in the right-of way pursuant to Section 8.16.080(D). (Ord. 13-2018 § 1)

 

8.16.080 Use of construction dumpsters—All zones.
    A.  No person shall place or use a construction dumpster at any location within the city unless such placement and use is in compliance with this chapter.

    B.   Construction dumpsters lawfully situated upon public or private property may not be used for the disposal of household or hazardous waste or any type of permanent storage. Commercial dumpsters shall not be used as a receptacle for regular and continuous trash produced by residences or businesses. All such construction dumpsters must be emptied or removed within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming full.

    C.   No construction dumpster shall be kept on public or private property for a period longer than fifteen (15) days after construction has been completed.

    D.  Placement of a construction dumpster in the right-of-way shall be governed by Chapter 12.12 of this Code in addition to the limitations in this subsection.

    1.   Construction dumpsters must be placed:

    a.   In residential zones, abutting the property using the dumpster;

    b.   Within twelve (12) inches of the curb or shoulder;

    c.   Parallel to the curb or shoulder;

    d.   At least thirty (30) feet from an intersection;

    e.   At least five (5) feet from any driveway;

    f.    At least fifteen (15) feet from fire hydrant;

    g.   At least twenty (20) feet from a crosswalk at an intersection;

    h.   At least fifty (50) feet from the driveway entrance to any fire station where it meets the street;

    i.    At least thirty (30) feet from any flashing beacon or signal, stop sign, yield sign, of traffic control signal located at the side of the roadway;

    j.    At least fifty (50) feet from any railroad crossing.

    2.   Construction dumpsters shall not be placed:

    a.   On the side of the street opposite of the driveway of any fire station;

    b.   In a manner that obstructs any sidewalk, intersection, crosswalk or otherwise obstructs vehicle or pedestrian traffic;

    c.   Within the right-of-way adjacent to the vision clearance area, as defined in Chapter 17.08 of this Code.

    E.   Construction dumpsters may be placed on private property:

    1.   If the dumpster is not placed within the vision clearance triangle, as defined by Chapter 17.08 of this Code; and

    2.   With the permission of the owner of the private property. (Ord. 13-2018 § 1)

 

8.16.090 At large recycling receptacles.
    A.  The location of all at-large community receptacles for recyclable materials must be approved by the Zoning Administrator, unless they are located within the right-of-way. Location within the right-of-way must be approved by the City Engineer.

    B.   Whenever a container is designated by signage on or near the container as a receptacle for certain types of recyclable materials, such as aluminum cans, glass, cardboard or newspapers, it shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly deposit into such receptacle any item or material other than the recyclable material designated on such signage.

    C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit and leave behind any trash or recyclable material outside of any receptacle designated for recycling. Receptacles shall be designated for recycling by signage placed on or near the receptacle. (Ord. 13-2018 § 1)

 

8.16.100 General requirements applicable to all commercial containers.
    It shall be the duty of any person using any commercial container within the City to maintain such commercial container in a clean and trash free area. (Ord. 13-2018 § 1)

 

8.16.110 Unlawful acts designated.
    A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this chapter.

    B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit into any trash receptacle owned or maintained by the City in or at any public property, any trash or other waste material that is brought into any public property from elsewhere; provided that this prohibition shall not apply to trash generated by or through normal or customary use of a public park for picnics, parties, recreational activities and/or other similar activities, nor shall this prohibition apply to the deposit of small amounts of waste material into any trash container located in any public property.

    C.   Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person other than the owner, owner’s agent, or a licensed trash hauler, to move or remove any such receptacle or container from its usual location or place of collection.

    D.  It shall be unlawful for any person other than a renter, authorized owner, user or trash hauler to remove any of the contents of a trash receptacle or commercial container. (Ord. 13-2018 § 1)

 

8.16.120 Penalties.
    A.  Any violation of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance and may be abated as provided for in this Code.

    B.   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter may be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.28.010 of this Code. Every day any violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 13-2018 § 1)

Chapter 8.18 OFFENSIVE TRADE OR BUSINESS
8.18.010 General provisions.
    Whenever the pursuit of any trade, business or manufacturing or the maintenance of any substance or condition of things results in a condition detrimental to the health, safety, general welfare or comfort of the inhabitants of the City, such pursuit shall be declared unlawful, shall be deemed a nuisance, and shall be abated. By way of illustration, but not limitation, the pursuit of the following trades or businesses shall constitute unlawful nuisances:

    A.  Junkyards and Dumping Grounds. All places used or maintained, or permitted to be used or maintained, as junkyards, or dumping grounds, or for the wrecking or disassembling of automobiles, trucks, tractors or machinery of any kind, or for the storing or leaving of worn out, wrecked or abandoned automobiles, machinery of any kind, or for any of the parts thereof, or for the storing or leaving of any machinery or equipment used by contractors or builders or by other persons, when such places are kept in such manner as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by others or cause a detriment to the public health, safety or welfare. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed or construed to prevent the City from acquiring, operating and maintaining a facility for the storage of motor vehicles, vehicles, boats, machinery or equipment pursuant to this Code.

    B.   Slaughterhouses and Rendering Plants. All places used or maintained or permitted to be used or maintained for slaughtering animals, for bone crushing, bone boiling, bone rendering, bone burning, fat boiling, fat rendering, fat drying, gut cleaning or the making of glue, or the manufacture of fertilizing materials of any kind or description from any dead animal or part thereof, or any boiling of offal, swill, fat or grease of any description when such places are operated in any unclean or offensive manner, or when such places are operated so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by others or cause a detriment to the public health, safety or welfare.

    C.   Improper Storage Operations. All places at which the responsible party keeps, stores or permits to be kept or stored any building materials, construction materials, paper, trash, waste material, junk, or litter upon any property in such a manner to cause a fire hazard or other detriment to the health, safety or general welfare of the inhabitants of the City, or in such a manner that the stored materials may be blown or deposited upon any other public or private property.

    D.  Slaughtering of Animals. Any use of residential property for animal slaughtering or butchering whether for private use or for sale in a manner which interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by others or causes a detriment to the public health, safety or welfare.

    E.   Windows, doors and other means of ingress or egress shall not be boarded, unless the owner establishes by substantial evidence to the reasonable satisfaction of the City Administrator or his or her designee that one of the following applies:

    1.   The building is the subject of an active building permit for repair or rehabilitation and the owner or owner’s designee is progressing diligently to complete the repair or rehabilitation; or

    2.   The building is vacant due to fire, flood, earthquake, or other form of natural disaster and the owner is actively pursuing assistance for demolition, rehabilitation or restoration of the building and/or premises from local, state or federal assistance programs or from insurance agencies.

    3.   This section shall not apply to buildings solely uses for residential purposes. (Ord. 12-2019 § 3)

Chapter 8.20 OFFENSIVE DISCHARGES
8.20.010 Noxious liquids.
    It shall be unlawful and deemed a nuisance to discharge out of or from, or permit to flow from any house or place, any foul or noxious liquid or substance of any kind whatsoever, into or upon any adjacent ground or lot, or into any street, alley, sidewalk or public place. (Ord. 12-2019 § 3)

 

8.20.020 Liquid fuel products.
    The leakage of five (5) gallons or more of liquid fuel products into the environment from any tank, line, or delivery vehicle, constitutes a danger to the health, safety and welfare of the general public and the citizens of the City and is therefore a nuisance. (Ord. 12-2019 § 3)

 

8.20.030 Leaking receptacles, offensive channels.
    It shall be unlawful and deemed a nuisance for any responsible party to permit the existence of any unclean, leaking, foul, unsafe, or dangerous, defective or filthy drain, ditch, trail, or gutter, or any leaking or broken slop, garbage, or manure box or receptacle of like character, whenever and wherever found in the City. (Ord. 12-2019 § 3)

 

8.20.040 Harmful chemicals.
    It shall be unlawful and deemed a nuisance for any responsible party to apply or use any herbicide, pesticide, insecticide, rodenticide, disinfectant, fumigant or other harmful chemical, gas or vapor upon the property in such a manner that the harmful chemical, gas or vapor leaches, escapes, migrates, or flows from the property and deposits in or on any other public or private property. (Ord. 12-2019 § 3)

 

8.20.050 Illicit discharges.
    Illicit discharges into storm sewers, stormwater drainage channels or into waters and waterways within the City shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 20.10. (Ord. 12-2019 § 3)

Chapter 8.22 OFFENSIVE LOCATIONS
8.22.010 Stagnant ponds.
    Any cellar, vault, drain, sewer, pond of water, or other place that shall be noxious or offensive to others, or injurious to public health, safety or welfare through an accumulation or deposition of noxious, offensive or foul water, or other substances, or be conducive to the breeding of mosquitoes, shall be unlawful and deemed a nuisance. (Ord. 12-2019 § 3)

 

8.22.020 Open wells, cisterns or excavation.
    Excavations exceeding five (5) feet in depth, cisterns and wells or an excavation used for storage of water, are nuisances unless the same are adequately covered with a locked lid, or other covering weighing at least sixty (60) pounds or are securely fenced to a height of at least five (5) feet, and it shall be unlawful for any responsible party to permit such nuisance to remain on any premises. (Ord. 12-2019 § 3)

 

8.22.030 Stale matter.
    It shall be unlawful and deemed a nuisance to keep, collect, or use or cause to be kept, collected, or used, or permit to be kept or used, any stale, putrid, or stinking fat or grease or other matter, except for a commercial use that has regularly scheduled pickups. (Ord. 12-2019 § 3)

 

8.22.040 Sanitary sewer inlets.
    It shall be unlawful and deemed a nuisance to deposit in or throw into, or permit to be deposited in or thrown into, any sanitary sewer, sanitary sewer inlet, or privy vault that shall have a sanitary sewer connection, any article whatsoever that might cause such sanitary sewer, sanitary sewer inlet, or privy vault, to overflow, backup or otherwise become noxious or offensive to others, or to become injurious to public health, safety or general welfare of the residents of the City. (Ord. 12-2019 § 3)

 

8.22.050 Refuse hauling vehicles.
    The parking, storage or keeping of any truck, wagon, trailer, tank wagon or other vehicle used or being used to transport garbage, trash, offal, manure, debris, dead animals, excrement, hides, cesspool or grease trap refuse, or any other nauseous, unhealthful or offensive substances, within two hundred fifty (250) feet of any residence longer than necessary to load such vehicle, other than one occupied solely by the person keeping, storing or parking such vehicle, is declared to be a nuisance. (Ord. 12-2019 § 3)

 

8.22.060 Exceptions.
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply with respect to stormwater sewer inlets or other stormwater facilities owned or controlled by the City or with respect to illicit discharges governed by Chapter 20.10 of this Code. (Ord. 12-2019 § 3)

Chapter 8.24 CONDITION OF STABLE; FERTILIZER; BUILDINGS
8.24.010 General provisions.
    A.  The following conditions shall constitute nuisances:

    1.   Any animal or fowl enclosure in which any animal or fowl may be kept, or in any other place in which manure or liquid discharges of such animals or fowls may accumulate, and which is maintained in an unsanitary condition, allowing an offensive odor to escape therefrom, or providing an insect or rodent attractant;

    2.   Manure or any other organic material used on premises for fertilizing purposes which are allowed to become offensive to sight, an attraction to insects or rodents, or to otherwise create an unsanitary condition;

    3.   Whenever manure or any other organic material shall accumulate and affect the health of the public; or

    4.   To allow any building or premises or appurtenance thereof, or any use made or maintained on or within property, to become offensive in odor, offensive to sight, or to create an unsanitary or hazardous health condition. (Ord. 12-2019 § 3)

Chapter 8.26 LITTERING
8.26.010 General provisions.
    A.  It is unlawful and deemed a nuisance for any person to deposit, throw or place any litter upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public property or place in the City, except in public receptacles or authorized private receptacles.

    B.   It is unlawful and deemed a nuisance to place evicted personal property within the public right-of-way. When a nuisance created by the placement of evicted personal property in any public right-of-way within the City has occurred, the following procedures shall apply:

    1.   The City shall abate the nuisance without notice removing any and all evicted personal property from any public right-of-way within the City and dispose such property to any site designated as a repository for solid waste and/or rubbish.

    2.   No later than the close of the next business day following the removal of the evicted property, the City shall provide notice, by certified mail, postage prepaid, to the last known address of the owner of the evicted personal property. Such notice shall state that the evicted property constituted a nuisance and that such property has been removed, and the notice shall identify by street address and telephone number the repository where the evicted personal property was disposed.

    3.   The owner of the real property from which the evicted personal property was removed shall be responsible for reimbursing the City for the cost of disposal of the evicted personal property. If the owner fails within thirty (30) days after billing to pay such costs to the City, such costs may be collected as a lien against the real property.

    4.   The City is authorized to abate any nuisance caused by the placement of evicted personal property onto any public right-of-way within the City and to dispose of such evicted personal property as provided herein. The procedures contained herein shall not constitute a bailment, and the City shall not be considered the bailee of any evicted personal property. No person shall maintain any claim or suit against the City, its officers, officials, employees or agents responsible for disposing of any personal property or possession under this section.

    C.   It is unlawful and deemed a nuisance for any person, while an operator or passenger in any vehicle, to deposit, throw or place any litter in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public property or place in the City, except in public receptacles and authorized private receptacles.

    D.  It is unlawful and deemed a nuisance to operate any truck, trailer or vehicle in such a manner that the load or any portion of the content of such vehicle is blown or deposited in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public property or place in the City.

    E.   It is unlawful and deemed a nuisance for any person, except an authorized public employee or officer or a person who has previously obtained a permit, to post, place, glue, staple, nail, affix or attach any handbill, poster, placard, sign, announcement or other painted or printed material upon or to any street, alley, sidewalk, lawful sign, utility pole or any public or private dwelling, store or other building or fence within the City without the permission of the owner or occupant of such property.

    F.   It is unlawful to deposit, throw, dump or leave litter on any private property, except into an approved trash receptacle and with the permission of the responsible party in control of the property. It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation of this section if such property is designated by permit or law for the disposal of such material and the person is authorized by the proper public authority. (Ord. 12-2019 § 3)

Chapter 8.28 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
8.28.010 General provisions.
    A.  The following shall be unlawful and are deemed nuisances:

    1.   The keeping of any property in a condition or manner which generates law enforcement calls disproportionate to other properties in the neighborhood or which negatively affects neighboring properties and/or residents, whether by continuous or excessive noise or by maintenance of the property in an unsightly or unwholesome manner, noxious or offensive to others or injurious to public health, safety or welfare.

    2.   To allow any property, including any private residence, to deteriorate, either through abandonment or neglect, to the extent that such property becomes an unsightly nuisance and a detriment or danger to surrounding property or the general public. Evidence of abandonment or neglect which could render a property either an unsightly nuisance or a detriment or a danger to surrounding property may include a combination of some of the following or occurrences and conditions which are similar to the following: Substantial peeling or faded paint; broken shutters or fascia; bent, broken or rusted gutters; broken doors, windows or screens; detached doors or screens; broken or damaged fencing; damaged or dead landscaping; cracked and/or potholed cement or asphalt paving; extensive and substantial damage to the roof or cladding; presence of weeds in gravel or paved parking areas.

    3.   The responsible party shall, at all times, maintain the property free of litter, trash, garbage or refuse. Weed or grass clippings shall not be left or stored by the responsible party in such a manner as to allow the clippings to be windblown onto other private property or public property. (Ord. 12-2019 § 3)

Chapter 8.30 INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES
8.30.010 Unsheltered storage prohibited.
    A.  Any unsheltered inoperable motor vehicle may not be parked, stored or kept for more than fourteen (14) days on private property. It shall be unlawful to have more than two (2) unsheltered inoperable vehicles stored on private property at the same time.

    B.   An unsheltered inoperable motor vehicle that remains on private property for more than fourteen (14) days shall be effectively screened in the rear or side yard of such private property for the period which the vehicle remains on the property. No more than two (2) effectively screened, inoperable motor vehicles may be stored on private property at the same time, unless such activity is in accordance with this Code.

    C.   The owner and the occupant of the private property on which the unsheltered storage is occurring and the owner of the inoperable motor vehicle in question are jointly and severally responsible to abate the nuisance. No person, after a notice of violation has been given, shall move the inoperable motor vehicle or vehicles in question to any other private property upon which storage of such vehicle or vehicles is not permitted or onto any public property or right-of-way.

    D.  Painting of motor vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an enclosed space.

    E.   Vehicles that are considered collector’s items, as defined in C.R.S. Section 42-12-101, are permitted to be stored in accordance with state law. (Ord. 12-2019 § 3)

 

8.30.020 Exceptions.
    Any person who is conducting an automobile sales, storage or repair enterprise operated in compliance with existing zoning regulations when the storage is necessary to the operation of such business enterprise is exempt from the requirements of Section 8.30.010. (Ord. 12-2019 § 3)

Chapter 8.32 DEAD ANIMALS
8.32.010 General provisions.
    A.  When any animal in the City dies, it shall be the duty of the owner or keeper of such animal to promptly dispose of its remains in a proper manner.

    B.   When the body of any dead animal is on any public property in the City, it shall be the duty of the Chief and other officers of the Cañon City Police Department, including Animal Control Officers, to cause such body to be removed forthwith and disposed of at the Humane Society or other similar facility equipped to dispose of the same.

    C.   It is unlawful and deemed a nuisance for any person in possession or control of any occupied or unoccupied property within the City, or any part thereof, to bury or cause to be buried any dead animal within the City. (Ord. 12-2019 § 3)

Chapter 8.34 OUTSIDE STORAGE
8.34.010 General provisions.
    A.  It shall be unlawful to store, or cause to be stored, any personal property in the front yard, front porch, or area visible from the public street in the City, except as provided by subsection C of this section. Personal property includes items such as, but not limited to, household appliances, household furniture, household fixtures, auto parts, chemicals, building materials, landscape materials, machinery and evicted property.

    B.   It shall be unlawful, to store, or cause to be stored upon property or to allow to be viewed by the general public, or any member thereof, goods, materials or substances not otherwise or specifically defined or definable as trash, garbage or junk, but which goods, materials or substances are of a type, kind, quantity or description not commonly associated with the zoning classification or permitted use of the property. This subsection shall apply to storage of firewood, unless the amount is two (2) cords or less, and the firewood is neatly stacked.

    C.   Exceptions:

    1.   Permanently installed facilities.

    2.   Goods offered in a yard sale may be stored in accordance to Section 17.20.220.

    3.   Lawn and patio furniture, including, but not limited to, tables, chairs, umbrellas and benches.

    4.   Furniture and other household goods, associated with moving into or out of any residential structure, may be stored for a period not to exceed seven (7) days.

    5.   Landscape materials to be installed on the same lot(s) that they are stored upon may be stored for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days.

    6.   Fencing materials to be used for construction of fences on the same lot(s) that they are being stored upon may be stored for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days.

    7.   Building materials to be used for constructions of structures or facilities on the same lot(s) that they are stored upon may be stored for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days. It shall be unlawful and deemed a nuisance to store any construction materials in a manner which causes such materials to be blown, scattered about or otherwise moved.

    8.   As permitted in Sections 17.20.140 and 17.20.170.

    9.   None of the above exceptions shall apply to evicted property. (Ord. 12-2019 § 3)

Chapter 8.36 WEED AND VEGETATIVE PLANT MANAGEMENT STANDARDS
8.36.010 Vegetative growth.
    No vegetative growth shall encroach onto the public right-of-way, except as permitted pursuant to Chapter 12.12. (Ord. 12-2019 § 3)

 

8.36.020 Weeds.
    It is unlawful and deemed a nuisance for any person in possession or control of any occupied or unoccupied lot or parcel of land within the City, or any part thereof, including the sidewalk, alley or street adjacent to the same, to permit the growth of weeds, to store, keep, or place cut or dead growth, weeds, grass, brush, tree limbs, branches, or other unsightly debris creating hazardous conditions on public or private property. (Ord. 12-2019 § 3)

 

8.36.030 Undesirable plant management.
    This section shall be known and may be cited as the “Cañon City Weed Management Act.”

    A.  Legislative Declaration—Rule of Construction.

    1.   In enacting this section, the City Council finds and declares that there is a need to ensure that all the lands of the City, whether in private or public ownership, are protected by and subject to the jurisdiction of the City with respect to the management of undesirable plants as designated by the State of Colorado and City Council. In making such determination the City Council hereby finds and declares that certain undesirable plants constitute a present threat to the continued economic and environmental value of the lands of the City and if present in any area of the City must be managed. It is the intent of the City Council, that the advisory commission appointed under this section, in developing undesirable plant management plans, will consider the elements of integrated management as defined in this section, as well as all appropriate and available control and management methods, seeking those methods which are least environmentally damaging and which are practical and economically reasonable.

    2.   This section is in addition to other provisions of this section and is intended to be an expansion of, not a substitution for, those provisions.

    B.   Duty to Manage Undesirable Plants.

    1.   All persons owning, controlling or occupying property within the city shall be responsible for the management and elimination of undesirable plants from the property owned, controlled or occupied by such person within thirty (30) days from the effective date of this ordinance.

    2.   It is the duty of all persons to use integrated methods to manage undesirable plants if the same are likely to be materially damaging to the land of neighboring landowners.

    3.   In all cases where such persons are not required to use integrated methods to manage undesirable plants, as provided in Subsection (B)(2), the management and elimination of undesirable plants required under Subsection (B)(1) shall nevertheless be accomplished in an ecologically feasible and environmentally safe manner in accordance with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.

    C.   Undesirable Plant Management—Municipal Authority.

    1.   The City Council, by resolution, may adopt rules and other regulations as may be necessary and proper to enforce this section and otherwise provide for the management of undesirable plants within the city; provided that neither this section, nor any resolution, rule, other regulation, or exercise of power pursuant to this section shall apply to unincorporated lands or facilities outside the corporate limits of the city, except such lands or facilities which are owned by or leased to the City, unless the City and the county of Fremont, state of Colorado otherwise agree pursuant to Part 2 of Article 1 of Title 29, C.R.S., or Article 20 of Title 29, C.R.S.

    2.   The City Council shall provide for the administration of any undesirable plant management plan authorized by this section through the use of agents, delegates, or employees and may hire additional staff or provide for the performance of all or part of the undesirable plant management plan through outside contract. Any agent, delegate, employee, staff, or contractor applying or recommending the use of chemical control methods shall be certified by the Department of Agriculture for such application or recommendation.

    3.   The City Council may cooperate with counties and other municipalities for the exercise of any or all of the powers and authorities granted by Article 5.5 of Title 35, C.R.S. Such cooperation shall take the form of an intergovernmental agreement pursuant to Part 2 of Article 1 of Title 29, C.R.S., or Article 20 of Title 29, C.R.S.

    4.   This section is intended by City Council to satisfy the requirement for the adoption of an undesirable plant management plan imposed by Article 5.5 of Title 35, C.R.S.

    D.  Advisory Commissions—Formation—Duties.

    1.   The City Council shall be and hereby is appointed to act and function as the City’s undesirable plant management advisory commission. The City Council reserves the right and power to appoint by resolution a commission of property owners to act as the undesirable plant management advisory commission for the City. The members of the commission of property owners, if so appointed, shall be residents of the City.

    2.   In the event that the City elects to cooperate with another county or municipality for any of the purposes set forth in Article 5.5 of Title 35, C.R.S., the membership of the advisory commission shall be determined by the governing bodies of such cooperating local governments.

    3.   The advisory commission shall annually elect a chairman and secretary. A majority of the members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business.

    4.   The advisory commission shall have the powers and duties specified at C.R.S. Section 35-5.5-107 and City Council reserves unto itself all rights and powers available to any “local governing body” under said section.

    E.   Designated Undesirable Plants.

    1.   The City Council pursuant to the mandate of the general assembly of the state of Colorado hereby finds and declares that the undesirable plants designated in this section are a present threat to the economic and environmental value of the lands of the City and shall, pursuant to this section, manage these undesirable plants and weeds.

    2.   The following plant species are designated as undesirable plants which must be managed under the provisions of this section: the plant commonly known as leafy spurge, also known by the scientific name Euphorbia esula; and the knapweed plants commonly known as diffuse, Russian, and spotted knapweeds, also known by the scientific names of Centaurea diffusa, Centaurea repens, and Centaurea maculosa.

    3.   City Council may designate additional undesirable plants by ordinance after a public hearing with not less than thirty (30) days prior notice to the public.

    F.   Private Lands—Control of Undesirable Plants—Charges.

    1.   City Council, through its delegates, agents, and employees, shall have the right to enter upon any premises, lands, or places, whether public or private, during reasonable business hours for the purpose of inspecting for the existence of weed infestations, when at least one of the following circumstances has occurred:

    a.   The owner or occupant has requested an inspection;

    b.   A neighboring owner or occupant has reported a suspected weed infestation and requested an inspection; or

    c.   An authorized agent of the local government has made a visual observation from a public right-of-way or area and has reason to believe that an infestation exists.

    2.   No entry upon any premises, lands, or places shall be permitted until the owner or occupant has been notified, either orally or by certified mail, that such inspection is pending. Where possible, inspections shall be scheduled and conducted with the concurrence of the owner or occupant.

    3.   If, after receiving notice that an inspection is pending, the owner or occupant denies access to the inspector of the City, the inspector may seek an inspection warrant issued by a municipal, county, or district court having jurisdiction over the land. The court shall issue an inspection warrant upon presentation by the City Council, through its agent or employee, of an affidavit stating: The information which gives the inspector reasonable cause to believe that any provision of this section is being or has been violated; that the occupant or owner has denied access to the inspector; and a general description of the location of the affected land. No owner or occupant shall deny access to such land when presented with an inspection warrant.

    4.   The City shall have the authority, acting directly or indirectly through its agent or staff, to notify the owner or occupant of such lands, advising the owner or occupant of the presence of undesirable plants. Said notice shall name the undesirable plants, advise the owner or occupant to control the undesirable plants, and specify the best available control methods of integrated management, including, but not limited to, biological management, chemical management, mechanical control, or cultural control. Where possible, the delegates, agents and employees of the City charged with enforcement powers and duties under this section, shall consult with the affected owner or occupant in the development of a management plan for the control of the weeds on the premises or lands.

    5.   Within a reasonable time after receipt of notification, which at no time shall exceed ten (10) days, the owner or occupant shall either:

    a.   Comply with terms of the notification;

    b.   Acknowledge the terms of the notification and submit an acceptable plan and schedule for the completion of the plan for compliance; or

    c.   Request an arbitration panel to determine the final management plan.

    6.   The arbitration panel selected by the City Council shall be comprised of a weed management specialist or weed scientist, an owner of similar land in the city, and a third panel member chosen by agreement of the first two (2) panel members. The owner or occupant shall be entitled to challenge any one member of the panel, and the City Council shall name a new panel member from the same category. The decision of the arbitration panel shall be final.

    7.   In the event the owner or occupant fails to comply with the notice to control the identified undesirable plants or the management land developed by the arbitration panel, the City Council, through its delegates, agents or employees charged with enforcement powers and duties under this section, may: Provide for and compel the control of such plants at such time, upon such notice, and in such manner as the City Council shall prescribe by ordinance or resolution; and assess the whole cost thereof, including up to fifteen percent (15%) for inspection and other incidental costs in connection therewith, upon the lot or tract of land where the undesirable plants are located; except that City Council shall not levy a tax lien against land it controls as part of a public right-of-way. Such assessment shall be a lien against each lot or tract of land until paid and shall have priority over all other liens except general taxes and prior special assessments. Such assessment may be certified to the County Treasurer of the County in which the property is located and collected and paid over in the same manner as provided for the collection of taxes. However, any such assessment shall not be more than twenty percent (20%) of the assessed valuation of the entire contiguous tract of land in any one year. Any amount in excess of the twenty percent (20%) limitation remaining unpaid may be carried over and charged on the tax roll of the succeeding year, and any unpaid balance so carried over shall bear interest at the rate established by the Commissioner of Banking pursuant to Section 39-21-110.5, C.R.S., until paid.

    8.   The City Council shall not provide for or compel the control of undesirable plants on private property pursuant to this subsection F without first applying the same or greater control measures to any land or rights-of-way owned or controlled by the City that are adjacent to the private property.

    9.   The City Council shall not assess the cost of providing for or compelling the control of undesirable plants on private property until such control has successfully achieved the level of control called for in the notice to control the identified undesirable plants or the management plan developed by the arbitration panel.

    10. The City Council, through its delegates, agents, and employees, shall have the right to enter upon any premises, lands or places, whether public or private, during reasonable business hours for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the requirements of this section concerning undesirable plant management and any other local requirements.

    11. No agent, employee or delegate of the City Council shall have a civil cause of action against an owner or occupant for personal injury or property damage incurred while on public or private land for purposes consistent with this section except when such damages were willfully or deliberately caused by the owner.

    G.  Public Lands—Control of Undesirable Plants—Charges. Pursuant to Section 35-5.5-110, C.R.S., it is the duty of each state board, department or agency which controls or supervises state lands to manage undesirable plants on any lands under its jurisdiction using the methods prescribed by the local governing body in whose jurisdiction such state lands are located. As to state lands within the city, the City Council shall have those rights and powers as are specified and otherwise provided for at Section 35-5.5-110, C.R.S.

    H.  Cooperation with Federal and State Agencies. The City Council may enter into cooperative agreements with federal agencies and state agencies for the integrated management of undesirable plants within their respective territorial jurisdictions.

    I.    Public Nuisance—Abatement. The City Council hereby declares that all undesirable plants at any and all stages thereof, their carriers, and any and all premises, plants, and things infested or exposed to infestation therewith located within the city are a public nuisance. All such nuisances are subject to all laws and remedies relating to the prevention and abatement of nuisances, including, but not limited to, the provisions of this section. (Ord. 12-2019 § 3)

Chapter 8.38 SIDEWALKS AND GUTTERS
8.38.010 General provisions.
    A.  All persons are required to keep the sidewalk in front of and adjacent to the land occupied by them clear of ice, mud, dirt, rubbish, landscaping and vegetative growth.

    B.   After any snow fall, the snow shall be removed from such sidewalk within twenty-four (24) hours from residential properties and immediately from commercial properties.

    C.   Snow shall not be plowed, shoveled, or deposited on adjacent sidewalks, storm drains, or in front of or on curb ramps.

    D.  No motor vehicle, trailer or equipment shall be parked or stored on any portion of the sidewalk or any portion of the right-of-way between the sidewalk and on-street parking, unless permitted by the City Engineer pursuant to Chapter 12.12. At no times shall the flow of pedestrian traffic be restricted. (Ord. 12-2019 § 3)

Chapter 8.40 UNIFORM CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
8.40.010 Document adopted by reference—Copies on file.
    A.  There is adopted for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property within the city arising from the existence of dangerous and unsafe buildings, the code known as the “Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings,” 1994 Edition, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, 5360 South Workman Mill Road, Whittier, California 90601, all to have the same force and effect as though set forth in this section in every particular, except such portions as are deleted, modified or amended by Section 8.40.030 of this chapter.

    B.   At least one copy of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings have been or are now filed in the office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 5-1996 § 4)

 

8.40.020 Definitions.
    Wherever used in the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings:

    A.  “Corporation counsel” means the City Attorney or a member of his staff;

    B.   “Jurisdiction” means the City of Cañon City. (Ord. 5-1996 § 4)

 

8.40.030 Amendments and deletions—Abatement procedure.
    The Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is amended and changed in the following respects:

    A.  Section 103 is amended to read:

 

      SECTION 103 – ALTERATIONS, ADDITIONS AND REPAIRS

 

      All buildings or structures which are required to be repaired under the provisions of this Code shall be subject to the provisions of Section 3402 of the International Building Code.

 

    B.   Section 204 is amended to read:

 

      SECTION 204 – INSPECTION OF WORK

 

      All buildings or structures within the scope of this Code and all construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the Building Official in accordance with and in the manner provided by this Code and Sections 109 and 1704.1 of the International Building Code.

 

    C.   Section 205.1 is amended to read:

 

      205.1   General. The Board of Adjustment is hereby designated as the Board of Appeals and shall hear and decide all appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of this Code.

 

    D.  Section 301 is amended to re-define “Building Code” and to add references to other codes either adopted or enforceable in this jurisdiction, as follows:

 

      BUILDING CODE means the International Building Code or the International Residential Code, published by the International Code Council, as adopted by this jurisdiction, whichever is applicable, or both the International Building Code and the International Residential Code, if both are applicable.

 

      BUILDING OFFICIAL means the building official of this jurisdiction and/or other designees of the building official or, in the absence of the building official, the City Administrator may designate building inspectors and/or code enforcement officials to perform the duties and obligations of the building official.

 

      MECHANICAL CODE means the International Mechanical Code or the International Fuel Gas Code, published by the International Code Council, as adopted in this jurisdiction, or both the International Mechanical Code and the International Fuel Gas Code, if both are applicable.

 

      PLUMBING CODE shall mean the version of the Plumbing Code adopted and enforced by the State of Colorado in this jurisdiction.

 

      ELECTRICAL CODE shall mean the version of the Electrical Code adopted and enforced by the State of Colorado in this jurisdiction.

 

    E.   Section 905.3 is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

      905.3 Special Assessment. If the legislative body of this jurisdiction orders that the charge shall be assessed against the property, it shall confirm the assessment, cause the same to be recorded on the assessment roll, and thereafter said assessment shall constitute a special assessment against and a lien upon the property. Any such special assessment shall be made by ordinance, which may be introduced on or after the date upon which a determination under Section 904 is made. The costs of adopting and publishing such ordinance shall be added to the City’s other costs and included in the amount of the special assessment.

(Ord. 18-2020 § 5; Ord. 16-2017 § 1; Ord. 24-2002 § 1)

 

8.40.040 Enforcement—Building Official authority.
    A.  The Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings shall be enforced by the Building Official, who shall operate under the supervision of the City Administrator.

    B.   The Building Official may designate such members of his staff as inspector as shall from time to time be necessary. The Building Official shall recommend to the City Administrator the employment of a special technical inspector, should the same become necessary. (Ord. 5-1996 § 4)

 

8.40.050 Violation—Penalty—Additional remedies.
    A.  Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter 8.40, or the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, as adopted and amended in this chapter, or who fails to comply therewith, or who violates or fails to comply with any order made thereunder, or who maintains or occupies any structure in violation of any of the provisions or orders entered pursuant to such Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, or who fails to comply with an order issued by a court of competent jurisdiction within the time provided for, shall severally, for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in an amount that does not exceed the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010.

    B.   The imposition of one penalty for any one violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time, and when not otherwise specified, each day such prohibited condition is maintained shall constitute a separate offense.

    C.   The application of the penalty set forth in Subsections A and B of this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of or correction of prohibited conditions. (Ord. 17-2013 § 23; Ord. 24-2002 § 2; Ord. 5-1996 § 4)

Chapter 8.42 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
8.42.010 Administrative nuisance abatement—Notice of abatement.
    A.  A Community Services Officer, upon the discovery of any nuisance on public or private property in the City, shall notify the responsible party in writing, to remove and abate from the property, the thing or things therein described as a nuisance, within the time specified in the notice.

    1.   The time for abatement of a nuisance posing an imminent danger of damage or injury to or loss of life, limb, property or health shall not exceed one day.

    2.   As to other nuisances, the reasonable time for abatement shall not exceed seven (7) days, unless it appears from the facts and circumstances that compliance could not reasonably be made within seven (7) days or that a good faith attempt at compliance is being made.

    3.   If the responsible party shall fail to comply with the requirements for a period longer than that named in the notice, then the Community Services Officer or other authorized City official shall proceed to have the nuisance described in the notice, removed or abated from the property described in the notice without delay; and the Community Services Officer shall have the authority to call for any necessary assistance. In no event shall the notice, described by this section, be required prior to issuance of a summons and complaint.

    4.   Any nuisance located or found in or upon any street, avenue, alley, public sidewalk, highway, public right-of-way, public grounds, park, recreational facility, or other public property owned or controlled by the City, in the City, may be abated without notice. Nor shall a notice described in this section be required prior to issuance of a summons and complaint pursuant to Subsection 8.42.020(D).

    B.   Service of Notice. Service of a notice of a violation on the responsible party shall be by any of the following means:

    1.   Personally delivering a copy of the notice to the responsible party;

    2.   Mailing a copy of the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the owner, as reflected in the real estate records of the county assessor and to the tenant, if applicable, at tenant’s address; or

    3.   Mailing a copy of the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the owner of the property described in the notice as reflected in the county assessor records if the property is unoccupied and by posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place at the unoccupied premises.

    4.   Service of the notice shall be deemed complete upon the date of personal delivery or three (3) business days after the date of mailing as required herein.

    C.   Contents of Notice. The notice to abate, issued pursuant to the provisions of this section to the responsible party upon which a nuisance was discovered, shall contain the following:

    1.   The address and other description of the property upon which the nuisance was discovered;

    2.   The name and address of the owner of the property upon which the nuisance was discovered as reflected in the county assessor records;

    3.   The name and address of the occupant of the property upon which the nuisance was discovered, if known, and if different from the owner;

    4.   A description of the thing or things or condition deemed to be a nuisance;

    5.   The time in which the thing or things or condition are to be removed or abated from the property;

    6.   A statement that, if the responsible party fails to comply with directions contained in the written notice or file a written protest thereto in the time allowed, the City may enter the property, abate the nuisance described therein and assess the costs thereof to the owner of the property; and

    7.   A statement that, if the cost of abatement is not paid, a lien may be placed upon any property for which the abatement was performed and the City will be entitled to the actual costs of abatement, plus fifteen percent (15%) of such abatement costs for inspection, a minimum fee assessment of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and other incidental costs of abatement. (Ord. 12-2019 § 3)

 

8.42.020 Actions to abate a nuisance.
    When, in the reasonable judgment of a Community Services Officer, a violation of this chapter exists, the officer may, on behalf of the City, abate a public nuisance by any of the following procedures:

    A.  Abatement After Notice. If, after written notice has been given as described in Section 8.42.010, the responsible party fails to abate the nuisance in the time specified in the notice, the City may enter upon such property for the purpose of abating the nuisance if an emergency exists that eminently threatens the health, safety and welfare of the public.

    B.   Abatement by Civil Action. If, after written notice has been given, as described in Section 8.42.010, the responsible party fails to abate the nuisance in the time specified in the notice, the Community Services Officer, on behalf of the City, may bring an action in the Municipal Court to have the nuisance declared as such by the court and for an order enjoining the nuisance or ordering its restraint, removal, termination or abatement by the responsible party, or authorize abatement by an appropriate official or agency of the City. The Municipal Court is hereby authorized to make such findings and declarations, and to enter such orders in circumstances deemed appropriate.

    1.   The City shall file a verified complaint for an abatement order which shall include an affirmation that the City has complied with the notice requirements of Subsection 8.42.010(C) and that the responsible party has failed to abate the identified nuisance upon the property.

    2.   The Municipal Court shall review the verified complaint and schedule a hearing on the request for an abatement order. The Municipal Court shall direct the issuance of a summons stating the time, date, and place at which the request for an abatement order will be heard by the Municipal Court.

    3.   The City shall serve the summons and complaint on the responsible party named in the complaint in the same manner as provided above for service of the original notice at least seven (7) days prior to the time of the hearing.

    4.   At the time, date, and place stated in the summons, the Municipal Court Judge shall review and consider the request for an abatement order, any statement of the City in support thereof, and any statement and evidence presented by the responsible party, if present.

    5.   Upon the date and at the time set for the hearing, if the responsible party fails to appear, and if the City proves that proper service was made on the responsible party, the Court may grant such orders as requested by the City. The Municipal Court Judge may consider evidence of actual notice received by a responsible party in determining whether adequate notice of a violation has been provided. The Judge may find that notice is adequate despite a lack of technical compliance with Subsection 8.42.010(C) upon evidence that a responsible party received actual notice of a written notice to abate a reasonable amount of time prior to the expiration of the abatement period. Failure to appear on any date set for a hearing shall be grounds for entering a default and judgment thereon against a non-appearing party. For good cause shown, and prior to enforcement, the Municipal Court may set aside an entry of default and the judgment entered thereon.

    C.   Abatement by Administrative Citation. If, after written notice has been given, as described in Section 8.42.010, the responsible party fails to abate the nuisance in the time specified in the notice, the Community Services Officer may issue an administrative citation to the responsible party.

    1.   The Community Services Officer shall serve the administrative citation on the responsible party in the same manner as provided above for service of the original notice. If personally served, the Community Services Officer shall attempt to obtain the signature of the person receiving the administrative citation on the citation. If that person refuses or fails to sign the administrative citation, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the citation and subsequent proceedings.

    2.   The administrative citation shall contain the following information:

    a.   The location of the violation(s) and the date and approximate time the violation(s) were observed. When applicable, the administrative citation shall identify the property in violation by address or legal description.

    b.   Reference to the applicable sections of this Code that were violated and a description of the violations.

    c.   The action required to correct the violations.

    d.   A statement that the responsible party shall correct the violations immediately and a description of the consequences of failure to correct said violations.

    e.   The amount of fine imposed for each violation.

    f.    An explanation of how the fine shall be paid, the available forms of payment, the time period by which it shall be paid, and the consequences of failure to pay the fine.

    g.   The process for appealing the administrative citation.

    h.   The signature of the Community Services Officer and the signature of the responsible party if it can be obtained.

    3.   An administrative citation may be appealed by the responsible party within seven (7) days from the service of the administrative citation by filing a notice of appeal. Compliance with this time limit shall be a jurisdictional prerequisite to any appeal brought under this chapter, and failure to comply shall bar any such appeal.

    a.   The notice of appeal shall be made in writing and shall be filed with the Municipal Court in person, by facsimile transmission or by mail. Regardless of the manner of filing such appeal, the notice of appeal must be filed with the Municipal Court within seven (7) days from the date the administrative citation was served. The notice of appeal shall provide the basis for the appeal.

    b.   As soon as practicable after receiving the written notice of appeal, the Municipal Court shall schedule a date, time and location for the hearing.

    c.   Written notice of the date, time and location of the hearing shall be personally served upon or sent by first class mail to the responsible party at least five (5) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. The hearing shall be held no more than fourteen (14) days after a timely notice of appeal has been filed.

    d.   In computing the day a notice of appeal must be filed or the day by which a hearing must be held, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any period is a Saturday, Sunday, or City-recognized holiday, the period is extended to the first day thereafter which is not a Saturday, Sunday, or City-recognized holiday.

    4.   Administrative appeals are intended to be informal in nature. Formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. The procedure and format of the administrative hearing shall follow the procedures provided in this section.

    a.   Each party may call and question witnesses, cross-examine witnesses and present evidence in support of its case.

    b.   The Court, at the request of any party to the hearing, may subpoena witnesses, documents and other evidence where the attendance of the witness or the admission of evidence is deemed necessary to decide the issues at the hearing. All costs related to the subpoena, including witness and mileage fees, shall be borne by the party requesting the subpoena and shall be paid in advance of the issuance of the subpoena unless otherwise ordered by the Court. The form of, and the process for issuing subpoenas shall be the same as in the Municipal Court.

    c.   The only issue to be decided by the Court is whether the Community Services Officer exceeded his or her authority in issuing the administrative citation. The City bears the burden of proof to establish the existence of a violation of the Code. The City’s meeting of this burden of proof shall constitute prima facie evidence that the Community Services Officer did not exceed his or her authority. The appellant shall have the burden of rebutting such evidence.

    d.   The standard of proof required in an administrative appeal permitted by this chapter is a preponderance of the evidence.

    e.   Whenever it appears that an appeal is not filed within the time permitted by this chapter, or the particular law or ordinance involved, or that the Court for some other reason lacks jurisdiction, the appeal may be dismissed on the motion of any party or on the Court’s own motion.

    f.    The decision of the Court shall be known as an administrative enforcement order. The Court may: (i) uphold the administrative citation and all penalties; or (ii) dismiss the administrative citation and all penalties. The Court also may impose conditions and deadlines for violators to correct violations or abate nuisances and may require payment of any outstanding penalties and all fees and costs assessed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

    g.   In the event that the Court does not dismiss the administrative citation, the Court shall assess reasonable administrative costs of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), but not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00).

    h.   The administrative enforcement order shall become final on the date the order is mailed to or served upon the responsible party. A copy of the order shall be provided to the City.

    i.    Any responsible party who fails to appear at the hearing is deemed to waive the right to a hearing and the adjudication of the issues related to the hearing, provided that proper notice of the hearing had been given to such responsible party. The Court may take testimony, evidence and argument from the City and issue an administrative enforcement order that may include an assessment of reasonable administrative costs in the absence of a responsible party who fails to appear at the hearing.

    5.   The City Administrator shall develop guidelines for fines based upon the City Administrator’s assessment of the cost to the City for enforcing the various provisions of this chapter. Thereafter, the City Administrator shall publish a schedule of fines for administrative citations. The schedule of fines shall be graduated in amount, with the smallest fine being assessed for the first administrative citation and increasingly larger fines for second, third and subsequent administrative citations. No single fine assessed for an administrative citation shall exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Such guidelines and fine schedule shall be approved by the City Council. The schedule of fines shall not be amended more often than once per year.

    6.   If the responsible party fails to correct the violation, subsequent administrative citations may be issued for additional violations of the same section. The fine assessed for each administrative citation issued for violations of the same section or sections shall not exceed the amount set in the City Administrator’s schedule of fines regardless of the number of violations per citation. Payment of the fine shall not excuse the failure to correct the violations nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the City.

    7.   The failure of any responsible party to pay the fines assessed by an administrative citation within the time specified on the citation or by an administrative enforcement order, may result in the imposition of a late fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), a twenty percent (20%) charge to defray the cost of collection, and interest at a rate of ten percent (10%) per annum on all unpaid amounts, calculated from the date of the citation. In the event of failure to pay all fines assessed, the City Administrator may refer the matter for collection by whatever means are available to the City. In the case of delinquent charges, assessments or taxes, including fines and the costs of nuisance abatement respecting real property identified in an administrative citation and/or enforcement order served upon or issued to an owner of such property, the City Administrator shall, pursuant to C.R.S. Section 31-20-105, certify the same to the County Treasurer to be collected and paid over by the County Treasurer in the same manner as taxes are collected. An action or other process provided by law may be maintained by the City to recover or collect any amounts, including late fees, interest, and administrative costs, owing under this chapter.

    8.   Payment of an administrative fine shall not relieve a responsible party of the obligations to abate a nuisance or to otherwise come into compliance by discontinuing the activity or circumstance constituting the violation.

    9.   Abatement of a nuisance or other compliance will not relieve a responsible party who has been properly served an administrative citation from the obligation to pay the fine, except that some or all of the fine for a first offense may be waived by the Community Services Officer, as provided in the guidelines adopted by the City.

    D.  Abatement by Criminal Action/Penalty Assessment. If a Community Services Officer elects not to summarily abate the nuisance pursuant to subsection A above, abate the nuisance pursuant to subsection B above, or issue an administration citation pursuant to subsection C above, the Community Services Officer may initiate a criminal action to have a nuisance declared as such by the court and to have the court impose sentence and otherwise enter orders as provided for in this chapter.

    1.   The criminal action shall be brought in the name of the people of the City of Cañon City by serving a copy of the summons and complaint upon the responsible party and filing the original with the court. Summonses and complaints and subpoenas shall be served as in other criminal actions. Any employee or agent of the City, who is over the age of eighteen (18), may serve a summons and complaint upon the responsible party or a subpoena upon any witness to the violation.

    2.   The responsible party served with the summons and complaint shall have the right to enter a plea of guilty or not guilty in the Municipal Court. If the responsible party is found guilty, the court shall impose sentence and order abatement as provided by Subsection 8.42.020(B). (Ord. 12-2019 § 3)

 

8.42.030 Recovery of expense of abatement.
    A.  If the City abates a nuisance pursuant to this chapter, it shall be entitled to recover the following:

    1.   The actual costs of abatement, plus fifteen percent (15%) of such abatement costs for inspection, a minimum fee assessment of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and other incidental costs of abatement.

    2.   Such costs shall be paid to the City within thirty (30) days after the City Administrator (or his or her designee) has mailed notice of the assessment by certified mail to the owner of the property; provided, however, that if the property is occupied by someone other than the owner, the City Administrator (or his or her designee) shall mail such notice of assessment by certified mail, to both the occupant and the owner. Service shall be complete upon depositing the notice within the United States Postal Service, postage prepaid for certified mail.

    3.   Every such assessment shall be a lien in the several amounts assessed against such lot, lots or tract of land until paid. The City may record a lien upon the property at the time of the notice of assessment or thereafter, if not paid.

    4.   Such assessment shall be a lien shall have priority over all liens, except general taxes and prior special assessments, and the same may be collected by any legal means, including certification at any time after such failure to pay the same, by the City to the County Treasurer to be placed upon the tax list for the current year and to be collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected, with fifteen percent (15%) penalty to defray the cost of collection. (Ord. 12-2019 § 3)

 

8.42.040 Penalty.
    A.  Any person found guilty of, or pleads nolo contendere to violating any provision of this chapter, shall be subject to penalties in this section, provided that the maximum fine for any violation shall not exceed the maximum fine authorized pursuant to Section 1.28.010 and further provided that nothing shall be construed as either prohibiting or limiting the City from pursuing such other remedial provisions as set forth in this chapter.

    B.   Any responsible party violating any provision of this title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine pursuant to the following schedule:

    1.   Upon the first finding of guilt or plea of nolo contendere for a violation of this title in any twelve (12) month period, a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) per count;

    2.   Upon the second finding of guilt or plea of nolo contendere for a violation of this title in any twelve (12) month period, a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per count;

    3.   Upon the third finding of guilt or plea of nolo contendere for a violation of this title in any twelve (12) month period, a fine of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) per count;

    4.   Upon the fourth or subsequent finding of guilt or plea of nolo contendere for a violation of this title in any twelve (12) month period, a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per count.

    C.   In levying and imposing fines upon conviction of any of the sections specified herein, the court shall have no authority to reduce or suspend all or any portion of the minimum fines specified herein, it being the expressed intent of the City Council that the court will adhere to the fine schedule specified herein. The twelve (12) month period referred to in subsection B shall be measured from date of violation to date of violation.

    D.  As a portion of any judgment, fine or assessment levied upon conviction of a violation of this title, the court shall order that the violation be abated within a time established by the court, but in no event to exceed thirty (30) days from the date of conviction. Failure to abate within the time so ordered may constitute contempt of court, and may be punishable as such. The order also shall provide that, in the event the defendant has not abated the nuisance within thirty (30) days after the court order, the City or its agents are authorized to do so, at the expense of the defendant.

    E.   In addition to any fines levied hereunder, the court shall impose, as a portion of the costs assessed against a convicted responsible party, any costs incurred by the City in prosecuting, enforcing and abating the nuisance.

    F.   Each day during which any responsible party commits, or allows to remain unabated, any of the actions specified as unlawful in this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. Multiple violations of this chapter may be included on a single notice to abate or a single summons and complaint. (Ord. 12-2019 § 3)

Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
Division I. Offenses By or Against Public Officers and Government
Division II. Offenses Against the Person
Division III. Offenses Against Public Decency
Division IV. Offenses Against the Peace
Division V. Offenses Against Property
Division VI. Consumer Protection (Reserved)
Division VII. Offenses By or Against Minors
Division VIII. Weapons
Division IX. Fire and Explosives Regulations

Division I. Offenses By or Against Public Officers and Government
Chapter 9.04 IMPERSONATING OFFICERS OR INTERFERING WITH POLICE ACTIVITIES
9.04.010 Impersonating an officer—Misdemeanor.
    Whoever shall, in this city, falsely represent himself to be an officer or employee of this city, or shall, without being duly authorized, exercise or attempt to exercise any of the duties, functions or powers of a city officer or employee, or shall hinder, obstruct, resist or otherwise interfere with any city officer or employee from arresting any person, or attempt to rescue from any such officer or employee any person in his custody, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 9.04.010)

 

9.04.020 Resisting officer—Aiding escape—Misdemeanor.
    A.  It is unlawful for any person to resist any police officer or any member of the Police Department in the discharge of such officer’s duty, or offer or endeavor to do so.

    B.   It is unlawful for any person, while a prisoner in the City jail, or in any other place where prisoners are confined, or who is otherwise in the lawful custody of any police officer or member of the Police Department, to escape or attempt to escape, or to assist others to escape or attempt to escape from such custody or confinement.

    C.   Any person convicted of any violation of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and punished accordingly. (Prior § 9.04.020)

 

Chapter 9.08 INTERFERING WITH FIREFIGHTING
9.08.010 Compulsory firefighting service—Conditions.
    A.  Every person present at a fire shall be subject to and obedient to the orders of the chief, assistant chief, or in their absence, the person in charge, in extinguishing the fire and removing or protecting property; and in case such person shall neglect or refuse to obey such orders, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

    B.   All such officers shall have power to arrest any such person and to hold him in custody until after the fire has been extinguished, when he shall be taken to the Municipal Court to be dealt with according to law; provided, that no person shall be bound to obey such officer unless the official character of the officer is known or made known to such person. (Prior code § 9.08.040)

 

9.08.020 Destroying buildings to check conflagration.
    When a fire is in progress, the chief of the Fire Department, or in his absence the assistant chief or other person in charge, may with the advice of the Mayor of the City, or in case the Mayor is not present, and in his judgment he may deem it necessary, order any building or buildings that are in close proximity thereto, to be tom down, blown up, or otherwise disposed of, for the purpose of checking the conflagration; but neither the chief of the Fire Department or any other member of the Fire Department shall unnecessarily or recklessly destroy any building or other property. (Prior code § 9.08.020)

 

9.08.030 Fire apparatus—Other vehicles to yield.
    Whenever any alarm of fire is given, all persons occupying the streets of the city with vehicles of any description shall yield the right-of-way on such streets to hose, hook-and-ladder companies, or any other fire apparatus repairing to such fire or fires. (Prior code § 9.08.050)

 

9.08.040 Driving over hose prohibited.
    It is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle of any kind over any line of hose, or to drive any horse or animal over the same or to stand thereon, or in any manner interfere with any line of hose. (Prior code § 9.08.060)

 

9.08.050 False alarms—Misdemeanor.
    Any person who shall, in this city, intentionally make or give a false alarm of fire is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 9.08.080)

 

9.08.060 Tampering with fire apparatus—Misdemeanor.
    Any person tampering or in anywise interfering with any alarm box or other apparatus belonging to the Fire Department and the property of the City is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 9.08.070)

 

9.08.070 Loitering around Fire Department buildings.
    Persons not members of the Fire Department are forbidden to meet or loiter in and around the buildings used by the Department, and the members permitting the same shall be liable to discharge. (Prior code § 9.08.010)

 

9.08.080 Turning water on goods or persons.
    Any member of the Fire Department who shall willfully turn a stream of water, or cause the same to be done, on any person or persons, or on any goods or other property susceptible to damage by water, except in case of imminent necessity, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, nor will any person whether a member of a Fire Department or not be allowed needlessly to handle the hose or hydrant of other fire apparatus in use. (Prior code § 9.08.030)

 

Chapter 9.10 ALARM SERVICES
9.10.010 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter:

    A.  “Alarm” means any signal to which the Police or Fire Department respond or are dispatched pursuant to notification.

    B.   “Alarm device” means any device that is designed or used to signal the occurrence of a burglary, robbery, other criminal offence, or fire. This term does not include an alarm affixed to an automobile.

    C.   “Alarm business” means any person that monitors, either directly or through subcontractors, signals from alarms, central alarm systems, direct dial alarm systems or other alarm systems and sources for compensation or other pecuniary benefit. An alarm business also includes any person that sells and/or installs alarms for compensation and thereafter provides monitoring services with respect to such alarms, with or without additional charges.

    D.  “Alarm site” means a single premises or location located within the City of Cañon City that is served by an alarm business. Each tenancy, if served by a separate alarm device in a multi-tenant building or complex, shall be considered a separate alarm site.

    E.   “Audible alarms” means an alarm which makes an audible sound but for which a monitoring or alarm business is not contracted for monitoring.

    F.   “Central alarm system” means any system used to receive signals from alarm devices that are monitored by an alarm business or a subcontractor of an alarm business.

    G.  “Direct dial alarm systems” means those alarms which, when triggered, dial any telephone number to which they are programmed to notify.

    H.  “False alarm” means any alarm unless:

    1.   Evidence exists to substantiate an attempted or forced entry to the premises;

    2.   Evidence exists to substantiate that the alarm was triggered by combustion or fire, lightning, or phone company maintenance or repair work;

    3.   Activated for testing, construction or maintenance purposes and the Police or Fire Department has been notified and given prior approval.

    I.    “Monitor” means the process by which an alarm business receives signals from alarm devices and relays a request to emergency service providers for the purpose of summoning public safety service providers to the alarm site.

    J.    “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation, limited liability corporation or other legal entity. (Ord. 24-2007 § 1)

 

9.10.020 Permits required—Application—Fees.
    A.  No person shall operate, maintain, serve or function as an alarm business or operate as a central alarm system monitoring service within the City without first obtaining an alarm monitoring permit issued by the City Clerk in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

    B.   An applicant for a permit under this chapter shall file an application with the City Clerk on forms supplied by that office containing all requested information, including, without limitation:

    1.   The name, address and emergency and non-emergency telephone numbers of the applicant;

    2.   The name, address and emergency and non-emergency telephone number(s) of the local operator(s) and/or responsible party(ies) of the alarm business (if different from Subsection (B)(1) of this section);

    3.   An individual history record and criminal record check for each individual applicant, all general partners of a partnership, and limited partners owning ten percent (10%) (or more) of a partnership; all officers and directors of a corporation, and stockholders of a corporation owning ten percent (10%) (or more) of the stock of such corporation; all limited liability company managing members, and officers or other limited liability company members with a ten percent (10%) (or more) ownership interest in such alarm business;

    4.   A list of any service contractors or subcontractors for such alarm business;

    5.   A certificate of insurance evidencing that the applicant is covered by comprehensive general liability insurance in amounts equal to or greater than those minimum coverage amounts specified by the City Administrator or designee for the type of license to be issued pursuant to this chapter. Such certificate shall provide that the City of Cañon City is named as an additional insured. All such insurance must be maintained and remain in full force and effect during the period for which the license will be issued. Each insurance certificate shall provide that the holder of the insurance policy and the City will be notified by the insurer not fewer than thirty (30) days prior to any material decrease in coverage or cancellation of the policy; and

    6.   An individual history record and criminal history record for every manager of the locally operating alarm business.

    C.   Permits shall be issued by the City Clerk for the calendar year or remainder thereof, upon payment in advance of a fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).

    D.  Following receipt of a properly completed application containing all requested information, the City Clerk shall forward all application materials to the Chief of Police for review. The City may conduct a background investigation of the applicant, and any individual identified in response to Subsection (B)(3) of this section to determine if they are of good moral character.

    E.   Upon approval of the application by the City Clerk and the Chief of Police, the City Clerk shall issue the permit.

    F.   A permit may be denied only upon a joint finding by the City Clerk and Chief of Police that:

    1.   The applicant or any person identified at Subsection (B)(3) of this section is not a person of good moral character;

    2.   The application contains a misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact;

    3.   The applicant had a similar permit revoked during the twelve (12) month period immediately preceding the date of the application;

    4.   The application is materially deficient;

    5.   The applicant has failed to pay when due fees with respect to false alarms that are provided for in this chapter.

    G.  Any denial made pursuant to Subsection F of this section shall be made in writing and contain the findings upon which the denial was based. Such a denial shall be appealable as an administrative decision in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 2.52 of this Code.

    H.  The City reserves the right to request additional information necessary to make a decision regarding the issuance of such permit. Such additional information may include, but is not limited to, experience in alarm business profession, a list of all employees along with additional background information on each employee, a list of all customers (within city limits) of the alarm business, and/or the specifications of the alarm system installed and a description of the methods by which monitoring is conducted.

    I.    Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may not be transferred to another person or company. (Ord. 33-2010 § 36; Ord. 24-2007 § 1)

 

9.10.025 Renewal.
    Renewals of the licenses provided for in this Chapter 9.10 shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5.66 of this Code. (Ord. 33-2010 § 37)

 

9.10.030 Permit—Revocation.
    A.  A permit granted pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by the joint decision of the City Clerk and the Chief of Police for violation of any provision of this chapter and/or of the rules and regulations if any, promulgated pursuant to Section 9.10.040. No revocation shall become effective until thirty (30) days after the date the notice of revocation is mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee’s address, as shown in the City’s files, or such notice is otherwise served upon the licensee.

    B.   Any decision to revoke a permit may be appealed to the City Administrator pursuant to Section 2.52.010(C) of this Code. Revocation shall be further stayed until the completion of the licensee’s appeal. (Ord. 18-2020 § 6)

 

9.10.040 Administration and enforcement.
    The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the City Clerk and the Chief of Police, jointly. They shall have the power to make and enforce such rules and regulations as may, in their discretion, be necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter, including rules and regulations regarding installation of central alarm systems. (Ord. 24-2007 § 1)

 

9.10.050 False alarm—Penalty—Payment of penalty.
    A.  Each alarm site at which a permittee provides monitoring services shall be liable to the City for false alarm charges in the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the fourth false alarm responded to by officers of the Cañon City Police Department during any calendar year at that alarm site, and fifty dollars ($50.00) for each false alarm in excess of four (4) during the same calendar year. There will be no false alarm charge for the first three (3) false alarms responded to by officers of the Cañon City Police Department at any one site in any calendar year.

    B.   All false alarm charges shall be paid to the Finance Department of the City within thirty (30) days of the notice date, and unpaid charges and portions thereof shall accrue interest at the rate of one and one-half percent per month thereafter. (Ord. 33-2010 § 38; Ord. 24-2007 § 1)

 

9.10.060 Intentional false alarms—Misdemeanor.
    Any person who intentionally activates or causes a false alarm, in addition to any penalties which may be imposed under this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 24-2007 § 1)

 

9.10.070 Direct dial systems.
    No person may install a direct dial alarm system coded to any telephone number without the permission of the person to whose telephone it is coded. (Ord. 24-2007 § 1)

 

9.10.080 Audible alarm requirements.
    Any person maintaining an audible alarm as part of a building alarm system shall post a notice stating the names and telephone numbers of the persons to be notified to render repair or service and to secure the premises if any alarm is activated. Such notice shall be posted near the alarm in a position legible from the ground outside the building where the alarm system is located. (Ord. 24-2007 § 1)

 

9.10.090 Violation—Misdemeanor—Administrative penalty.
    Penalties for violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter 9.10 shall be as provided in Chapter 5.66 of Title 5 of the Cañon City Municipal Code. (Ord. 33-2010 § 39; Ord. 24-2007 § 1)

Division II. Offenses Against the Person
Chapter 9.11 HARASSMENT—STALKING
9.11.010 Harassment.
    A.  A person commits harassment if, with intent to harass, annoy, or alarm another person, he or she:

    1.   Strikes, shoves, kicks, or otherwise touches a person or subjects him or her to physical contact; or

    2.   In a public place directs obscene language or makes an obscene gesture to or at another person; or

    3.   Follows a person in or about a public place; or

    4.   [No provision. Counterpart section of state statute was repealed.]

    5.   Initiates communication with a person, anonymously or otherwise by telephone, computer, computer network, or computer system in a manner intended to harass or threaten bodily injury or property damage, or makes any comment, request, suggestion, or proposal by telephone, computer, computer network, or computer system that is obscene; or

    6.   Makes a telephone call or causes a telephone to ring repeatedly, whether or not a conversation ensues, with no purpose of legitimate conversation; or

    7.   Makes repeated communications at inconvenient hours that invade the privacy of another and interfere in the use and enjoyment of another’s home or private residence or other private property; or

    8.   Repeatedly insults, taunts, challenges, or makes communications in offensively coarse language to, another in a manner likely to provoke a violent or disorderly response.

    B.   As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires, “obscene” means a patently offensive description of ultimate sexual acts or solicitation to commit ultimate sexual acts, whether or not such ultimate sexual acts are normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including masturbation, cunnilingus, fellatio, anilingus, or excretory functions.

    C.   Harassment pursuant to Subsection A of this section is a misdemeanor. Any person convicted of a violation of Subsection A shall be punished by a fine in an amount that does not exceed the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010.

    D.  Any act prohibited by Subsection (A)(5) of this section may be deemed to have occurred or to have been committed at the place at which the telephone call, electronic mail, or other electronic communication was either made or received. (Ord. 17-2013 § 31; Ord. 16-2003 § 1)

 

9.11.020 Stalking.
    A.  A person commits stalking if directly, or indirectly through another person, such person knowingly:

    1.   Makes a credible threat to another person and, in connection with such threat, repeatedly follows, approaches, contacts, or places under surveillance that person, a member of that person’s immediate family, or someone with whom that person has or has had a continuing relationship; or

    2.   Makes a credible threat to another person and, in connection with such threat, repeatedly makes any form of communication with that person, a member of that person’s immediate family, or someone with whom that person has or has had a continuing relationship, regardless of whether a conversation ensues; or

    3.   Repeatedly follows, approaches, contacts, places under surveillance, or makes any form of communication with another person, a member of that person’s immediate family, or someone with whom that person has or has had a continuing relationship in a manner that would cause a reasonable person to suffer serious emotional distress and does cause that person, a member of that person’s immediate family, or someone with whom that person has or has had a continuing relationship to suffer serious emotional distress. For purposes of this subparagraph (3), a victim need not show that he or she received professional treatment or counseling to show that he or she suffered serious emotional distress.

    B.   For the purposes of this section:

    1.   Conduct “in connection with” a credible threat means acts which further, advance, promote, or have a continuity of purpose, and may occur before, during, or after the credible threat;

    2.   “Credible threat” means a threat, physical action, or repeated conduct that would cause a reasonable person to be in fear for the person’s safety or the safety of his or her immediate family or of someone with whom the person has or has had a continuing relationship. Such threat need not be directly expressed if the totality of the conduct would cause a reasonable person such fear.

    3.   “Immediate family” includes the person’s spouse and the person’s parent, grandparent, sibling, or child; and

    4.   “Repeated” or “repeatedly” means on more than one occasion.

    C.   Stalking pursuant to Subsection A of this section is a misdemeanor. Any person convicted of a violation of Subsection A shall be punished by a fine in an amount that does not exceed the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010. (Ord. 17-2013 § 32; Ord. 16-2003 § 1)

Division III. Offenses Against Public Decency
Chapter 9.12 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
9.12.010 Definitions.
    For purposes of this Code:

    A.  “Fermented malt beverage” has the same meaning as its meaning under the Colorado Beer Code.

    B.   “Malt, vinous, and spirituous liquor” has the same meaning as its meaning under the Colorado Liquor Code. (Prior code § 9.28.010)

 

9.12.020 Alcoholic and fermented malt beverages—Public consumption unlawful when.
    A.  No person within the city limits shall possess an opened container of or consume any malt, vinous or spirituous liquor or fermented malt beverage in public, except upon premises licensed for consumption of the type of liquor or beverage involved.

    B.   For purposes of this section, “opened container” means any container other than an original closed container as sealed or closed for sale to the public by the manufacturer or bottler of the liquor or beverage. If an original container has been unsealed, undone or opened in any manner, it is an opened container for purposes of this section.

    C.   For purposes of this section, “in public” means:

    1.   In or upon any public highway, street, alley, sidewalk, parking lot, public building, park, or other public property or place, whether in a vehicle or not;

    2.   In or upon any other private property without the express or implied permission of the owner or person in possession and control of such property or such person’s agent.

    D.  It is a specific defense for any person accused of violating this section that the defendant was transporting the liquor or beverage from one place where it could be lawfully consumed directly and without delay to another such place, and the container was at all times during the transportation capped, corked or otherwise reclosed with a firmly affixed waterproof lid. When the liquor or beverage was being transported in a motor vehicle, this defense shall only be available if the container was in the trunk or was not otherwise immediately accessible to the driver or any passenger.

    E.   No person shall drive or sit in the driver’s seat of any motor vehicle, other than one carrying passengers for hire, in which a violation of Subsection A of this section is occurring. (Prior code § 9.28.020)

 

9.12.030 Minors—Unlawful activities designated—Exceptions.
    (Repealed, Ord. 10-1993 § 1. See Chapter 9.13.)

 

9.12.040 Minors—Possessing certain beverages unlawful.
    (Repealed, Ord. 10-1993 § 1. See Chapter 9.13.)

 

9.12.050 Violation—Penalty.
    Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter 9.12, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in an amount that does not exceed the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010. (Ord. 17-2013 § 33; Ord. 15-1993 § 1)

 

Chapter 9.13 ILLEGAL OBTAINING, POSSESSION AND CONSUMPTION OF ETHYL ALCOHOL BY UNDERAGE PERSONS
9.13.010 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:

    A.  “Establishment” means a business, firm, enterprise, service or fraternal organization, club, institution, entity, group, or residence, and any real property, including buildings and improvements, connected therewith, and shall also include any members, employees, and occupants associated therewith.

    B.   “Ethyl alcohol” means any substance which is or contains ethyl alcohol.

    C.   “Jurisdiction of the City” means any place within the corporate limits of the City of Cañon City and any place, property or land outside of the city limits which is owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the City, the use of which the City has jurisdiction and authority to regulate, including but not limited to Temple Canyon Park, Red Cañon Park, Royal Gorge Park and Skyline Drive.

    D.  “Possession of ethyl alcohol” means that a person has or holds any amount of ethyl alcohol anywhere on his or her person, or that a person owns or has custody of ethyl alcohol, or has ethyl alcohol within his or her immediate presence and control.

    E.   “Private property” means any dwelling and its curtilage which is being used by a natural person or natural persons for habitation and which is not open to the public and privately owned real property which is not open to the public. “Private property” shall not include:

    1.   Any establishment which has or is required to have a license pursuant to Article 3, 4, or 5 of Title 44, Colorado Revised Statutes, 2018 as amended; or

    2.   Any establishment which sells ethyl alcohol or upon which ethyl alcohol is sold; or

    3.   Any establishment which leases, rents, or provides accommodations to members of the public generally. (Ord. 3-2019 § 9; Ord. 10-1993 § 2)

 

9.13.020 Unlawful obtaining or attempting to obtain ethyl alcohol.
    It is unlawful for any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to obtain or attempt to obtain any ethyl alcohol by misrepresentation of age or by any other method in any place within the jurisdiction of the City where ethyl alcohol is sold. (Ord. 10-1993 § 2)

 

9.13.030 Unlawful possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol.
    A.  It is unlawful for any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to:

    1.   Possess any ethyl alcohol in any store, in any public place, including public streets, alleys, roads or highways within the jurisdiction of the city or inside vehicles while upon the public streets, alleys, roads or highways; or

    2.   Possess any ethyl alcohol anywhere in the jurisdiction of the city, other than those locations specified in paragraph (1) of Subsection A of this section; or

    3.   Consume ethyl alcohol anywhere in the jurisdiction of the city.

    B.   A violation of any provision of Subsection A of this section shall be a strict liability offense. It shall be an affirmative defense to the offenses described in Subsection A of this section that the ethyl alcohol was possessed or consumed by a person under twenty-one (21) years of age under the following circumstances:

    1.   When the existence of ethyl alcohol in a person’s body was due solely to the ingestion of a confectionery which contained ethyl alcohol within the limits prescribed by section 25-5-410(1)(i)(II), Colorado Revised Statutes, 1973 as amended, or the ingestion of any substance which was manufactured, designed, or intended primarily for a purpose other than oral human ingestion, or the ingestion of any substance which was manufactured, designed, or intended solely for medicinal or hygienic purposes, or solely from the ingestion of a beverage which contained less than one-half of one percent (0.5%) of ethyl alcohol by weight.

    C.   The possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol by a person under twenty-one (21) years of age with the consent of and in the presence of his or her parent or legal guardian, regardless of the place where such possession or consumption occurs, including the residence of such parent or guardian, shall not be a defense to the offense described in Subsection A of this section.

    D.  The possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol shall not constitute a violation of any provision of Subsection A if such possession or consumption takes place for religious purposes protected by the first amendment to the United States constitution.

    E.   Prima facie evidence of a violation of any provision of Subsection A of this section shall consist of:

    1.   Evidence that the defendant was under the age of twenty-one (21) years and possessed or consumed ethyl alcohol anywhere within the jurisdiction of the City; or

    2.   Evidence that the defendant was under the age of twenty-one (21) years and manifested any of the characteristics commonly associated with ethyl alcohol intoxication or impairment while present anywhere in the jurisdiction of the City of Cañon City.

    3.   During any trial for a violation of any provision of Subsection A of this section, any bottle, can, or any other container with labeling indicating the contents of such bottle, can, or container shall be admissible into evidence, and the information contained on any label on such bottle, can, or other container shall be admissible into evidence and shall not constitute hearsay. A jury or a judge, whichever is appropriate, may consider the information upon such label in determining whether the contents of the bottle, can, or other container were composed in whole or in part of ethyl alcohol. A label which identifies the contents of any bottle, can, or other container as “beer,” “ale,” “malt beverage,” “fermented malt beverage,” “malt liquor,” “wine,” “champagne,” “whiskey” or “whisky,” “gin,” “vodka,” “tequila,” “schnapps,” “brandy,” “cognac,” “liqueur,” “cordial,” “alcohol,” or “liquor” shall constitute prima facie evidence that the contents of the bottle, can, or other container was composed in whole or in part of ethyl alcohol.

    F.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit or preclude prosecution for any offense pursuant to any other provision of the Cañon City Municipal Code.

    G.  The qualitative result of an alcohol test or tests shall be admissible at the trial of any person charged with a violation of any provision of Subsection A of this section upon a showing that the device or devices used to conduct such test or tests have been approved as accurate in detecting alcohol by the Executive Director of the Department of Health of the State of Colorado.

    H.  Official records of the Department of Health relating to the certification of breath test instruments, certification of operators and operator instructors of breath test instruments, certification of standard solutions, and certification of laboratories are, pursuant to Article 13 of Title 18, Colorado Revised Statutes, 1973 as amended, official records of the State of Colorado and shall be recognized as such in any judicial proceeding concerning a charge under any provision of Subsection A of this section. Copies of such records, attested by the Executive Director of the Department of Health of the State of Colorado or deputy and accompanied by a certificate bearing the official seal for said Department, which state that the Executive Director of the Department has custody of such records, shall be admissible in all courts of record and shall constitute prima facie evidence of the information contained in such records. The official seal of the Department described in this Subsection H may consist of a rubber stamp producing a facsimile of the seal stamped upon the document.

    I.    In any judicial proceeding in the Cañon City Municipal Court or in any court of this state concerning a charge under any provision of Subsection A of this section, the court shall take judicial notice of methods of testing a person’s blood, breath, saliva, or urine for the presence of alcohol and of the design and operation of devices certified by the Department of Health for testing a person’s blood, breath, saliva, or urine for the presence of alcohol. This Subsection I shall not prevent the necessity of establishing during a trial that the testing devices were working properly and that such testing devices were properly operated. Nothing in this Subsection I shall preclude a defendant from offering evidence concerning the accuracy of testing devices.

    J.    No law enforcement officer shall enter upon any private property to investigate any violation of this section without probable cause. (Ord. 10-1993 § 2)

 

9.13.040 Penalties.
    A.  Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). The court shall have no discretion to suspend any portion of any fine imposed pursuant to this section below the minimum provided for herein. The court, upon sentencing a defendant pursuant to this section may, in addition to any fine, order that the defendant perform not more than forty-eight (48) hours of useful public service, subject to the conditions and restrictions of Section 18-1.3-507, C.R.S. Upon conviction, the court shall further order that the defendant submit to and complete an alcohol evaluation or assessment, an alcohol education program, or an alcohol treatment program, at such defendant’s own expense, to be performed by a person or entity specified or approved by the court. Objections to any education program or treatment program recommended by an alcohol evaluator shall be dealt with by the court in the same manner as is provided for at Subsection 9.13.050(B)(4).

    B.   Surrender of License, Notice of Conviction.

    1.   Consistent with Sections 42-2-124 and 42-2-125, C.R.S., the court shall require an offender to immediately surrender his or her instruction permit, driver’s, minor driver’s, or provisional driver’s license if convicted of: (a) violating Section 9.13.020 or Subsection 9.13.030(A)(l) and having failed to complete an alcohol evaluation or assessment, an alcohol education program, or an alcohol treatment program ordered by the court in connection with such conviction; or (b) violating Section 9.13.020 or Subsection 9.13.030(A)(l) subsequent to a previous conviction for such offenses.

    2.   Consistent with Section 42-2-124, C.R.S., the court shall forward to the Colorado Department of Revenue a notice of conviction, together with the offender’s license or permit, as the case may be, not later than ten (10) days after the conviction for which surrender is required becomes final.

    3.   It is unlawful for any person to fail to surrender his or her permit or license to the court upon sentencing with respect to a plea of guilty or no contest, or verdict of guilty to a violation specified in Subsection 9.13.040(B)(1) above.

    C.   Declaration as to Intent.

    1.   It is hereby declared that a final finding of guilty of a violation of Section 9.13.020 or of Subsection 9.13.030(A)(l) is a “conviction” within the meaning of Section 42-2-124(3), C.R.S.

    2.   It is further declared that a violation of Section 9.13.020 is substantially equivalent to the offense described at Section 44-3-901(1)(b), C.R.S., as amended, depending upon the characteristics of the ethyl alcohol involved in the offense.

    3.   It is further declared that a violation of Section 9.13.030(A)(l) is substantially equivalent to the offense described at Section 44-3-901(1)(c), C.R.S., as amended, or the offense described at Section 44-3-901(1)(c), C.R.S., as amended, depending upon the characteristics of the ethyl alcohol.

    D.  Whenever the court requires that a person complete any amount of public service pursuant to Subsection A of this section, the court shall also impose upon that person, in addition to any other fine, cost or penalty, a public service fee in an amount set by resolution of the City Council. Such public service fee may be payable directly to the court or, upon order of court, to a Colorado non-profit corporation organized for purposes of establishing, managing and monitoring the performance of court-ordered useful public service.

    E.   Consistent with Section 18-13-122(4)(e), C.R.S., a person convicted of a violation of this chapter is subject to an additional penalty surcharge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), which may be waived by the court upon a showing of indigency, that shall be transferred to the State Treasurer and credited to the adolescent substance abuse prevention and treatment fund. (Ord. 3-2019 § 10; Ord. 24-2018 § 1)

 

9.13.050 Deferred sentence and judgment.
    A.  In certain limited circumstances the court may order and grant a deferred judgment and sentence for any violation of any provision of this chapter, subject to the conditions, restrictions and requirements set forth in this section. Any order granting deferred sentence and judgment shall incorporate (by reference or otherwise) into its terms the defendant’s agreements and promises, as set forth in the agreement provided for at Subsection B of this section, and may contain such additional terms as the court may impose as conditions precedent to the entry of the order.

    B.   No order granting a deferred sentence and judgment shall enter unless the defendant has read and signed a written agreement containing at least the following:

    1.   The defendant’s statement that he or she was under the age of nineteen (19) years at the time of the commission of the offense charged in the summons and complaint.

    2.   The defendant’s statement that the defendant had not previously been convicted and had not previously been granted a deferred prosecution or deferred sentence and judgment with respect to a violation of Section 9.13.020 or of any provision of Section 9.13.030(A) or of Chapter 9.12 of the Cañon City Municipal Code, or of any ordinance of another municipality prohibiting attempts to purchase, possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol by an underage person, or of Section 18-13-122, Colorado Revised Statutes, 1973, as amended and as said section may later be amended (concerning illegal possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol by an underage person).

    3.   The defendant’s agreement and promise that the defendant, at the defendant’s own expense, on or before a date to be specified in the court’s order, will submit to an alcohol evaluation or assessment to be performed by a person or entity specified or approved by the court.

    4.   The defendant’s agreement and promise that, following such evaluation or assessment, the defendant, at the defendant’s own expense, will participate in and complete an alcohol education program or an alcohol treatment program, as and within the time recommended by the person or entity performing the evaluation or assessment, provided however that the defendant may request a hearing before the court, within ten (10) days following the court’s receipt of any report containing such recommendations from the alcohol evaluator, if the defendant objects to the education or treatment program recommended in the report. The defendant shall deliver or arrange for the delivery of a written report and recommendations of the alcohol evaluator to the court within ten (10) days of its completion. If such hearing is requested by the defendant, the court shall conduct a hearing and shall have the discretion to order the defendant to complete such alcohol education or treatment program as to it seems most appropriate for the defendant, after having considered the report and such evidence and statements as may be presented at the hearing.

    5.   The defendant’s agreement and promise to complete twenty-four (24) hours of useful public service and to pay a public service fee equal in an amount equal to the useful public service fee which may be ordered upon a conviction of a violation of this chapter.

    6.   The defendant’s agreement and promise that the defendant will surrender to the court the defendant’s instruction permit, minor driver’s license, provisional driver’s license or driver’s license immediately upon entry of the court’s order granting the deferred sentence and judgment, which license shall be held by the court for not fewer than thirty (30) days nor more than ninety (90) days, at the discretion of the court, and defendant’s further agreement and promise that said defendant will not drive or otherwise operate a motor vehicle at any place within the State of Colorado during the period the court is holding the defendant’s permit or license.

    7.   The defendant’s agreement and promise to pay an administrative fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), a victim’s assistance surcharge of ten dollars ($10.00) and court costs of fifteen dollars ($15.00), on or before a date specified in the agreement.

    8.   The defendant’s agreement and promise to abide by all other terms and conditions as may be set forth in the agreement.

    C.   Except in cases where the court finds that the defendant is fully emancipated, no agreement providing for deferred sentence and judgment shall be considered by the court unless such agreement has also been read and signed by the defendant’s parent, legal guardian or legal custodian and, if the defendant is represented by legal counsel, the defendant’s attorney.

    D.  No deferred sentence and judgment shall be granted unless the defendant shall have first tendered to the court a knowing and voluntary plea of guilty to the offense charged in the summons and complaint. Such plea shall be withdrawn only upon the defendant’s successful completion of all terms and conditions of the order granting deferred sentence and judgment.

    E.   Any order granting deferred sentence and judgment pursuant to this section may be revoked by the court upon the motion of the City Attorney or his or her deputy, pursuant to notice and hearing, if:

    1.   The court finds that the defendant violated any of the terms and conditions set forth in the order, or

    2.   If it is proven that any of the defendant’s statements set forth in the agreement relating to the absence of prior convictions or prior deferred sentencing or prosecution agreements was materially false as of the date the agreement was signed.

    F.   If any order granting deferred sentence and judgment is revoked by the court, the court shall enter judgment of conviction against the defendant and impose such penalties as are provided for at Section 9.13.040. The fact that the defendant was found to have violated the order granting deferred sentence and judgment and the nature of the violation may be considered by the court upon sentencing, but in no event shall the fine imposed be less than the applicable minimum fine provided for at Section 9.13.040. (Ord. 10-1993 § 2)

 

Chapter 9.16 URINATION AND DEFECATION
9.16.010 Public urination and defecation unlawful.
    No person shall, in this city, urinate or defecate upon any public place, or place within public view, other than in the toilet facility provided for such purpose. A “public place” is a place to which the public or a substantial number of the public has access, and includes streets, schools, places of amusement, parks, playgrounds, and the common areas of public and private buildings and facilities. A “place within public view” is any place where conduct by a person reasonably may be expected to be open to view by members of the public. (Prior code § 9.30.010)

 

9.16.020 Violation—Penalty.
    Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter 9.16, or suffers or allows the same to be violated, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in an amount that does not exceed the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010. (Ord. 17-2013 § 34; Ord. 15-1993 § 1)

Division IV. Offenses Against the Peace
Chapter 9.20 DISTURBING THE PEACE
9.20.010 Forming a group to do violence.
    Each and every one of any two (2) or more persons who comes together in this city for the purpose of doing any unlawful act, with force or violence, against the property of this city, or against the person or property of another, or against the peace, or to the terror of others, or who, being together, in concert, make any movement or preparation therefor, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 9.48.010)

 

9.20.020 Instigating riots or fights.
    Any person who shall, in this city, cause, engage in (except in self-defense or justifiably in defense of another), instigate or encourage any riot, rout, affray or fight, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 9.48.020)

 

9.20.030 Disorderly conduct.
    A person commits disorderly conduct if he or she intentionally, knowingly or recklessly:

    A.  Makes a course and obviously offensive utterance, gesture or display in a public place, and the utterance, gesture or display tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace;

    B.   Makes unreasonable noise in a public place or near a private residence that he or she has no right to occupy; or

    C.   Permits any of the above enumerated conduct in or upon any house, building or premises in the city, owned or possessed by him or her or under his or her management or control, so that others in the vicinity shall be disturbed thereby. (Ord. 19-2003 § 3; prior code § 9.48.030)

 

9.20.040 Disturbing lawful assemblies.
    Any person who, in this city, intentionally disturbs any lawful assemblage of people, other than the kind specified in Section 9.20.050, by rude or indecent behavior, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 21-1987 § 13; prior code § 9.48.060)

 

9.20.050 Disturbing religious worship.
    Any person who, in this city, intentionally disturbs any congregation or assembly met for religious worship, by making a noise or by rude or indecent behavior or profane discourse, within their place of worship or so near the same as to disturb the order or solemnity of the meeting, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 21-1987 § 12; prior code § 9.48.050)

 

9.20.060 Encouraging animals to fight.
    Any person who shall cause, instigate or encourage a dogfight, or a fight between animals of any kind, in any public place or private place in this city, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 9.48.070)

 

9.20.070 Purpose of Sections 9.20.080 through 9.20.090.
    It is found and declared that:

    A.  The making and creation of loud, unnecessary or unusual noises within the limits of the city is a condition which has existed for some time and the extent and volume of such noises is increasing;

    B.   The making, creation or maintenance of such loud, unnecessary, unnatural or unusual noises which are prolonged, unusual and unnatural in their time, place and use affect and are a detriment to public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity of the residents of the City;

    C.   The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted, is declared as a matter of legislative determination and public policy, and it is further declared that the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained in Sections 9.20.080 through 9.20.090 and enacted are in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare, and prosperity, and the peace and quiet of the City and its inhabitants. (Prior code § 9.48.080)

 

9.20.080 Certain noises unlawful.
    It is unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise, or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of any person within the limits of the city. (Prior code § 9.48.090)

 

9.20.090 Horns and loudspeakers prohibited.
    The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noises in violation of Sections 9.20.080 through 9.20.100, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely;

    A.  Horns, Signaling Devices.

    1.   The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place of the City, except as a danger warning;

    2.   The creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound;

    3.   The sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time;

    4.   The use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity;

    5.   The use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and

    6.   The use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up.

    B.   Loudspeakers, Amplifiers for Advertising.

    1.   The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public between the hours to ten p.m. to seven a.m. (Prior code § 9.48.100)

 

9.20.100 Violation—Penalty.
    Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter 9.20, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in an amount that does not exceed the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010. (Ord. 17-2013 § 35; Ord. 15-1993 § 1)

 

Chapter 9.21 PUBLIC BUILDINGS
9.21.010 Public buildings—Trespass, interference—Penalty.
    A.  No person shall so conduct him or her self at or in any public building owned, operated, or controlled by the City, the State, or any of the political subdivisions of the State or at any building owned, operated, or controlled by the federal government as to wilfully deny to any public official, public employee, or invitee on such premises the lawful rights of such official, employee, or invitee to enter, to use the facilities of, or to leave any such public building.

    B.   No person shall, at or in any such public building, wilfully impede any public official or employee in the lawful performance of duties or activities through the use of restraint, abduction, coercion, or intimidation or by force and violence or threat thereof.

    C.   No person shall wilfully refuse or fail to leave any such public building upon being requested to do so by the chief administrative officer or designee charged with maintaining order in such public building, if the person has committed, is committing, threatens to commit, or incites others to commit any act which did, or would if completed, disrupt, impair, interfere with, or obstruct the lawful missions, processes, procedures, or functions being carried on in the public building.

    D.  No person shall, at any meeting or session conducted by any judicial, legislative, or administrative body or official at or in any public building, wilfully impede, disrupt, or hinder the normal proceedings of such meeting or session by any act of intrusion into the chamber or other areas designated for the use of the body or official conducting the meeting or session or by any act designed to intimidate, coerce, or hinder any member of such body or official engaged in the performance of duties at such meeting or session.

    E.   No person shall, by any act of intrusion into the chamber or other areas designated for the use of any executive body or official at or in any public building, wilfully impede, disrupt, or hinder the normal proceedings of such body or official.

    F.   The term “public building,” as used in this section, means and includes any public building described or otherwise referred to in Subsection A of this section and any premises being temporarily used by a public officer or employee in the discharge of his or her official duties.

    G.  It shall be an affirmative defense that the defendant was exercising his or her right to lawful assembly and peaceful and orderly petition for the redress of grievances, including any labor dispute between the City and its employees, and contractor or subcontractor or any employee thereof.

    H.  Any person who violates any provision of this section, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in an amount that does not exceed the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010. (Ord. 17-2013 § 36; Ord. 16-2003 § 2)

 

Chapter 9.22 UNLAWFUL CONDUCT ON PUBLIC PROPERTY OF THE CITY
9.22.010 Unlawful conduct on public property of the City.
    A.  It is unlawful for any person to enter or remain in any public building owned, operated or controlled by the City or on any public property owned, operated or controlled by the City or to conduct him or herself in or on the same in violation of any order, rule, or regulation concerning any matter prescribed in this Subsection A, limiting or prohibiting the use or activities or conduct in such public building or on such public property, issued by the City Council, the City Administrator or any other official of the City designated by City Council by ordinance or resolution and having the power of control, management, or supervision of the building or property. In addition to any authority granted by any other law, City Council, the City Administrator or any other official designated by City Council under this subsection may adopt such orders, rules, or regulations as are reasonably necessary for the administration, protection, and maintenance of such public buildings and property, specifically, orders, rules, and regulations upon the following matters:

    1.   Preservation of property, vegetation, wildlife, signs, markers, statues, buildings and grounds, and other structures, and any object of scientific, historical, or scenic interest;

    2.   Restriction or limitation of the use of such public buildings or property as to time, manner, or permitted activities;

    3.   Prohibition of activities or conduct within public buildings or on public property which may be reasonably expected to substantially interfere with the use and enjoyment of such places by others or which may constitute a general nuisance;

    4.   Necessary sanitation, health, and safety measures, consistent with the ordinances and published rules and regulations of the City;

    5.   Camping and picnicking, public meetings and assemblages, and other individual or group usages, including the place, time, and manner in which such activities may be permitted;

    6.   Use of all vehicles as to place, time, and manner of use;

    7.   Control and limitation of fires, including, but not limited to, the prohibition, restriction, or ban on fires or other regulation of fires to avert the start of or lessen the likelihood of wildfire, and the designation of places where fires are permitted, restricted, prohibited, or banned.

    B.   No conviction may be obtained under this section unless notice of such limitations or prohibitions is prominently posted at all public entrances to such building or property or unless such notice is actually first given the person by the City Administrator, by any other official designated by City Council under Subsection A of this section, or by any law enforcement officer of the City.

    C.   All officers of the Cañon City Police Department shall have the authority to communicate to any person the terms of any orders, rules or regulations adopted pursuant to Subsection A of this section and the additional authority to enforce Subsection A and all orders, rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Subsection A by removing any violator from the public building or public place where the violation occurred and by issuing and serving upon such violator a summons and complaint or such other charging documents as are appropriate.

    D.  Any person who violates Subsection A of this section, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in an amount that does not exceed the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010. (Ord. 17-2013 § 37; Ord. 16-2003 § 3)

 

9.22.020 Obstruction of public places.
    A.  Purpose. The City Council finds and determines that intentionally blocking, obstructing or interfering with the safe or free passage of a pedestrian or vehicle by any means where pedestrians and traffic are present, including unreasonably causing a pedestrian or vehicle operator to take evasive action to avoid contact is a public safety concern without regard to the speech of the individual who is intentionally blocking, obstructing or interfering with the safe or free passage of a pedestrian or vehicle, and that such conduct should be regulated to address the public safety concerns caused by individuals taking evasive action to avoid such contact.

    B.   Definitions.

    “Obstruct” shall mean to walk, stand, sit, lie, or place an object in such a manner as to hinder or slow progress, to retard progress, to make accomplishment of obtaining a goal slower or more difficult, or to impede another person or vehicle, or to require another person or a driver of a vehicle to take evasive action to avoid physical contact. Acts authorized as an exercise of one’s constitutional right to picket or legally protest, or acts authorized by permit issued by the City shall not constitute obstruction.

    C.   Prohibited Acts.

    1.   It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, either alone or in consort with others:

    a.   Any portion of any street or highway located between the sidewalks or between the curbs, or on any portion of the vehicular-traveled portion of any street, highway, or alley which does not have abutting sidewalks or curbs, in such a manner that hinders or impedes the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles;

    b.   Any sidewalk in such a manner that hinders or impedes the free and uninterrupted passage of pedestrians;

    c.   Any portion of any City trail in a manner which hinders or impedes the free and uninterrupted passage of pedestrians or City staff performing trail maintenance; or

    d.   Any portion of a City park or other City property in manner which hinders or impedes the ability of City staff to perform maintenance of or similar actions in such areas and after City staff has made a request that the individual relocate while staff conducts maintenance or actions referred to herein.

    D.  Affirmative Defense.

    1.   It is an affirmative defense to a violation of this section that a person:

    a.   Stands, sits, kneels, reclines or lies down due to a medical emergency.

    b.   As a result of a medically confirmable disability, utilizes a wheelchair, walker or other similar mobility supporting device to move.

    c.   Operating or patronizing a commercial establishment or vending cart, or carrying out other activities pursuant to a license, permit, or other authorization.

    d.   Stands, sits or kneels when attending a parade, festival, performance, rally, demonstration, meeting or similar special event conducted in the public right-of-way pursuant to any permit or license issued by the City.

    e.   Sits upon an object intended for sitting furnished by the City or by any other public agency. This defense shall not apply to requests made by City staff under subsection (C)(1)(d) of this section.

    f.    Sits upon a public sidewalk at or near a transit stop while waiting for public transportation.

    2.   No law enforcement officer shall issue a citation, make an arrest, or otherwise enforce this section against any person unless the person engages in conduct prohibited by this section after having first been notified by a law enforcement officer that the conduct violates this section.

    E.   When law enforcement has frequent and consistent contact with a person violating this section, the officer should attempt to ascertain whether the person is in need of medical or human services assistance, including, but not limited to, mental health treatment, drug or alcohol rehabilitation, or homeless services assistance. If the officer determines that the person may be in need of medical or human services assistance, the officer should make reasonable efforts to contact and obtain the assistance of a designated human service outreach worker, who in turn shall assess the needs of the person and, if warranted, direct the person to an appropriate provider of medical or human services assistance in lieu of the person being cited or arrested for a violation of this section. If the officer is unable to obtain the assistance of a human services outreach worker, if the human services outreach worker determines that the person is not in need of medical or human services assistance, or if the person refuses to cooperate with the direction of the human services outreach worker, the officer may proceed to cite or arrest the person for a violation of this section.

    F.   Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this section, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in an amount that does not exceed the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010. (Ord. 24-2019 § 1)

 

9.22.030 Camping on public property.
    A.  Camping within any parkway, recreation area, park or other City property is prohibited, except as permitted under Sections 9.44.060 and 9.44.065 of the Code.

    B.   For purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:

    1.   Camping shall mean to reside or dwell temporarily in a place and conduct activities of daily living, such as eating or sleeping, in such place or establishing or constructing a shelter. The term does not include napping during the day or picnicking. The phrase during the day means from one hour after sunrise until sunset.

    2.   Shelter includes, without limitation, any tent, tarpaulin, lean-to, sleeping bag, bedroll, blankets, or any form of cover or protection from the elements other than clothing.

    3.   Reside or dwell includes, without limitation, conducting such activities as eating, sleeping, or the storage of personal possessions.

    C.   No officers of the City of Cañon City Police Department shall issue a citation, make an arrest or otherwise enforce this section against any person unless the officer orally requests or orders the person to refrain from the alleged violation of this section and, if the person fails to comply after receiving the oral request or order, the officer tenders a written request or order to the person warning that if the person fails to comply the person may be cited or arrested for a violation of this section.

    D.  When possible, the officer should attempt to ascertain whether the person is in need of medical or human services assistance, including, but not limited to, mental health treatment, drug or alcohol rehabilitation, or homeless services assistance. If the officer determines that the person may be in need of medical or human services assistance, the officer should make reasonable efforts to contact and obtain the assistance of a designated human service outreach worker, who in turn shall assess the needs of the person and, if warranted, direct the person to an appropriate provider of medical or human services assistance in lieu of the person being cited or arrested for a violation of this section. If the officer is unable to obtain the assistance of a human services outreach worker, if the human services outreach worker determines that the person is not in need of medical or human services assistance, or if the person refuses to cooperate with the direction of the human services outreach worker, the officer may proceed to cite or arrest the person for a violation of this section so long as the warnings required by subsection C of this section have been previously given.

    E.   Cleanup of Unauthorized Camping Sites. Upon violation of this section, officers may remove and store all unclaimed personal property found at an unauthorized camping site. Illegal items, such as illicit drugs and any items that reasonably appear to be evidence of a crime, will be turned over to the appropriate law enforcement agency. Any items otherwise not regarded as having apparent utility or that are in an unsanitary condition will be immediately discarded. Removal of personal property under this section shall be executed pursuant to the following procedure:

    1.   At least seventy-two (72) hours prior to the proposed cleanup date, the City will post a notice stating the date and time of the cleanup. The notice will be posted in the general vicinity of the personal property to be removed.

    2.   In the event of the existence of a condition posing an imminent danger of damage or injury to or loss of life, limb, property or health, the City may take immediate action to clean up without notice but under no circumstances may a clean up under this section occur more than twenty-four (24) hours after the discovery of the site by law enforcement.

    3.   Personal property removed from illegal camp sites shall be stored in a secure location and shall be held for a period of at least thirty (30) days from the date the cleanup occurred.

    4.   An individual may claim ownership of an item of personal property within thirty (30) days from the last date that the cleanup occurred. The City will not return items such as tobacco, alcohol, or marijuana or products containing tobacco, alcohol, and/or marijuana, and will dispose of such products in accordance with its Cañon City Police Department policies and procedures for the disposal of illicit substances.

    5.   After the thirty (30) day storage period elapses, unclaimed personal property will be disposed of by either discarding, recycling, or otherwise disposing of such items as determined by the Chief of Police. (Ord. 25-2019 § 1)

 

Chapter 9.23 SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES
9.23.010 Definitions.
    As used in this Chapter 9.23, unless the context otherwise requires:

    A.  “Airport smoking concession” means a bar or restaurant, or both, in a public airport with regularly scheduled domestic and international commercial passenger flights, in which bar or restaurant smoking is allowed in a fully enclosed and independently ventilated area by the terms of the concession.

    B.   “Auditorium” means the part of a public building where an audience gathers to attend a performance, and includes any corridors, hallways, or lobbies adjacent thereto.

    C.   “Bar” means any indoor area that is operated and licensed under Article 47 of Title 12, C.R.S., primarily for the sale and service of alcohol beverages for on-premises consumption and where the service of food is secondary to the consumption of such beverages.

    D.  “Cigar-tobacco bar” means a bar that, in the calendar year ending December 31, 2005, generated at least five percent (5%) or more of its total annual gross income or fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) in annual sales from the on-site sale of tobacco and/or nicotine products and the rental of on-site humidors, not including any sales from vending machines. In any calendar year after December 31, 2005, a bar that fails to generate at least five percent (5%) of its total annual gross income or fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) in annual sales from the on-site sale of tobacco and/or nicotine products and the rental of on-site humidors shall not be defined as a “cigar-tobacco bar” and shall not thereafter be included in the definition regardless of sales figures.

    E.   “Electronic smoking device” means an electric or battery-operated device, the use of which resembles conventional smoking, which can be used to deliver substances, including without limitation nicotine, tobacco, or marijuana, to the person using such device. Electronic smoking device includes without limitation an electronic cigarette, cigar, cigarillo, pipe, or hookah, but does not include any product approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration as a drug or medical device that is used in accordance with its purpose.

    F.   “Employee” means any person who:

    1.   Performs any type of work for the benefit of another in consideration of direct or indirect wages or profit; or

    2.   Provides uncompensated work or services to a business or nonprofit entity.

    G.  “Employee” includes every person described in paragraph E, regardless of whether such person is referred to as an employee, contractor, independent contractor, or volunteer or by any other designation or title.

    H.  “Employer” means any person, partnership, association, corporation, or nonprofit entity that employs one or more persons. “Employer” includes, without limitation, the legislative, executive, and judicial branches of state government; any county, city and county, city, or town, or instrumentality thereof, or any other political subdivision of the state, special district, authority, commission, or agency; or any other separate corporate instrumentality or unit of state or local government.

    I.    “Entryway” means the outside of the front or main doorway leading into a building or facility that is not exempted from this chapter under Section 9.23.030. “Entryway” also includes the area of public or private property within a fifteen (15) foot radius outside of such front or main doorway.

    J.    “Environmental tobacco smoke,” “ETS,” or “secondhand smoke” means the complex mixture formed from the escaping smoke of a burning tobacco product, also known as “sidestream smoke,” and smoke exhaled by the smoker.

    K.  “Food service establishment” means any indoor area or portion thereof in which the principal business is the sale of food for on-premises consumption. The term includes, without limitation, restaurants, cafeterias, coffee shops, diners, sandwich shops, and short-order cafés.

    L.   “Indoor area” means any enclosed area or portion thereof. The opening of windows or doors, or the temporary removal of wall panels, does not convert an indoor area into an outdoor area.

    M.  “Local authority” means the City of Cañon City.

    N.  “Marijuana” shall have the same meaning as in Section 16(2)(f) of Article XVIII of the State Constitution.

    O.  “Nicotine product” means an electronic smoking device or any component thereof that can be used to deliver nicotine to the person inhaling from the device, including, without limitation, an electronic cigarette, cigar, cigarillo, hookah, pipe or nicotine vaporizer; and nicotine or other chemical liquids, extracts, and oils intended to be used therein.

    P.   “Park” means an area of land set aside for public use that is owned, controlled or used by the City, with or without facilities, for rest or recreational purposes, regardless of any age or fee requirement. The term “park” does not include city-owned open space or natural lands, including soft surface trails.

    Q.  “Picnic area” means any covered area within a park owned or operated by the city for dining, seating or other forms of entertainment pursuant to park rules and regulations, including but not limited to, pavilions and shelters.

    R.   “Place of employment” means any indoor area or portion thereof under the control of an employer in which employees of the employer perform services for, or on behalf of, the employer.

    S.   “Playground” means the area within a park owned or operated by the City containing equipment or facilities designed for children’s play.

    T.   “Public building” means any building owned or operated by:

    1.   The state, including the legislative, executive, and judicial branches of state government;

 

    2.   Any county, city and county, city, or town, or instrumentality thereof, or any other political subdivision of the state, a special district, an authority, a commission, or an agency; or

    3.   Any other separate corporate instrumentality or unit of state or local government.

    U.  “Public meeting” means any meeting open to the public pursuant to Part 4 of Article 6 of Title 24, C.R.S., or any other law of this state.

    V.  “Recreational facility” means any area that is owned, controlled or used by the City that is open to the general public for recreational purposes, regardless of any age or fee requirement, including, but not limited to, athletic fields, basketball courts, batting cages, BMX tracks, community gardens, community pools, dog parks, ice skating rinks, restrooms, skateboard parks, ski and sledding hills, and spectator and concession areas.

    W.  “Smoke-free work area” means an indoor area in a place of employment where smoking is prohibited under this chapter.

    X.  “Smoking” means the lighting of any cigarette, cigar, pipe, or the activation of an electronic smoking device, or the possession of any lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe or activated electronic smoking device, regardless of its composition. Smoking shall include the lighting of any cigarette, cigar, pipe, or the activation of an electronic smoking device containing marijuana.

    Y.  “Tobacco” means cigarettes, cigars, cheroots, stogies, and periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed, and other smoking tobacco; snuff and snuff flour; Cavendish; plus and twist tobacco; fine-cut and other chewing tobacco; shorts, refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings, and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco, prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing or for smoking in a cigarette, pipe, or otherwise, or both for chewing and smoking. “Tobacco” also includes cloves and any other plant matter or product that is packaged for smoking.

    Z.   “Tobacco business” means a sole proprietorship, corporation, partnership, or other enterprise engaged primarily in the sale, manufacture, or promotion of tobacco, tobacco products, nicotine products or smoking devices or accessories, either at wholesale or retail, and in which the sale, manufacture, or promotion of other products is merely incidental.

    AA. “Work area” means an area in a place of employment where one or more employees are routinely assigned and perform services for or on behalf of their employer. (Ord. 12-2019 § 4)

 

9.23.020 General smoking restrictions.
    A.  Except as provided in Section 9.23.030 of this chapter, and in order to reduce the levels of exposure to environmental tobacco, vapors and marijuana smoke, smoking shall not be permitted and no person shall smoke in any indoor area, including, but not limited to:

    1.   Public meeting places;

    2.   Elevators;

    3.   Government-owned or -operated means of mass transportation, including, but not limited to, buses, vans, and trains;

    4.   Taxicabs and limousines;

    5.   Grocery stores;

    6.   Gymnasiums;

    7.   Jury waiting and deliberation rooms;

    8.   Courtrooms;

    9.   Child day care facilities;

    10. Health care facilities including hospitals, health care clinics, doctor’s offices, and other health care related facilities;

    11. (a) Any place of employment that is not exempted.

    (b)  In the case of employers who own facilities otherwise exempted from this chapter, each such employer shall provide a smoke-free work area for each employee requesting not to have to breathe environmental tobacco smoke or vapors expelled from electronic smoking devices. Every employee shall have a right to work in an area free of environmental tobacco smoke and vapors.

    12. Food service establishments;

    13. Bars;

    14. Limited gaming facilities and any other facilities in which any gaming or gambling activity is conducted;

    15. Indoor sports arenas;

    16. Restrooms, lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in public and private buildings, condominiums, and other multiple-unit residential facilities;

    17. Restrooms, lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in hotels and motels, and in at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the sleeping quarters within a hotel or motel that are rented to guests;

    18. Bowling alleys;

    19. Billiard or pool halls;

    20. Facilities in which games of chance are conducted;

    21. The common areas of retirement facilities, publicly owned housing facilities, and, except as specified in Subsection 9.23.030(A)(10) of this chapter, nursing homes, but not including any resident’s private residential quarters or areas of assisted living facilities specified in Subsection 9.23.030(A)(10) of this chapter. Nothing in this chapter affects the validity or enforceability of a contract, whether entered into before, on, or after July 1, 2006, that specifies that a part or all of a facility or home specified in this paragraph 21 is a smoke-free area.

    22. Public buildings;

    23. Auditoria;

    24. Theaters;

    25. Museums;

    26. Libraries;

    27. To the extent not otherwise provided in Section 25-14-103.5, C.R.S., public and nonpublic schools;

    28. Other educational and vocational institutions; and

    29. The entryways of all buildings and facilities listed in paragraphs 1 to 28 of this Subsection A.

    B.   A cigar-tobacco bar shall not expand its size or change its location from the size and location in which it existed as of December 31, 2005. A cigar-tobacco bar shall display signage in at least one conspicuous place and at least four (4) inches by six (6) inches in size stating: “Smoking allowed. Children under eighteen (18) years of age must be accompanied by a parent or guardian.”

    C.   Smoking is not permitted in public parks within one hundred (100) feet of any playground or recreational facilities. Signs designating these smoking restrictions shall be posted adjacent to playgrounds and recreational facilities. (Ord. 12-2019 § 4)

 

9.23.030 Exceptions to smoking restrictions.
    A.  The restrictions set forth in this chapter shall not apply to:

    1.   Private homes, private residences, and private automobiles; except that this chapter shall apply if any such home, residence, or vehicle is being used for child care or day care or if a private vehicle is being used for the public transportation of children or as part of health care or day care transportation;

    2.   Limousines under private hire;

    3.   A hotel or motel room rented to one or more guests if the total percentage of such hotel or motel rooms in such hotel or motel does not exceed twenty-five percent (25%);

    4.   Any retail tobacco business;

    5.   A cigar-tobacco bar;

    6.   An airport smoking concession;

    7.   The outdoor area of any business other than the entryway area of such business and the entryways of adjoining nonexempt properties on either side of such businesses;

    8.   A place of employment that is not open to the public and that is under the control of an employer that employs three or fewer employees;

    9.   A private, nonresidential building on a farm or ranch, as defined in Section 39-1-102, C.R.S., that has annual gross income of less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000); or

    10. The areas of assisted living facilities: a) that are designated for smoking for residents; b) that are fully enclosed and ventilated; and c) to which access is restricted to the residents or their guests. As used in this paragraph, “assisted living facility” means a nursing facility, as that term is defined in Section 25.5-4-103, C.R.S., and an assisted living residence, as that term is defined in Section 25-27-102, C.R.S. (Ord. 12-2019 § 4)

 

9.23.040 Optional prohibitions.
    A.  The owner or manager of any place not specifically listed in Section 9.23.020 of this chapter, including a place otherwise exempted under Section 9.23.030 of this chapter, may post signs prohibiting smoking or providing smoking and nonsmoking areas. Such posting shall have the effect of including such place, or the designated nonsmoking portion thereof, in the places where smoking is prohibited or restricted pursuant to this chapter.

    B.   If the owner or manager of a place not specifically listed in Section 9.23.020 of this chapter, including a place otherwise exempted under Section 9.23.030 of this chapter, is an employer and receives a request from an employee to create a smoke-free work area as contemplated by Subsection 9.23.020(11)(b), the owner or manager shall post a sign or signs in the smoke-free work area as provided in Subsection A of this section. (Ord. 12-2019 § 4)

 

9.23.050 Other applicable regulations—Counterpart regulations authorized—Municipal Court jurisdiction.
    A.  This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by any other applicable law.

    B.   Statutory authorization for the enactment, adoption and local enforcement of this chapter is set forth in Subsection 24-14-207(2), C.R.S. The regulations set forth in this chapter also are authorized by the inhabitants of the City through Sections 3 and 5 of Article I of the Charter of Cañon City.

    C.   The Cañon City Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction over violations of smoking regulations set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 12-2019 § 4)

 

9.23.060 Unlawful acts—Penalties.
    A.  It is unlawful for a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls the use of a premises subject to this chapter to violate any provision of this chapter.

    B.   It is unlawful for a person to smoke in an area where smoking is prohibited pursuant to this chapter.

    C.   A person who violates this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200) for a first violation within a calendar year, a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300) for a second violation within a calendar year, and a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500) for each additional violation within a calendar year. Each day of a continuing violation shall be deemed a separate violation. (Ord. 12-2019 § 4)

 

Chapter 9.24 THEFT
9.24.010 Acts constituting theft designated.
    A.  A person commits theft when he or she knowingly obtains or exercises control over anything of value of another without authorization, or by threat or deception, and:

    1.   Intends to deprive the other person permanently of the use or benefit of the thing of value; or

    2.   Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the thing of value in such a manner as to deprive the other person permanently of its use or benefit; or

    3.   Uses, conceals or abandons the thing of value, intending that such use, concealment or abandonment will deprive the other person permanently of its use and benefit; or

    4.   Demands any consideration to which he or she is not legally entitled as a condition of restoring the thing of value to the other person.

    B.   The provisions of this section shall be applicable to things having a value of less than three hundred dollars ($300.00). (Prior code § 9.50.010)

 

9.24.020 Theft of rental property.
    A.  A person commits theft of rental property if he or she:

    1.   Obtains the temporary use of the personal property of another, which is available only for hire, by means of threat or deception, or knowing that such use is without the consent of the person providing the personal property; or

    2.   Having lawfully obtained possession for temporary use of the personal property of another, which is available only for hire, knowingly fails to reveal the whereabouts of or fails to return the property to the owner thereof or his or her representative or to the person from whom he or she has received it, within seventy-two (72) hours after the time in which he or she agreed to return it.

    B.   The provisions of this section shall be applicable only to rental property having a value of less than three hundred dollars ($300.00). (Prior code § 9.50.020)

 

9.24.030 Concealment of goods.
    A.  If any person willfully conceals unpurchased goods, wares or merchandise owned or held by, and offered or displayed by any store or other mercantile establishment, whether the concealment is on his or her own person or otherwise, and whether on or off the premises of the store or mercantile establishment, such concealment constitutes prima facie evidence that the person intended to commit the crime of theft.

    B.   If any person conceals upon his or her person or otherwise carries away any unpurchased goods, wares or merchandise held or owned by any store or mercantile establishment, the merchant, or any employee thereof, or any peace officer, acting in good faith and upon probable cause based upon reasonable grounds therefor, may detain and question such person, in a reasonable manner, for the purpose of ascertaining whether the person is guilty of theft. Such questioning of a person by a merchant, a merchant’s employee, or peace or police officer, does not render the merchant, merchant’s employee or peace officer civilly or criminally liable for slander, false arrest, false imprisonment, malicious prosecution, or unlawful detention. (Prior code § 9.50.030)

 

9.24.040 Evidence of value.
    For purposes of this chapter, when theft occurs from a store, evidence of the retail value of the thing involved shall be prima facie evidence of the value of the thing involved. Evidence offered to prove the retail value may include, but shall not be limited to, fixed labels and tags, signs, shelf tags, and notices. (Prior code § 9.50.040)

 

9.24.050 Use of photographs, videotapes or films of property.
    Photographs, videotapes or films of property over which a person is alleged to have exerted unauthorized control or otherwise to have obtained unlawfully are competent evidence, and photographs, videotapes or films are admissible into evidence under the rules of law governing the admissibility of photographs, videotapes or films of evidence. (Prior code § 9.50.050)

 

9.24.060 Violation—Penalty.
    Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter 9.24, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in an amount that does not exceed the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010. (Ord. 17-2013 § 38; Ord. 15-1993 § 1)

 

Chapter 9.26 COMPLICITY
9.26.010 Complicity.
    A.  A person is legally accountable as principal for the behavior of another constituting a violation if, with the intent to promote or facilitate the commission of the offense, he or she aids, abets, advises or encourages the other person in planning or committing the offense.

    B.   Complicity is not a separate and distinct violation or offense under this Code, and it is not necessary to specifically charge complicity, it is merely a theory by which a defendant becomes accountable for a violation or offense committed by another. (Ord. 19-2003 § 4)

 

Chapter 9.28 LOST, ABANDONED OR UNCLAIMED PERSONAL PROPERTY
9.28.010 Application of chapter provisions.
    This chapter shall apply to all personal property acquired or held by the City Police Department under circumstances supporting a reasonable belief that such property was abandoned, lost or otherwise unclaimed. (Prior code § 9.54.010)

 

9.28.020 Return of property.
    Any personal property of the type described in Section 9.28.010 and believed to be abandoned, lost or otherwise unclaimed, shall be retained in custody by the Chief of Police, or his designated representative within the law enforcement agency, who shall make reasonable inquiry and effort to identify and notify the owner or person entitled to possession thereof, and shall return the property after such owner or person provides reasonable and satisfactory proof of ownership or right to possession, and reimburses the City for all reasonable expenses of such custody and handling. (Prior code § 9.54.020)

 

9.28.030 Unclaimed property—Disposition authorized when—Notice.
    If the identity or location of the owner or person entitled to possession of the property has not been ascertained within ninety (90) days after the Police Department obtains the property, or if the owner or person entitled to possession of the property, after having received notice that the Police Department is holding such property, fails to take possession of the property within ninety (90) days following receipt of such notice, the property shall be presumed abandoned and the Chief of Police, or his designated representative within the law enforcement agency, shall be entitled to dispose of the property. (Ord. 14-1992 § 1)

 

9.28.035 Disposition of unclaimed property.
    Unclaimed property which is presumed abandoned under Section 9.28.030 may be disposed of in accordance with any of the methods set forth in paragraphs A through B of this Section 9.28.035, except that the disposition provided for at paragraph A shall be mandatory.

    A.  Such property, in the case of lost personal property, including money (cash or currency), delivered to the Police Department by an individual who is not the owner of such property, shall be distributed to the individual who delivered the property to the Police Department, subject to the following requirements:

    1.   Such individual must have made a written claim for distribution of the property within 72 hours following delivery of the property to the Police Department on forms provided by the Police Department and have assisted the Police Department, upon reasonable request, in its attempts to locate the owner of the property by giving information as to when and where the lost property was found and such other details concerning the finding of the lost property as are considered relevant to the investigation of the Police Department; and

    2.   Such individual must reimburse the City for its reasonable costs of holding and processing the property and the cost of publishing notice of proposed distribution of the lost property prior to its distribution under this paragraph.

    3.   Before any property, other than property having an estimated value of $50.00 or less, or money having a face value of $100.00 or less, is distributed under this paragraph a notice of the proposed distribution under this paragraph shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least ten (10) days prior to its distribution. If no claim is made for such property within ten (10) days following publication of such notice, such property will be distributed to the individual who delivered the property to the Police Department and otherwise complied with all requirements of this paragraph.

    4.   If the lost property is property having an estimated value of $50.00 or less or money having a face value of $100.00 or less, publication of the notice shall not be required.

    5.   Claims to the property made following publication of notice pursuant to this section shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.28.050.

    B.   Such property may be disposed of in any manner permitted under the statutes of the state of Colorado, provided that the procedures for such disposal, as specified in the applicable statute, shall then be followed.

    C.   Such property may be declared abandoned and thereafter be distributed to any agency or department of the City for use by such department or agency for city purposes, provided that notice of such disposition shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least ten (10) days prior to the distribution of the property. Such notice shall describe the property and provide that the owner or a person entitled to possession thereof may claim such property within ten (10) days of the date of the publication of the notice. Any such claim shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.28.050. Property distributed under this subparagraph shall become city property upon its distribution.

    D.  Such property may be distributed pursuant to resolution of City Council to a charitable organization which has first submitted to the City Administrator a plan for distribution or use of the property for charitable purposes which is acceptable to City Council. Any such resolution shall describe the property to be distributed and provide that such property shall be used or disposed of only in accordance with the provisions of the plan for distribution or use. Such resolution shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, and also provide that any property described therein may be claimed within ten (10) days from the date of publication of such resolution by its owner or a person entitled to possession thereof. Property so claimed shall be excluded from the distribution to the charitable organization. Claims to property made after the publication of the resolution shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.28.050.

    E.   Such property may be sold for cash to the highest bidder at a public auction. Notice of any such auction, including time, place and a brief description of the property to be sold, shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the county where the auction is to be held at least ten days prior to such auction. Property claimed by its owner or a person entitled to possession thereof shall be excluded from the sale. All such claims shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.28.050. (Ord. 14-1992 § 1)

 

9.28.040 Deposit of sale proceeds.
    Proceeds of the sale of property at public auction will first be applied to pay the costs of the auction and the proceeds remaining after such payment shall then be deposited in the general fund of the City. (Ord. 14-1992 § 1)

 

9.28.050 Recovery of property—Conditions.
    A.  The owner or person entitled to possession of property described in this chapter may claim and recover possession of the property at any time before its sale or other disposition upon providing reasonable and satisfactory proof of ownership or right to possession and after reimbursing the City for all reasonable expense of custody and handling thereof, including all publication costs, if any.

    B.   Any owner or person entitled to possession of such property who fails to make claim and recover possession of the property prior to its sale or other disposition under Section 9.28.035 shall forfeit all rights to such property.

    C.   No property with respect to which a claim has been made shall be disposed of under Section 9.28.035 until such claim has been denied in writing by the Chief of Police and the time for challenging such denial under paragraph D has expired. All determinations of claims made by the Chief of Police shall be final.

    D.  Any legal action filed challenging a decision of the Chief of Police shall be filed pursuant to rule 106 of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure within thirty (30) days of such decision or shall be forever barred. If any legal action is timely filed, the property shall be disbursed by the Chief of Police pursuant to the order of the court having jurisdiction over such claim. (Ord. 14-1992 § 1)

 

9.28.060 Damages—Liability limitations.
    No person or agency shall be responsible for consequent damages to another occasioned by an act or omission in compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 14-1992 § 1)

 

Chapter 9.30 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY NOT OTHERWISE PROVIDED FOR UNDER OTHER PROVISIONS OF THE MUNICIPAL CODE
9.30.010 Purpose.
    The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the administration and disposition of all unclaimed property which is in the possession of or under the control of the City for which the disposition thereof is not provided at other chapters of this Code. (Ord. 15-1992 § 1)

 

9.30.020 Definitions.
    Unless otherwise required by context or use, words and terms shall be defined as follows:

    A.  “Unclaimed property” means any tangible or intangible property, except for property described at Section 9.28.010 of this Code, which shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 9.28, including any income or increment derived therefrom, less any lawful charges, that is held by or under the control of the City and which has not been claimed by its owner for a period of more than one year after it became payable or distributable or was otherwise acquired by the City. “Unclaimed property” shall specifically include any and all property, the disposition of which is not governed by other provisions of this Code, held or controlled by the City which, in the absence of this ordinance, would be subject to the provisions of the Colorado Unclaimed Property Act, Section 38-13-101 et seq., C.R.S. 1973, as amended.

    B.   “Owner” means a person or entity, including a corporation, partnership, association, governmental entity other than this city, or a duly authorized legal representative or successor in interest of same, which owns unclaimed property held by the City.

    C.   “City Administrator” shall mean the City Administrator or designee thereof. (Ord. 15-1992 § 1)

 

9.30.030 Procedure for notice and claims relative to and forfeiture of unclaimed property.
    A.  Prior to disposition of any unclaimed property having an estimated value of $50.00 or more, the City Administrator shall send a written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address, if any, of any owner of unclaimed property. The last known address of the owner shall be the last address of the owner as shown by the records of the municipal department or agency holding the property. The notice shall include a description of the property, the amount or estimated value of the property, and, when available, the purpose for which the property was deposited or otherwise held. The notice shall state where the owner may make inquiry of or claim the property. The notice shall also state that if the owner fails to provide the City Administrator with a written claim for the return of the property within 60 days of the date of the notice, the property shall become the sole property of the City and any claim of the owner to such property shall be deemed forfeited.

    B.   Prior to disposition of any unclaimed property having an estimated value of less than $50.00 or having no last known address of the owner, the City Administrator shall cause a notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The notice shall include a description of the property, the owner of the property, the amount or estimated value of the property and, when available, the purpose for which the property was deposited or otherwise held. The notice shall state where the owner may make inquiry of or claim the property. The notice shall also state that if the owner fails to provide the City Administrator with a written claim for the return of the property within sixty (60) days of the date of the publication of the notice, the property shall become the sole property of the City and any claim of the owner to such property shall be deemed forfeited.

    C.   If the City Administrator receives no written claim within the above sixty (60) day claim period, the property shall become the sole property of the City and any claim of the owner to such property shall be deemed forfeited.

    D.  If the City Administrator receives a written claim within the sixty (60) day claim period, the City Administrator shall evaluate the claim and give written notice to the claimant within ninety (90) days thereof that the claim has been accepted or denied in whole or in part. The City Administrator may investigate the validity of a claim and may request further supporting documentation from the claimant prior to disbursing or refusing to disburse the property.

    E.   In the event that there is more than one claimant for the same property, the City Administrator may, in the City Administrator’s sole discretion, resolve said claims, or may resolve such claims by depositing the disputed property with the registry of the district court in an interpleader action.

    F.   In the event that all claims filed are denied, the property shall become the sole property of the City and any claim of the owner of such property shall be deemed forfeited.

    G.  Any legal action filed challenging a decision of the City Administrator shall be filed pursuant to rule 106 of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure within thirty (30) days of such decision or shall be forever barred. If any legal action is timely filed, the property shall be disbursed by the City Administrator pursuant to the order of the court having jurisdiction over such claim. (Ord. 15-1992 § 1)

 

9.30.040 Disposition of unclaimed property.
    The City Administrator is authorized to establish and administer procedures for the administration and disposition of unclaimed property covered by this Chapter 9.30 consistent with the terms of this chapter, including compliance requirements for other municipal officers and employees in the identification and disposition of such property, subject to the following guidelines:

    A.  All intangible property subject to disposition under this Chapter 9.30 which is held in any fund of the City at the time such property becomes the property of the City under paragraph 9.30.030.C hereof, shall be distributed to such fund.

    B.   All other intangible property held by any agency or department of the City which is subject to disposition under this Chapter 9.30 shall be distributed to the general fund.

    C.   All tangible personal property subject to disposition under this Chapter 9.30 shall be distributed in any manner permitted under Chapter 9.28 with respect to distribution of property covered by such Chapter 9.28 by the Chief of Police or designated representative, except that publication prior to distribution in any such manner shall not be required.

    D.  Upon application by the City Administrator, City Council may authorize a manner or method of distribution not otherwise provided for herein.

    E.   No property subject to return or other distribution shall be returned or distributed to any owner or person or entity other than the City or a charitable organization until the City has been reimbursed for all reasonable expenses of custody and handling thereof, including costs of mailing and publication, if applicable. (Ord. 15-1992 § 1)

 

9.30.050 Damages—Liability limitations.
    No person or agency shall be responsible for consequent damages to another occasioned by an act or omission in compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 15-1992 § 1)

Division V. Offenses Against Property
Chapter 9.32 DISTURBING PUBLIC MONUMENTS
9.32.010 Unauthorized excavations and removal of landmarks.
    Whoever, in this city, makes or causes to be made, without lawful authority, an excavation in any highway, street, alley, sidewalk or other public place, or otherwise digs up or removes any stone, rock, gravel or earth in or from any such place, or removes any stones, stakes, or other landmarks placed by any officer of the City under authority thereof, or by any other duly authorized person, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 9.56.010)

 

Chapter 9.36 VANDALISM
9.36.010 Damaging, defacing or destruction of public property.
    A.  It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to damage, deface, destroy or injure the real or personal property of the City.

    B.   “Deface” as used in Subsection A of this section shall include, but not be limited to, the writing, painting, inscribing, drawing, scratching or scribbling upon any public wall of public surface owned, operated or maintained by the City, unless the City grants written permission for such writing, painting, inscribing, drawing, scratching or scribbling. (Ord. 19-2003 § 5: prior code § 9.60.010)

 

9.36.012 Protection of fire and Police Department property.
    A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to deface any fire station, fire apparatus, police station or police apparatus.

    B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, destroy or interfere with any public hydrant, fire plug, fire alarm, fire signal or any related apparatus of the Fire Department. (Ord. 19-2003 § 6)

 

9.36.015 Painting or decorating public buildings.
    It shall be unlawful for any person to paint or decorate any building, fence or other structure or property owned, leased or used by the City without the written permission of the City Administrator or of the department head responsible for such building, fence or other structure or property, if authority to grant such permission has been delegated by the City Administrator to such department head. (Ord. 19-2003 § 7)

 

9.36.018 Damaging, defacing or destruction of private property.
    A.  It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to damage, deface, destroy or injure the real or personal property of one or more other persons.

    B.   “Deface” as used in Subsection A of this section means and includes, but is not limited to, the writing, painting, inscribing, drawing, scratching or scribbling upon any wall or surface owned, operated or maintained by any person, unless there is written permission from the owner thereof or the owner’s agent or other person legally authorized to give such permission for such writing, painting, inscribing, drawing, scratching or scribbling. (Ord. 19-2003 § 8)

 

9.36.020 Obscene materials in public places.
    A.  Any person who, in this city, writes, draws, paints, stains, cuts, carves, marks, scratches, brands, engraves or otherwise makes any gross, indecent or obscene word or words, language, picture or device whatsoever, so that the same shall be exposed to public view, upon any wall, fence or other thing, or on any highway, street, avenue, alley or other public place, or place visible to persons in such public place, or sticks or puts up on, in any place aforesaid, any paper, wood or other thing on which or from which any such word or words, language, picture or device has been expressly shaped or made, in any way, is guilty of a misdemeanor.

    B.   “Obscene writings or pictures” are those specifically defined at Section 18-7-101(2), Colorado Revised Statutes. (Ord. 21-1987 § 14; prior code § 9.60.020)

 

9.36.030 Violation—Penalty.
    Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter 9.36, or suffers or allows the same to be violated, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in an amount that does not exceed the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010. (Ord. 17-2013 § 39; Ord. 15-1993 § 1)

 

Chapter 9.40 TRESPASS
9.40.010 Trespass.
    A.  A person commits the violation of criminal trespass if such person:

    1.   Knowingly and unlawfully enters or remains in a dwelling of another or if such person enters any motor vehicle with intent to commit a crime therein;

    2.   Unlawfully enters or remains in or upon the premises of another which are enclosed in a manner designed to exclude intruders or are fenced;

    3.   Knowingly and unlawfully enters or remains in or upon the common areas of a hotel, motel, condominium, or apartment building;

    4.   Knowingly and unlawfully enters or remains in a motor vehicle of another;

    5.   Unlawfully enters or remains in or upon premises of another. (Ord. 19-2003 § 9)

 

9.40.020 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter, “premises” means real property, buildings, and other improvements thereon, and the stream banks and beds of any nonnavigable fresh water streams flowing through such real property. (Ord. 19-2003 § 9)

 

9.40.030 Trespassing and intruding on privacy unlawful.
    A.  It is unlawful for any person to enter upon the premises then in possession of some other person, without permission of the person in possession thereof, and thereupon invade or intrude upon the privacy of any person then lawfully in or upon said premises.

    B.   The following acts, among others, are declared to be an invasion or intrusion of privacy: viewing or peeping at persons or property through any window, door, screen, shutter, blind or other opening of any building or structure located on the premises owned or lawfully used or occupied by another person. (Ord. 19-2003 § 9)

 

9.40.040 Violation—Penalty.
    Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter 9.40, or suffers or allows the same to be violated, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in an amount that does not exceed the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010. (Ord. 17-2013 § 40; Ord. 19-2003 § 9)

 

Chapter 9.44 PUBLIC PARKS
9.44.010 Application of chapter provisions.
    The prohibitions herein shall apply to all parks, except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter. (Prior code § 9.68.090)

 

9.44.020 Hours of operation.
    A.  General Rule. Except as is otherwise provided in this chapter, the public parks of the City that are located within the city limits and the recreational facilities within such parks shall be open daily to the public from five a.m. until eleven p.m., and no person who is not an authorized invitee, permittee, agent or employee of the City shall enter into or remain in any such public park at any other time.

    B.   Extended Hours. The City Administrator is authorized to issue written park use permits extending the hours during which any such park may remain open for special events.

    C.   Specific Hours of Operation for Certain Recreational Facilities. The hours during which a skatepark, basketball court or tennis court will be open for public use shall be those hours that are posted by the City at the skatepark, basketball court or tennis court. If no hours of operation are posted, the hours during which a skatepark, basketball court or tennis court will be open for public use shall be the hours specified in Subsection A of this section for public parks. The City Administrator, after consultation with the Director of Parks and City Council, is authorized to determine and cause the posting of the hours of operation for all skateparks, basketball courts and tennis courts. The hours so posted need not be the same for all similar facilities within the city. The hours of operation for any such recreational facility may be modified as seasons, climate, neighborhood needs and other circumstances might warrant.

    D.  Temporary Closures. The City Administrator, or his or her designee, is authorized to order the temporary closure of any public park, skatepark, basketball court, tennis court, or sections thereof, to use by the general public, with or without advance notice, when it has been determined that:

    1.   The closure is necessary to protect members of the public from possible injury due to actual or anticipated circumstances or conditions; or

    2.   The closure is necessary to protect the recreational or other facilities within a public park from damage or destruction due to actual or anticipated circumstances or conditions; or

    3.   The closure is necessary to facilitate maintenance or repairs; or

    4.   The closure is warranted because the public park or facilities within a public park have been reserved for use by authorized persons, teams or organized groups for athletic events, practices, contests, tournaments or other special events authorized by City Council or the City Administrator pursuant to resolution, contract, agreement or a park use permit. (Ord. 3-2002 § 1)

 

9.44.025 Regulations pertaining to the use of City parks and facilities in City parks.
    A.  Council may, by resolution, adopt and amend regulations pertaining to the use of City parks and the use of facilities within the City’s parks, including, but not limited to, restrooms, playground equipment and tennis courts.

    B.   It is unlawful for any person to violate any regulation set forth in any such resolution once each of the following requirements has first been met:

    1.   The resolution containing the regulation must have been adopted pursuant to and specifically mention Section 9.44.025(A);

    2.   The resolution containing such regulation, or a summary of the regulations set forth in such resolution, which summary specifically identifies the resolution by number and year of adoption, is printed in a public notice published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city; and

    3.   One or more copies of the resolution containing such regulation are made available for inspection, copying and distribution in the office of the City Clerk.

    C.   At such time as the requirements set forth in Subsection B of this section have been met, regulations adopted pursuant to Subsection A for all purposes shall be treated as if fully set forth in this Chapter 9.44. Violation of any such regulation shall be punishable in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.44.110. (Ord. 19-1996 § 1)

 

9.44.030 Enforcement authority.
    It shall be the duty of any Park Policeman or any person designated by the City Administrator to enforce the rules and regulations set out in this chapter. (Prior code § 9.68.110)

 

9.44.040 Vehicle operation and parking restrictions.
    No person shall, within any public park owned by the City, located within and without the city:

    A.  Drive, operate or cause to be operated any motor vehicle, including, but not limited to, any self-propelled vehicle, moped, go-cart, golf cart, motor scooter, electric personal assistive mobility device or “EPAMD,” as defined in C.R.S. § 42-1-102(28.7), engaged electronic assisted bicycle, hoverboard, or similar mode of transportation, except upon established roads and trails specifically designated by the City Council and marked for such purpose. A person may operate an electrical assisted bicycle, as defined in C.R.S. § 42-1-102(28.5), as may be amended, with the electrical motor disengaged on park paths where bicycles are authorized to travel. Electric personal assistive mobility devices or “EPAMDs” shall be permitted only if the user is dismounted. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit or restrict the use or operation of an “other power-driven mobility device” (OPDMD), as used and defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Title II and III;

    B.   Stop, stand or park, or cause the stopping, standing or parking of a motor vehicle except in areas specifically designated and marked for such purpose; provided, however, this Subsection B shall have no application when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with directions of a police officer or park attendant designated as such by the City Administrator. (Ord. 43-2017 § 1; prior code § 9.68.030)

 

9.44.050 Skyline Drive—One-way road.
    Skyline Drive is declared to be a one-way road; therefore, it is unlawful for any vehicle to enter such road at the east approach thereof, or to drive over any portion of the driveway, entering from the east. All vehicles, in order to drive over Skyline Drive, shall enter at the west approach. (Prior code § 9.68.040)

 

9.44.055 Rafting facilities—River Station and Centennial Park.
    A.  Portions of the River Station project area that abut the Arkansas River, as designated by the City Administrator, may be used for the launching and take-out of commercial and private river rafts, kayaks, canoes and other river vessels floating the Arkansas River. The authorization contained in this section shall supersede and control over any other provision of the Cañon City Municipal Code, including any provision in Title 17, that is in conflict with this section.

    B.   City Council, by resolution, may authorize the City Administrator to issue licenses to qualified river outfitters; to charge and collect reasonable deposits, fees and late charges with respect to such licenses; and to adopt and enforce reasonable rules, regulations and restrictions concerning the use of the River Station project area by river outfitters and others that are consistent with the guidelines set forth in such resolutions.

    C.   It is unlawful for any river outfitter to use any portion of the River Station project area for purposes of embarkation, disembarkation or transportation of river vessels and clients without first having applied for and obtained a valid license for such purposes, issued pursuant to the provisions of any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 9.44.055B.

    D.  It is unlawful for any river outfitter, whose license to use either Centennial Park (prior to 1997) or the River Station project area (during 1997 or in subsequent years) has expired or been revoked, to use the River Station project area for purposes of embarkation, disembarkation or transportation of river vessels or clients at any time following the expiration or revocation of such license until a new license has been issued to such river outfitter by the City Administrator or until such revoked license has been reinstated.

    E.   As used in this section and in any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 9.44.055(B) and in any license issued pursuant to the authorization provided for in this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

 

    1.   “River outfitter” means and includes any person soliciting to provide or providing, for compensation, facilities, guide services or transportation for the primary purpose of river running; except that “river outfitter” does not include any person whose only service is providing motor vehicles, vessels, and other equipment for rent or any person whose only service is providing instruction in canoeing or kayaking skills.

    2.   “Vessel” means every description of watercraft used or capable of being used as a means of transportation of persons and property on the water, other than single-chambered air-inflated devices or seaplanes.

    3.   “Client” means and includes any person, other than a river outfitter or an employee of a river outfitter, who is transported on the Arkansas River for the primary purpose of river running in a vessel owned or used by a river outfitter for such primary purpose. The payment of a fee to the river outfitter shall be prima facie evidence that the person paying the fee is a client.

    F.   All rafting take-out facilities within Centennial Park and all other portions of Centennial Park which abut the Arkansas River are closed to use by all river outfitters, without regard to whether such river outfitters are licensed by the City. Centennial Park is available for use by non-commercial users of river vessels as points of embarkation and disembarkation, subject to such rules, regulations and restrictions as may be imposed pursuant to applicable municipal law. It is unlawful for any person, including but not limited to river outfitters, to use Centennial Park in any manner prohibited in this Section 9.44.055F.

    G.  It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 9.44.055B. Any such resolution shall clearly provide that it was adopted pursuant to Section 9.44.055B.

    H.  Any conviction of any river outfitter of a violation of any provision of this Section 9.44.055 shall be reported to the Colorado Division of Parks and Outdoor Recreation and any other division or agency of the state of Colorado having jurisdiction over or with respect to the activities of river outfitters using any portion of the Arkansas River which flows through Royal Gorge Park or within the boundaries of the city. (Ord. 10-1997 § 1: Ord. 18-1994 § 1)

 

9.44.057 Guidelines and rules pertaining to skateparks.
    A.  Definitions. Unless otherwise required by context or usage, words and terms used in this chapter shall be defined as follows:

    1.   “Free-style bicycle” means a metal frame with two inline nonmetallic wheels on separate axles with no pegs, wheels not more than twenty inches in diameter, with handle bars and a seat designed for athletic stunts on flat or contoured surfaces of constructed of native soils, asphalt or concrete.

    2.   “Inline skate” means a shoe with a set of nonmetallic wheels attached in a straight line commonly used for skating over a flat surface, but not including a tricycle, scooter, or razor.

    3.   “Riding surface” means a flat or contoured hard surface or course within a park or a skatepark that is constructed of asphalt, concrete or another durable material and which is available to users for inline skating, skateboarding and/or free-style cycling, where permitted.

    4.   “Skateboard” means a short board mounted on a small set of nonmetallic wheels, which is used for coasting and often for performing athletic stunts.

    5.   “Skatepark” means any skatepark facility available for public use by skateboarders, inline skaters and, where not prohibited, free-style cyclists that is owned or operated by the City, including, but not limited to the skate park facility in Mountain View Park.

    6.   “User” means any person who uses a skate park for skating or riding.

    B.   Guidelines. The following guidelines shall apply in all skateparks:

    1.   Use of the skatepark shall be at the user’s own risk. All users are cautioned to know their own skills and limitations.

    2.   Helmets, knee, elbow, and wrist pads are strongly recommended at all times.

    3.   Users are strongly encouraged to know their abilities, to use only those elements of the skatepark that are within their abilities, to be courteous and respectful to others, to take turns, and to have fun.

    4.   Special events or organized group use shall be scheduled by obtaining a park use permit from the City Administrator, or his designee.

    C.   Rules. The following rules shall apply in all skateparks:

    1.   Appropriate shoe wear must be worn. Sandals and bare feet are prohibited on riding surfaces at all times.

    2.   The following items are prohibited and shall not be used on or near any riding surface within any skate park at any time:

    a.   Bicycles with wheels over twenty inches in diameter;

    b.   Bicycles with pegs or similar devices protruding from the wheels of the bicycle;

    c.   Scooters;

    d.   Razors;

    e.   Tricycles;

    f.    All forms of motorized equipment;

    g.   Any other item or device prohibited by signage posted at the skatepark.

    3.   Adding to or modifying skatepark features with makeshift items, such as jumps or ramps, is prohibited, as is skating or riding on any park structure outside of the riding surfaces that is not intended or suitable for such use.

    4.   No food, drinks or tobacco products are permitted on riding surfaces.

    5.   The use of profanity in a skatepark is prohibited.

    6.   No glass containers are permitted anywhere in a skatepark.

    7.   No illegal drugs or alcohol beverages are permitted anywhere in a skatepark.

    8.   No metal shovels, sand or salt may be used on any riding surface.

    9.   Destroying or defacing public property is prohibited. Tagging or placing stickers or graffiti upon any skatepark surface or structure is defacing public property and is illegal.

    10. Spectators and pets are not allowed on riding surfaces.

    11. No person shall ride a bicycle or skate in a skatepark in such a manner as to indicate a wanton and willful disregard for the safety of another person or of property. Willful and wanton conduct consists of an affirmative act, purposefully committed, which the person who committed the act must have realized as dangerous, done heedlessly and recklessly, without regard to consequences or the rights and safety of others.

    12. No unauthorized person shall enter, use, remain in or refuse to leave a skatepark when the skatepark is not open for public use. (See Section 9.44.020.)

 

    D.  Revocation of Privilege to Use Skatepark.

    1.   Use of the skatepark shall be a privilege, and the City, acting through the Director of Parks or his or her designee, shall have the right and authority to revoke, either temporarily or permanently, the privilege of any person to use a skatepark if that person does not obey or otherwise adhere to the guidelines and rules contained in Subsections B and C of this section, or if that person violates any other municipal ordinance or regulation pertaining to the use of a public park, a skatepark or any facility therein. All such revocations shall be documented in writing and shall identify the person whose privilege has been revoked by name and address, when known, and clearly state the date when the period of revocation will end.

    2.   The revocation of a person’s privilege to use the facilities of a skatepark shall be in addition to any penalty that may be imposed by the Municipal Court upon the conviction of such person for a violation of any rule set forth or otherwise provided for in this section.

    3.   A person’s physical presence at or use of a skatepark or any facility therein, when such person’s privilege to use such skatepark or facility has been revoked pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Subsection 9.44.057(D), shall be unlawful and, upon such person’s conviction of such violation, shall be punishable as provided for in Section 9.44.110. (Ord. 3-2002 § 2)

 

9.44.060 Unlawful activities designated.
    A.  Except as provided in Subsection B of this section, it is unlawful within any City park for any person to:

    1.   Possess or consume ethyl alcohol, as that term is defined in Chapter 9.13 of the Cañon City Municipal Code;

    2.   Sell, offer for sale or give away ethyl alcohol;

    3.   Sell or offer for sale any item, article or service or to conduct any other commercial activity;

    4.   Play any game of chance or conduct gambling activities;

    5.   Carry or discharge any firearms unless specifically authorized by law to do so;

    6.   Carry, possess or use fireworks at any place or in any manner which is not specifically authorized or permitted under Chapter 9.58 of the Cañon City Municipal Code;

    7.   Violate any posted safety rules established by authority of the City;

    8.   Paint, post or place any bill, notice, sign or banner in any park or in or on any tree, structure or facility within any City park;

    9.   Attach any permitted sign, banner or similar object to any tree, facility or improvement within any park by using damaging anchoring devices, including but not limited to nails, screws or staples;

    10. Molest, kill, move or transport any wildlife located in parks;

    11. Take, remove, cut, destroy any vegetation, plants, shrubs, or trees or any other natural feature, such as rocks, or the excavation of gravel or soil from any park;

    12. Remove from Temple Canyon Park, Red Canyon Park or Royal Gorge Park, any dead or fallen timber, except for gathering of fallen tree parts for use in the park from which the tree parts came for permitted camp fires in designed campfire rings;

    13. Wear, ride or otherwise use any type of rollerblade, roller skate, skateboard, bicycle or any other similar device, with or without wheels, on the tennis court surfaces at Rudd Park or Centennial Park or upon any tables, benches, shelters, stages, walls or hand or guard rails in any City park. For purposes of this section, “tennis court surfaces” means and includes all surface area inside of fencing surrounding the tennis courts in each park. Footwear and other devices identified and prohibited under this paragraph shall not be worn, carried into or stored within any such fenced area. Prohibited activities shall include skateboarding, rollerblading, roller skating, grinding and bicycle riding upon or within any of the surfaces and structures identified in this paragraph;

    14. Pound, drive, screw or excavate any stake, post, pipe, peg or anchor into the ground of any park without having first called for utility line locates from the Parks Department for the purposes of installing temporary tents or facilities for events;

    15. Build, light or maintain any fire in any park, or place within a park, when or where fires are banned or prohibited, either temporarily or permanently, or to leave any permitted fire unattended or unextinguished;

    16. Permit any dog or other animal in that person’s custody or control to defecate within such park, unless the person having custody or control of the dog or other animal immediately picks up and removes the waste matter deposited by such animal;

    17. Dispose of or leave behind any feces or other waste matter from a dog or other animal in that person’s control or custody in any street, alley, roadway, parking lot, playground, vegetated area or other place within or adjacent to any City park, except that such waste matter may be bagged or wrapped and then deposited in trash receptacles within any such park. The provisions of this paragraph and paragraph 16 of this subsection shall not apply with respect to persons with severely impaired vision who use and depend upon guide dogs to assist them in performing significant life activities.

    18. Camping within any City park, trail or open space, except as permitted by Section 9.44.065 of this Code. For purposes of this section, all terms shall have the same meaning as provided in Section 9.22.030 of this Code. Enforcement of this subsection shall be the same as provided in Section 9.22.030.

    19. Use the bandshell and stage structure within Veteran’s Park, unless permitted by the City.

    20. Lead or ride upon any horse or any other hoofed animal in areas designated and posted as identifying such use as being prohibited. This subsection shall also apply to all trails within City parks located outside the City boundaries.

    B.   Authority to Issue Certain Permits. The City Administrator is authorized to issue written permits authorizing one or more of the activities enumerated in paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 8, 10, 11, 12, 18 and 19 of Subsection 9.44.060(A). Any such activity identified in any such permit shall not be unlawful if conducted in accordance with the terms and provisions of the permit. Any permit which also requires Council approval pursuant to this section shall not be valid until Council approval is obtained.

    C.   No permit authorizing the sale, possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol within any City park shall be issued in the absence of prior formal approval by Council.

    D.  No permit authorizing overnight camping in any City park located within the boundaries of the city shall be issued in the absence of prior formal approval by Council.

    E.   No permit authorizing the sale of goods or services or any other commercial activity, including performances for which admission fees are charged, within any City park shall be issued in the absence of prior formal approval by Council, unless such permit is issued to a charitable or other nonprofit organization and the proceeds generated from such sales or other commercial activities are to be used for the charitable or other nonprofit purposes of such organization.

    F.   The City Administrator may refuse to issue any permit involving the sale of goods or services or other commercial activities in any City park requested by a charitable or nonprofit organization. If the City Administrator refuses to issue any such permit, the application for such permit will be referred by the City Administrator to Council for determination by Council if requested in writing by the applicant. Council will not consider any application for a park permit that is not submitted in writing on application forms prescribed or approved by the City Administrator.

    G.  Any permit issued pursuant to this section shall contain such restrictions and other limitations as were imposed by Council, in cases where Council’s prior approval was requested and obtained, and such other reasonable restrictions and limitations as are imposed in writing in the permit for purposes of protecting City parks and facilities from damage and those who use City parks from injury. All such permits shall require that the person receiving the permit will clean and restore the park or portion of a park to which the permit applied to the condition the park was in immediately prior to the conduct of the permitted activity and may require the posting of security or damage deposits when deemed necessary by the City Administrator to ensure compliance with such provisions.

    H.  For purposes of this section “person” means and includes any natural person, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, society, association, organization or other groups, regardless of whether formed or operated for profitable or not-for-profit purposes. (Ord. 8-2020 § 1; Ord. 25-2019 §§ 3,4; Ord. 12-2019 § 15; Ord. 13-2005 § 1; Ord. 23-2003 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 19-1996 § 2)

 

9.44.065 Overnight camping and open fires in Red Canyon Park, Temple Canyon Park and the Royal Gorge Park.
    A.  Overnight Camping.

    1.   Overnight camping in Red Canyon Park, Temple Canyon Park and the Royal Gorge Park shall be limited to designated overnight camping areas only. Camping in Red Canyon Park, Temple Canyon Park and the Royal Gorge Park shall not exceed seventy-two (72) hours during any two-week period of time; provided, however, that the Superintendent of Parks, or his or her designee, may, by permit, extend the time provided in this section. A time extension not to exceed an additional seventy-two (72) hours may be allowed if a written request is submitted to the Superintendent of Parks, or his designee, no less than twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the start of the requested time extension and at least one of the criteria below is met:

    a.   Breakdown of mode of transportation;

    b.   Medical emergency;

    c.   Special approved group events requiring longer than seventy-two (72) hours;

    d.   Any reason for which it is determined by the Park Superintendent, or his or her designee, that denial of a time extension would work an undue hardship on the requesting party or parties.

    2.   The City may require proof of time extension.

    B.   Open Fires. Open fires in Red Canyon Park, Temple Canyon Park and Royal Gorge Park shall be allowed in designated picnic and camping areas only, and all open fires shall be kept inside an open fire containment device approved by the Superintendent of Parks or his or her designee. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave unattended any fire within such parks. Any person who starts or causes to be started an open fire in said parks shall ensure such open fire is completely extinguished prior to leaving said park. The Superintendent of Parks, or his or her designee, may limit or ban open fires in Red Canyon Park, Temple Canyon Park or Royal Gorge Park when weather or other conditions create a high potential for forest or range fires. (Ord. 19-1989 § 1)

 

9.44.070 Throwing objects into Royal Gorge prohibited.
    No person shall throw, roll or push any rocks, missiles or other objects from the top of the Royal Gorge Canyon, or declivities or precipices therein, within the boundaries of the Royal Gorge Park, as defined in Section 9.44.080. (Prior code § 9.68.050)

 

9.44.075 Livestock within the Royal Gorge Park.
    Livestock are prohibited in the Royal Gorge Park, unless specifically authorized by the City Administrator or the City Administrator’s designee. Owners of livestock may not transport, release, or permit livestock to roam or graze into the Royal Gorge Park. For purposes of this chapter, livestock means cattle, mules, asses, goats, sheep, swine, buffalo, and cattalo, but does not include horses with riders and “alternative livestock” as defined in C.R.S. § 35-41.5-102, as may be amended. (Ord. 6-2019 § 1)

 

9.44.080 Climbing, hang gliding and other unlawful activities.
    A.  All parachuting, skydiving, hang gliding or other restrained or unrestrained form of ascent to or descent from the bridge, incline railway, train or canyon walls, located in Royal Gorge Park described as: Sections 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, or 28, Township 18 South, Range 71 West of the 6th P.M., is prohibited.

    B.   Any descent or ascent in:

    1.   Royal Gorge Park described above; or

    2.   Red Canyon Park, described as: The S 1/2, SW 1/4 and NW 1/4 SW 1/4 of Section 5, the SE 1/4, SE 1/4 of Section 6, the N 1/2 NE 1/4 of Section 7, and the NE 1/4, SE 1/4 and N 1/2 of Section 8, Township 17 South, Range 70 West of the 6th P.M.; or

    3.   Temple Canyon Park, described as: Section 10, Township 19 South, Range 71 West of the 6th P.M.;

by method of rock climbing or rappelling is prohibited.

    C.   Any of the above activities may, however, be permitted by the Royal Gorge Company of Colorado, by written agreement, in that portion of the Royal Gorge Park which is leased to the Royal Gorge Company, and the Royal Gorge Company shall notify the City of any such agreements. (Prior code § 9.68.060)

 

9.44.090 Firearms prohibited—Exceptions.
    No person, except a peace officer, shall carry any firearm into, or upon, or across any public park, playground or other property held, owned or controlled by the City; provided, that any person holding a permit from the City to kill or trap predatory animals may carry firearms for such purpose. (Prior code § 9.68.020)

 

9.44.095 Additional prohibitions concerning fireworks, firearms, explosives and other incendiary devices.
    The provisions of Chapter 9.44, with respect to the sale, possession or use of fireworks, firearms, explosives and other incendiary devices, shall apply and be strictly enforced in all parks owned or controlled by the City, whether within or outside of the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 25-1993 § 2)

 

9.44.100 Trapping and hunting prohibited—Exceptions.
    A.  Except by permit, no person shall trap, hunt for, kill, or attempt to kill or trap any wild animal or game in any public park, playground or other property held, owned or controlled by the City; provided, that predatory animals may be trapped or killed by a person or persons holding a permit from the City to do so.

    B.   Permits to kill or trap predatory animals in or upon any public park, playground or other property held, owned or controlled by the City, shall be issued by the City Administrator after approval by the Council, upon application therefor, stating the public park or other place where such hunting or trapping is to be carried on, the animals to be killed or trapped, and such other information as may be material to a determination of whether or not a permit should be issued. (Prior code § 9.68.010)

 

9.44.110 Violation—Penalty—Liability for costs.
    A.  Any person who commits any unlawful act described at Section 9.44.060, or who otherwise violates any provision of this Chapter 9.44, including any rules adopted pursuant to Section 9.44.057 or Section 9.44.025, or who suffers or allows the same to be violated, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in an amount that does not exceed the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010.

    B.   Any person, firm, corporation or association engaging in those activities proscribed by this Chapter 9.44 shall be liable for any and all costs of rescue, extrication, first aid administration or transport arising from such activities, in addition to any other penalties provided for by law. (Ord. 17-2013 § 41; Ord. 3-2002 § 3; Ord. 19-1996 § 3; Ord. 15-1993 § 1; prior code 9.68.100)

 

Chapter 9.46 PUBLIC TRAILS
9.46.010 Definitions.
    A.  “Public Trail” shall mean and include any trail situated within the boundaries of the City of Cañon City that is owned, operated and/or maintained for public use by the City of Cañon City or by the Cañon City Area Metropolitan Recreation and Park District, or by both the City and the District.

    B.   “Trail Rules and Regulations” shall include those rules and regulations set forth in Section 9.46.020 and any additional rules or regulations adopted by resolution or ordinance of City Council. (Ord. 7-2012 § 1)

 

9.46.020 Rules and regulations.
    The trail rules and regulations that shall apply to all public trails within the City are as follows:

    1.   Take only memories, leave only footprints;

    2.   Hunting, trapping and firearms are prohibited;

    3.   Campfires and overnight camping are prohibited;

    4.   Motorized vehicles, including, but not limited to, any self-propelled vehicle, moped, go-cart, golf cart, motor scooter, electric personal assistive mobility device or “EPAMD,” as defined in C.R.S. § 42-1-102(28.7), engaged electronic assisted bicycle, hoverboard, or similar mode of transportation, are not allowed except upon established trails specifically designated by the City Council and marked for such purpose. A person may operate an electrical assisted bicycle, as defined in C.R.S. § 42-1-102(28.5), as may be amended, with the electrical motor disengaged on park paths where bicycles are authorized to travel. Electric personal assistive mobility devices or “EPAMDs” shall be permitted only if the user is dismounted. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit or restrict the use or operation of an “other power-driven mobility device” (OPDMD), as used and defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Title II and III;

    5.   Cutting trees and other vegetation is prohibited;

    6.   Alcoholic beverages allowed by special permit only;

    7.   Pets must stay on the trail and be leashed and pet waste must be collected and deposited into trash receptacles;

    8.   Only authorized uses are allowed on the trail;

    9.   Vehicles must be parked in authorized areas;

    10. Trail hours shall be dawn to dusk.

    11. The riding or leading of a horse, or any other hoofed animal is authorized, except in areas designated and posted as prohibiting such use. (Ord. 8-2020 § 2; Ord. 43-2017 § 2; Ord. 7-2012 § 1)

 

9.46.030 Posting of trail rules and regulations.
    Notice of trail rules and regulations shall be posted at various locations within and along the public trail system at locations to be determined by the City or by the District or by the City and District jointly. (Ord. 7-2012 § 1)

 

9.46.040 Violations—Penalties.
    Any person violating any posted trail rule or regulation is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first violation and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for any subsequent violation committed in any twelve (12) month period. (Ord. 7-2012 § 1)

Division VI. Consumer Protection (Reserved)

Division VII. Offenses By or Against Minors
Chapter 9.48 LOITERING
9.48.010 Definition.
    A.  As used in this ordinance, “loitering” shall mean remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include the concept of spending time idly; to be dilatory; to linger, to stay; to saunter; to delay; to stand around and shall also include the colloquial expressions “hanging around” and “hanging out.” (Ord. 14-1995 § 1)

 

9.48.020 Juvenile loitering during nighttime hours.
    A.  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to loiter or to aimlessly drive or ride about, on or about any street, avenue, highway, road, sidewalk, curb, gutter, parking lot, alley, vacant lot, park, playground, yard, building, place of amusement, or eating place, whether public or private, without the consent or permission of the owner or occupant thereof, during the hours beginning at 12:01 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday mornings, and ending at six a.m.; and beginning at ten p.m. on Sunday night through Thursday night, and ending at six a.m. the following morning. No violation of this Section 9.48.030 will have occurred if the person under the age of eighteen (18) years is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other adult person over the age of twenty-one (21) years who is authorized by a parent or guardian of such juvenile to take said parent’s place in accompanying said juvenile for a designated period of time and purpose within a specified area. (Ord. 14-1995 § 1)

 

9.48.030 Parental responsibility.
    A.  It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of a juvenile under the age of eighteen (18) years to knowingly permit or allow such juvenile to loiter or to aimlessly drive or ride about at the places and within the time prohibited by Section 9.48.020 of this chapter. The term “knowingly” includes knowledge which a parent should be reasonably expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a juvenile in that parent or guardian’s custody. It shall be no defense that a parent, guardian, or other person having the care and custody of the juvenile was indifferent to the activities, conduct or whereabouts of such juvenile. (Ord. 14-1995 § 1)

 

9.48.040 Penalties.
    A.  Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter 9.48 shall be punished by a fine in an amount that is not less than fifty dollars ($50.00), nor more than the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010.

    B.   In addition to the fine provided for at Subsection A, any person who violates any provisions of this chapter may be ordered to perform not fewer than twenty-four (24) hours nor more than forty-eight (48) hours of useful public service and to pay all fees required by the agency through which the useful public service will be arranged, performed and monitored. (Ord. 17-2013 § 42; Ord. 14-1995 § 1)

Division VIII. Weapons
Chapter 9.52 CONCEALED WEAPONS
9.52.010 Carrying concealed weapons prohibited—Exceptions.
    A.  A person commits a misdemeanor if such person knowingly and unlawfully:

    1.   Carries a knife concealed on or about his or her person; or

    2.   Carries a firearm concealed on or about his or her person; or

    3.   Carries concealed upon his or her person any other deadly weapon, as described in Section 18-1-901(3)(c), C.R.S.

    B.   It shall not be an offense if the defendant was:

    1.   A person in his or her own dwelling or place of business or on property owned or under his or her control at the time of the act of carrying; or

    2.   A person in a private automobile or other private means of conveyance who carries a weapon for lawful protection of such person’s or another’s person or property while traveling; or

    3.   A person who, at the time of carrying a concealed weapon, held a valid written permit to carry a concealed weapon issued pursuant to Section 18-12-105.1, C.R.S., as it existed prior to its repeal, or, if the weapon involved was a handgun, held a valid permit to carry a concealed handgun or a temporary emergency permit issued pursuant to part 2 of Article 12 of Title 18, C.R.S.; except that it shall be an offense under this section if the person was carrying a concealed handgun in violation of the provisions of Section 18-12-214; or

    4.   A peace officer, as described in Section 16-2.5-101, C.R.S., when carrying a weapon in conformance with the policy of the employing agency as provided in Section 16-2.5-101(2), C.R.S.; or

    5.   A United States probation officer or a United States pretrial services officer while on duty and serving in the State of Colorado under the authority of rules and regulations promulgated by the judicial conference of the United States.

    C.   The provisions of paragraph 3 of Subsection B of this Section 9.52.010 will operate to allow persons holding valid concealed handgun permits and otherwise acting in compliance with applicable state law to carry their concealed handguns into and within the City’s parks and on trails within the City for so long as such activities are permitted by applicable state law, but shall not operate to permit the open carrying of firearms into or within specific places and areas within the City, including, but not necessarily limited to, parks and trails, where City ordinances or other regulations of the City prohibit firearms and signage advising the public of such prohibition has been posted in and around such places and areas, as specifically permitted by Section 29-11.7-104, C.R.S. and generally authorized by Article XX of the Colorado Constitution. (Ord. 27-2014 § 3; Ord. 6-2013 § 1)

 

9.52.020 Violation—Penalty.
    Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter 9.52, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in an amount that does not exceed the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010. (Ord. 17-2013 § 43; Ord. 15-1993 § 1)

 

Chapter 9.56 DISCHARGING WEAPONS
9.56.010 Discharging firearms and air rifles—Misdemeanor.
    Any person who, in this city, discharges a firearm of any kind or an air rifle, when not acting in line of duty or not otherwise authorized by law, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 9.92.010)

 

9.56.015 Exceptions for firearms.
    A.  The City Administrator and the Chief of Police may jointly authorize certain City employees assigned to manage or operate the City’s water plant and facilities, including, but not limited to, raw water storage ponds and surrounding lands, to discharge firearms within the city for purposes of controlling or attempting to control muskrats, beaver and other destructive animals and rodents which are causing damage to any of the City’s water plant facilities. Such authorization, if given, shall be made in writing and shall contain the following:

    1.   The names of those authorized under this section;

    2.   A description of the location or locations with respect to which the authorization applies;

    3.   Restrictions as to days and times of day when the discharge of firearms may take place;

    4.   Restrictions as to the types of firearms which may be used by the identified employees; and

    5.   Such other restrictions or limitations as are deemed appropriate by the City Administrator and the Chief of Police for purposes of ensuring the safety of water plant employees and the inhabitants of the City and minimizing, to the extent practicable, disturbances to the peace of inhabitants which may be caused as a result of the discharge of firearms by authorized water plant operators.

    B.   The discharge of firearms authorized under Subsection A of this section in accordance with the terms, requirements, restrictions and limitations of a written authorization, as provided for in said subsection, shall not be a violation of Section 9.56.010.

    C.   True and correct copies of all written authorizations made under Subsection A shall be kept and maintained in the offices of the City Administrator, City Clerk and Chief of Police.

    D.  It should be an exception to Section 9.56.010 for a starter’s gun or other firearm, including muzzle loaders, which fires blanks or blank cartridges to be used in a recognized athletic event or contest, public performance, theatrical event or in a public event if such use is sanctioned by the City Administrator or Chief of Police. (Ord. 12-2019 § 5; Ord. 3-1992 § 1)

 

9.56.020 Using devices to throw objects—Misdemeanor.
    Any person who knowingly, intentionally or recklessly throws or causes to be thrown, by means of any peashooter, beanshooter, slingshot, or by means of any other machine or contrivance, any stone or other similar object at or toward any other person or persons, or at, toward or against the property of another, including, but not limited to, motorized vehicles, buildings and other structures, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 19-2003 § 10; prior code § 9.99.020)

 

9.56.025 Throwing objects—Misdemeanor.
    Any person who knowingly, intentionally or recklessly throws or causes to be thrown, any stone, egg, ice ball or other similar object, at or toward any other person or persons, or at, toward or against the property of another, including, but not limited to, motorized vehicles, buildings and other structures, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 20-2019 § 1)

 

9.56.030 Violation—Penalty.
    A.  Except as provided in Section 9.56.030(B), any person who violates any provision of this Chapter 9.56, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in an amount that does not exceed the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010.

    B.   Any person convicted of unlawfully discharging a firearm at any place within the City or within any park or other land owned or controlled by the City, if the court finds that such firearm was discharged from within a vehicle, shall be punished by a fine of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) nor more than the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010. (Ord. 12-2019 § 6; Ord. 17-2013 § 44; Ord. 15-1993 § 1)

Division IX. Fire and Explosives Regulations
Chapter 9.58 FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES
9.58.010 Fireworks—Provisions of Colorado Revised Statutes adopted by reference pursuant to Section 9 of Article XII of the Charter of Cañon City, Colorado.
    There is adopted by reference Article 33.5 of Title 24 of the Colorado Revised Statutes (“C.R.S.”) as amended, all to have the same force and effect as if set forth herein in every particular, except for deletions, amendments and additions hereinafter in this chapter set forth. (Ord. 12-2019 § 7)

 

9.58.020 Certification—Copies for public use.
    The City Clerk shall certify the passage of the ordinance codified in this Chapter 9.58 and make not less than three (3) copies of Part 20, Article 33.5 of Title 24, C.R.S., and the ordinance codified in this chapter available for inspection by the public during regular business hours. Copies of said Part 20, Article 33.5 of Title 24, C.R.S., together with a certified copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be available for sale to the public through the office of the City Clerk for an amount equal to the City’s cost of reproducing the same. (Ord. 12-2019 § 7)

 

9.58.030 Additions, amendments and deletions.
    Penalties for violations of this chapter shall be as set forth in Section 9.58.070 and the provisions of C.R.S. § 24-33.5-2010 are therefore deleted. (Ord. 12-2019 § 7)

 

9.58.040 Violations within city limits.
    Any act or omission which is described as a violation of any provision of Article 33.5 of Title 24, C.R.S. shall constitute a violation of this chapter if committed or omitted within the corporate limits of the City. (Ord. 12-2019 § 7)

 

9.58.050 Violations outside of city limits.
    A.  Any act or omission which is a violation if committed or omitted within the corporate limits of the City shall be a violation if committed or omitted within any park or other land owned or controlled by the City that is situated outside of the corporate limits of the City, including, but not limited to, Royal Gorge Park, Red Canyon Park, Temple Canyon Park, Skyline Drive, Tunnel Drive, and the Cañon City water treatment plant and facilities.

    B.   Within any park or other land owned or controlled by the City which is located outside of the City limits, it shall also be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association to possess outside of a vehicle, cast, throw, explode, ignite, set off or otherwise fire:

    1.   Permissible fireworks, as defined at C.R.S. § 24-33.5-2001(11)(a), as may be amended.

    2.   Any device described at C.R.S. § 24-33.5-2001(5), except that it shall not be a violation of this Subsection 9.58.050(B) that a highway flare, railway fusee, ship distress signal, smoke candle or other emergency signal device was possessed, if such device was not ignited, and it also shall not be a violation that such device was ignited if:

    a.   The device was placed upon or near the edge of an existing roadway in a place that is a safe distance away from growing vegetation or other combustible materials; and

    b.   The device was ignited for the sole purpose of signaling the approximate location of a person or persons involved in an actual emergency situation involving death or serious bodily injury or other circumstances that constituted an actual and immediate threat to human life, health or safety. (Ord. 12-2019 § 7)

 

9.58.060 Firearms and explosives.
    A.  No person shall discharge a cannon nor cause to explode any gunpowder, blasting powder, giant powder, dynamite, TNT, nitroglycerine or other dangerous explosive, within the City or within the boundaries of any park or other land or facility owned or controlled by the City located outside of the corporate limits of the city, except:

    1.   A mechanical device utilizing an explosive powder or cartridge used in the construction trades may be used in the ordinary course of business; and

    2.   Explosives used in construction excavation projects, may be used in such projects, but only when a written permit for same shall have been previously obtained from the City Building Inspector, for which no fee shall be charged. (Ord. 12-2019 § 7)

 

9.58.070 Penalties for violations.
    A.  Any person who violates any provision of Section 9.58.040, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in an amount that is not less than fifty dollars ($50.00), nor more than the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010.

    B.   Every person who violates any provision of Section 9.58.050 or of Section 9.58.060, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in an amount that is not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00), nor more than the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010.

    C.   No portion of minimum fines provided for at Subsections A and B of this section shall be suspended by any court. (Ord. 12-2019 § 7)

 

Chapter 9.60 OPEN BURNING
9.60.010 Definitions.
    A.  “Fire Chief” means and refers to the Chief of the Fire Department operated by the Cañon City Area Fire Protection District.

    B.   “Jurisdiction of the City” means and includes all property within the boundaries of the City and all other land in the vicinity of the City that is owned or controlled by the City, including, but not limited to: Royal Gorge Park, Red Canyon Park, Temple Canyon Park, Skyline Drive, Tunnel Drive, Lakeside Cemetery, Greenwood Cemetery and all land containing facilities of the Cañon City Water Department.

    C.   “Official order,” as used in this chapter, means and includes any order issued by the City Administrator pursuant to the authority granted in subsection A of Section 9.60.020 which is distributed and posted in accordance with that subsection, and any certified written order of the Fire Chief delivered to the City Administrator which is posted and distributed as provided for in subsection B of Section 9.60.020.

    D.  “Open burning” means as any outdoor fire, including but not limited to, bonfires, campfires, warming fires, charcoal grill fires, fires in wood-burning stoves, the use of explosives, outdoor welding or hot work, fireworks of all kinds or brands, including fireworks otherwise permissible pursuant to C.R.S. § 24-33.5-2001, and the prescribed burning of fence lines or rows, fields, farm lands, rangelands, wildlands, trash and debris. Open burning shall not include:

    1.   Fires in camp stoves or grills fueled by bottled gas or pressurized liquid and specifically designed for cooking or heating purposes;

    2.   Fires in permanently constructed stationary masonry or metal fireplaces specifically designed for the purpose of combustion; and

    3.   Fires in commercially operated wood and/or charcoal-fired grills designed for cooking.

    E.   “Hazardous fire area” shall have the same meaning as the fire code adopted by the Cañon City Area Fire Protection District, as approved and ratified by resolution or ordinance of City Council. (Ord. 12-2019 § 7)

 

9.60.020 Authority for issuance and enforcement of official orders banning open burning and restricting access to hazardous fire areas.
    A.  Whenever the City Administrator determines that conditions in and around the City are such that there is a high risk of fire, in consultation with the Fire Chief and other local governmental entities with authority regarding fire restrictions, the City Administrator shall have the authority, by written order to:

    1.   To temporarily ban or otherwise restrict open burning;

    2.   To ban or restrict the use of fireworks; and

    3.   To deny or restrict public access to any hazardous fire area within the jurisdiction of the City.

    B.   Copies of all such orders by the City Administrator shall be promptly distributed to a newspaper of general circulation in the city, posted on the City’s official bulletin board at City Hall and on the City’s website. Notice of the City Administrator’s order also may be given to the general public using other means of communication available to the City Administrator.

    C.   Whenever the Fire Chief shall issue a written order banning or otherwise restricting open burning or denying or restricting public access to a hazardous fire area within the boundaries of the Cañon City Area Fire Protection District and deliver a certified copy of such order to the office of the City Administrator, such order shall be enforceable within the jurisdiction of the City by the Fire District. Copies of such orders by the Fire Chief shall be distributed and posted in the same manner and places as are provided for in subsection A of this section with respect to the written orders of the City Administrator.

    D.  In the event of a conflict between a provision of a written order of the City Administrator and a provision of a written order of the Fire Chief, the more stringent provision shall apply, unless the written order of the City Administrator provides otherwise. (Ord. 12-2019 § 7)

 

9.60.030 Duration.
    The City Administrator, or his or her designee, is authorized to impose restrictions of a limited duration based on the nature and scope of the current conditions. Any such duration may be extended or modified by subsequent administrative order of the City Administrator, or his or her designee, based on continuing adverse fire conditions. (Ord. 12-2019 § 7)

 

9.60.040 Presumption.
    After the terms of an official order have been posted on the City’s official bulletin board, City’s website, and printed or summarized in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, all persons physically present within the jurisdiction of the City shall be presumed to have actual knowledge of the terms of such official order. (Ord. 12-2019 § 7)

 

9.60.050 Unlawful acts.
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any open burning in the City, including public, private, state and federal lands, in violation of this Code or in violation of an administrative order issued by the City Administrator, or his or her designee, in accordance with this section. (Ord. 12-2019 § 7)

 

9.60.060 Penalty for violation.
    Any person convicted of violating any provision of this section, with the exception of 9.60.020(C), shall, upon conviction, be punished as follows:

    A.  First offense, a fine of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).

    B.   Second offense, a fine of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00).

    C.   Third offense, summons and a fine between three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) to not more than four hundred ninety-nine dollars ($499.00).

    D.  The City also may seek an injunction, abatement, restitution or any other remedy to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove the violation.

    E.   Each day a violation of this section continues shall constitute a separate offense. Any remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law. (Ord. 12-2019 § 7)

 

9.60.070 Additional remedies.
    The remedies provided in this section shall be cumulative and in addition to any other federal, state or local remedy, criminal or civil, which may be available. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to preclude prosecution under any other applicable statute, including but not limited to prosecution under C.R.S. § 18-13-109 or any other applicable statute, ordinance, rule, order or regulation. (Ord. 12-2019 § 7)

Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 10.04 MODEL TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter 10.08 RAILROAD REGULATIONS

Chapter 10.04 MODEL TRAFFIC CODE
10.04.010 Document adopted by reference.
    Pursuant to Section 9 of Article XII of the Charter of Cañon City, Colorado, there is adopted by this reference Articles I and II, inclusive, of the 2003 Edition of the “Model Traffic Code” promulgated and published as such by the Colorado Department of Transportation, Safety and Traffic Engineering Branch, 4201 East Arkansas Avenue, EP 700, Denver, Colorado 80222, all to have the same force and effect as if set forth herein in every particular, except for the deletions, amendments and additions hereinafter in this chapter set forth. (Ord. 27-2003 § 1: Ord. 10-2001 § 1)

 

10.04.020 Certification—Copies for public use.
    The City Clerk shall certify the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter and make not less than three (3) copies of the adopted Model Traffic Code and copies of this chapter, together with three (3) copies of any ordinance amending this chapter subsequent to the adoption of the 2003 Edition of the Model Traffic Code, available for inspection by the public during regular business hours. The Model Traffic Code, together with a certified copy of this chapter and copies of subsequent ordinances amending this chapter, shall be available for sale to the public through the office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 27-2003 § 2: Ord. 10-2001 § 1)

 

10.04.030 Purpose of Model Traffic Code provisions.
    The subject matter and purpose of the Model Traffic Code is to provide a system of traffic control and regulation within the city and within certain areas outside the city which are under the City’s jurisdiction, generally conforming to similar regulations throughout the State of Colorado and the United States. (Ord. 10-2001 § 1)

 

10.04.040 Interpretation of provisions.
    This chapter shall be interpreted and construed so as to effectuate its general purpose to conform with the State’s uniform system for the regulation of vehicles and traffic. Article and section headings of this chapter and the adopted Model Traffic Code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or extent of the provisions of any article or section thereof. (Ord. 10-2001 § 1)

 

10.04.050 Application.
    A.  This chapter shall apply to every street, alley, sidewalk area, driveway, park, and to every other public way or public place or public parking area, either within or outside the corporate limits of the city, the use of which the City has jurisdiction and authority to regulate, including, but not limited to, Temple Canyon Park, Red Canyon Park, Royal Gorge Park and Skyline Drive. All land within the corporate boundaries of the city, together with the land included within such designated parks and Skyline Drive shall constitute the “jurisdiction of the City” for purposes of the applicability and enforcement of the Model Traffic Code.

    B.   The provisions of Sections 606, 607, 610, 1401, 1402 and 1413 of the Model Traffic Code, respectively concerning the display of unauthorized signs or devices, the interference with official devices, the display of unauthorized insignia, reckless driving, careless driving, and eluding or attempting to elude a police officer, shall apply to both public places and ways and private places throughout the jurisdiction of the City, as described in Subsection A of this section. (Ord. 10-2001 § 1)

 

10.04.060 Violations and penalties.
    A.  It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of the Model Traffic Code, as adopted and amended in this chapter.

    B.   If no other fine is specified or otherwise provided for in this chapter, including Subsection C of this section, every person who violates any provision of this Chapter 10.04, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in an amount that does not exceed the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010.

    C.   Every person who is convicted of violating any provision of the Model Traffic Code (“MTC”) shall be punished according to the following schedule:

 

 

OFFENSE—MTC SECTION

FINE

1. Parking Violations:

 

a. Violations of Section 1203 (Time restricted parking)

$5.00

b. Violations of Section 1208 (Concerning spaces reserved for persons with a disability and related matters)

$100.00

c. Violations of Section 1202, 1204, 1205, 1206 or 1207

$30.00

d. Violations of Section 1212 (Prohibiting the parking or storage of commercial vehicles, recreational vehicles and/or trailers on residential streets)

$30.00 for a first violation within any 12-month period;

$50.00 for a second violation within any 12-month period;

$250.00 for a third or subsequent violation within any 12-month period.

NOTE: Time periods between violations of Section 1212 shall be measured from date of occurrence to date of occurrence for purposes of determining the appropriate fine for second and/or subsequent violations.

2. Child Restraint Systems and Seat Belts:

 

Violations of Section 236

$65.00

Violations of Section 237

$65.00

3. 0 and 1 Point Violations: All moving and non-moving violations of the MTC, not otherwise addressed in this schedule, for which the violator is assessed either no points or one point by the Colorado Department of Revenue, Division of Motor Vehicles (“DMV”)

$45.00

4. 2 to 12 Point Violations—Minimum Penalty: Violations of the MTC, not otherwise addressed in this schedule, for which the violator is assessed two or more points by the DMV

$25.00 per point

5. 6 or More Point Violations—Maximum Penalty: All violations of the MTC, not otherwise addressed in this schedule, for which the violator may be assessed 6 or more points by the DMV

Maximum penalty is a fine in an amount that does not exceed the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010

6. Speeding Violations:

 

a. 1 to 4 mph over the maximum lawful speed limit

$30.00

b. 5 to 9 mph over the maximum lawful speed limit

$70.00

c. 10 to 19 mph over the maximum lawful speed limit

$135.00

d. 20 to 39 mph over the maximum lawful speed limit

$200.00

e. 40+ over the maximum lawful speed limit (See Section 1101 MTC and Section 10.04.090 CCMC)

$340.00

7. Speeding violations in a “posted school zone”

Double the normal fine for the violation

8. Speeding violations in a “posted construction zone”

Double the normal fine for the violation

9. Careless driving violations

Minimum fine is $150.00; other penalties are as provided for in Section 1402 (see Section 10.04.140 CCMC)

10. Reckless driving violations

Minimum fine is $240.00; other penalties are as provided for in Section 1401 (see Section 10.04.130 CCMC)

11. Eluding a police officer

Minimum fine is $500.00; other penalties are as provided for in Section 1413 (see Section 10.04.160 CCMC)

12. Compulsory insurance violations

Minimum fine for a first offense is $500.00; other penalties are as provided for in Section 1409 (see Section 10.04.150 CCMC)

13. Moving violations, other than speeding, occurring in a “posted school zone”

Double the normal fine for the violation [see Section 615 and Article II, Section 102 (55.5) MTC]

14. Moving violations, other than speeding, occurring in a “posted construction zone”

Double the normal fine for the violation [see Section 614 and Article II, Section 102 (55.3) MTC]

15. Misuse of a Wireless Telephone Violations

 

a. Violations of Section 239(2)

Minimum fine for a first offense is $50.00; minimum fine for a second offense is $100.00

b. Violations of Section 239(3)

Minimum fine is $300.00; other penalties are as provided for in Section 239 (see Section 10.04.065 CCMC)

 

    D.  In addition to any penalty provided for in this section with respect to any violation of the Model Traffic Code, a surcharge, as provided for in Section 1.16.090 of the Cañon City Municipal Code shall be assessed upon conviction of the violation.

    E.   When a penalty assessment notice is permitted by the Model Traffic Code, as amended, and issued by the peace officer contacting an alleged violator, the fine amount to be shown on the penalty assessment notice shall be the fine or minimum fine provided for at Subsection C of this section and the surcharge amount shall be calculated as provided for in Section 1.16.090 of the Municipal Code.

    F.   If a person receives a penalty assessment notice for violation of any section of the Model Traffic Code, as amended, and pays the fine and surcharge for the violation on or before the date when the payment is due, the points assessed for the violation shall be reduced as follows:

    1.   For a violation having an assessment of three (3) or more points (under Section 42-2-127(5), C.R.S.), the points are reduced by two (2) points.

    2.   For a violation having an assessment of two (2) points (under Section 42-2-127(5), C.R.S.), the points are reduced by one point.

    G.  For purposes of Subsection F of this section, receipt of payment by mail by the City or the postmarking of such payment on or prior to the twentieth (20th) day after receipt of the penalty assessment notice by the defendant shall be deemed to constitute receipt on or before the date the payment was due. (Ord. 34-2017 § 2; Ord. 17-2013 §§ 45, 46; Ord. 1-2013 § 3; Ord. 6-2010 § 3; Ord. 15-2009 § 1)

 

10.04.065 Section 239—Misuse of a wireless telephone.
    There is hereby added to the Model Traffic Code a new Section 239 to read as follows:

 

239.           Misuse of a Wireless Telephone—Definitions—Penalty—Preemption.

      (1)       As used in this Section, unless the context otherwise requires:

                 (a)      “Emergency” means a situation in which a person:

                     (i)   Has reason to fear for such person’s life or safety or believes that a criminal act may be perpetrated against such person or another person, requiring the use of a wireless telephone while the car is moving; or

                     (ii)  Reports a fire, a traffic accident in which one or more injuries are apparent, a serious road hazard, a medical or hazardous materials emergency, or a person who is driving in a reckless, careless, or otherwise unsafe manner.

                 (b)      “Operating a motor vehicle” means driving a motor vehicle on a public highway, but “operating a motor vehicle” shall not mean maintaining the instruments of control while the motor vehicle is at rest in a shoulder lane or lawfully parked.

                 (c)      “Use” means talking on or listening to a wireless telephone or engaging the wireless telephone for text messaging or other similar forms of manual data entry or transmission.

                 (d)      “Wireless telephone” means a telephone that operates without a physical, wireline connection to the provider’s equipment. The term includes, without limitation, cellular and mobile telephones.

      (2)       A person under eighteen (18) years of age shall not use a wireless telephone while operating a motor vehicle. This Subsection (2) does not apply to acts specified in Subsection (3) of this Section.

      (3)       A person shall not use a wireless telephone for the purpose of engaging in text messaging or other similar forms of manual data entry or transmission while operating a motor vehicle.

 

      (4)       Subsection (2) or (3) of this Section shall not apply to a person who is using the wireless telephone:

                 (a)      To contact a public safety entity; or

                 (b)      During an emergency.

      (5)       (a)      A person who operates a motor vehicle in violation of Subsection (2) of this Section commits a traffic offense, punishable pursuant to Section 10.04.060 herein.

                 (b)      Except as set forth below, a person who operates a motor vehicle in violation of Section (3) shall be punished by a minimum mandatory fine of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00). If the person’s actions are the proximate cause of bodily injury or death to another, the person shall be punished by a minimum mandatory fine of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment for not fewer than ten (10) days, nor more than one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

      (6)       (a)      An operator of a motor vehicle shall not be cited for a violation of Subsection (2) of this section unless the operator was under eighteen (18) years of age and a law enforcement officer saw the operator use, as defined in paragraph (c) of Subsection (1) of this section, a wireless telephone.

                 (b)      An operator of a motor vehicle shall not be cited for a violation of Subsection (3) of this section unless a law enforcement officer saw the operator use a wireless telephone for the purpose of engaging in text messaging or other similar forms of manual data entry or transmission, in a manner that caused the operator to drive in a careless and imprudent manner, without due regard for the width, grade, curves, corners, traffic, and use of the streets and highways and all other attendant circumstances, as prohibited by Section 10.04.140 herein.

      (7)       The provisions of this section shall not be construed to authorize the seizure and forfeiture of a wireless telephone, unless otherwise provided by law.

      (8)       This section does not restrict operation of an amateur radio station by a person who holds a valid amateur radio operator license issued by the federal communications commission.

(Ord. 34-2017 § 1)

 

10.04.070 Subsection 703(3) modified—Stopping at stop signs and yielding after stopping.
    Subsection 703(3) of the Model Traffic Code is amended to read as follows:

 

      (3)       Except when directed to proceed by a police officer, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when such driver is moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways, except that, if a driver is involved in a collision with a vehicle in the intersection or junction of roadways after driving past a stop sign, such collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of his or her failure to yield right-of-way.

(Ord. 10-2001 § 1)

 

10.04.075 Section 704 amended—Vehicle entering roadway.
    Section 704 of the Model Traffic Code is amended to read as follows:

 

704.           Vehicle entering roadway.

      (1)       The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a roadway from any place other than a roadway shall stop before entering or crossing the roadway if the street, road, lane or way upon which the vehicle of such driver is traveling is controlled by a standard stop sign. The driver of a vehicle approaching such a standard stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when such driver is moving across or within the intersection or junction of the street, road, lane or way and the roadway.

      (2)       When such place is not controlled by a standard stop sign, the driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a roadway from any place other than another roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway to be entered or crossed.

      (3)       The requirements of Subsection (1) of this Section 704 shall apply without regard to whether the standard stop sign is located on public or private land and without regard to whether the stop sign was erected or is maintained by the City. Nothing in this Section 704 shall be construed to require the City to erect or maintain any stop sign on private property but the Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to permit the erection and maintenance of standard stop signs by private persons and entities to regulate and control traffic entering roadways from places other than roadways. The Traffic Engineer may maintain a schedule listing standard stop signs authorized or approved pursuant to this Subsection 704(3). Any such stop sign, once added to such schedule, shall be presumed to comply with the requirements of the Model Traffic Code unless the contrary is established by competent evidence.

(Ord. 26-2001 § 1)

 

10.04.080 Section 902 supplemented—Certain turns into on-street parking spaces prohibited.
    Section 902 of the Model Traffic Code is supplemented by the addition of a new Subsection 902(4) to read as follows:

 

      (4)       In a C (general commercial) and in a CB (central business district commercial) zoning district of the city, the driver of any vehicle shall not cross one or more lanes of traffic for the purpose of entering an on-street parking place provided for vehicles traveling in the opposite direction. Left turns into off-street parking lots, when not prohibited by official traffic control devices, shall be governed by Sections 702 and 901(b).

(Ord. 10-2001 § 1)

 

10.04.090 Section 1101 modified—Speed limits.
    Section 1101 of the Model Traffic Code is deleted and the following Section 1101 is substituted therefor:

 

1101.         Speed limits.

      (1) (a)  No person shall drive a vehicle on a highway at a speed that is in excess of the posted maximum speed limit or, where a maximum speed limit is not posted, at a speed that is in excess of the applicable lawful speed set forth at Subsection (2) of this section.

      (b)       For purposes of paragraph (1)(a), the posted maximum speed limit shall be the speed limit designated on an official speed limit sign or other official traffic control device for the applicable time and location.

      (2)       Except when a special hazard exists that requires a lower speed, the following speeds shall be lawful:

      (a)       Twenty (20) miles per hour on narrow, winding mountain highways or on blind curves;

      (b)       Twenty-five (25) miles per hour in any business district, as defined in Section 102(7) of Article II of this Code;

      (c)       Thirty (30) miles per hour in any residence district, as defined in Section 102 (59) of Article II of this Code;

      (d)       Forty (40) miles per hour on open mountain highways;

      (e)       Forty-five (45) miles per hour for all vehicles in the business of transporting trash, where higher speeds are posted, when said vehicle is loaded as an exempted vehicle pursuant to Section 507 (3);

      (f)       Fifty-five (55) miles per hour on other open highways which are not on the interstate system, as defined in Section 43-2-101(2), C.R.S., and are not surfaced, four-lane freeways or expressways;

      (g)       Fifty-five (55) miles per hour on surfaced, four-lane highways which are on the interstate system, as defined in Section 43-2-101(2), C.R.S., or are freeways or expressways;

      (h)       Any speed not in excess of a maximum speed limit designated by an official traffic control device;

      (i)        Ten (10) miles per hour in any alley;

      (j)        Fifteen (15) miles per hour on Skyline Drive;

      (k)       Twenty (20) miles per hour on any gravel-surfaced road or street.

      (3)       No driver of a vehicle shall fail to decrease the speed of such vehicle from an otherwise lawful speed to a reasonable and prudent speed when a special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions.

      (4)       (No provision).

      (5)       In every charge of violating Subsection (1) of this section, the complaint, summons and complaint, or penalty assessment notice shall specify the speed at which the defendant is alleged to have driven and also the maximum lawful speed limit applicable at the specified time and location of the alleged violation.

      (6)       The provisions of this section shall not be construed to relieve the party alleging negligence under this section in any civil action for damages from the burden of proving that such negligence was the proximate cause of an accident.

 

      (7)       The speed limits set forth in Subsection (2) of this section are the maximum lawful speed limits in the city.

      (8)       Unless a maximum lawful speed limit in excess of fifty-five (55) miles per hour is required pursuant to a mandatory State law that is applicable within the jurisdiction of the City and designated by an official traffic control device, the maximum lawful speed limit on any highway within the city limits of the City of Cañon City, including, but not limited to, highways that are part of the interstate system, shall be fifty-five (55) miles per hour.

      (9)       The conduct of a driver of a vehicle which would otherwise constitute a violation of this section is justifiable and not unlawful when:

      (a)       It is necessary as an emergency measure to avoid an imminent public or private injury which is about to occur by reason of a situation occasioned or developed through no conduct of said driver and which is of sufficient gravity that, according to ordinary standards of intelligence and morality, the desirability and urgency of avoiding the injury clearly outweigh the desirability of avoiding the consequences sought to be prevented by this section; or

      (b)       With respect to authorized emergency vehicles, the applicable conditions for exemption, as set forth in Section 108, exist.

      (10)     The minimum requirement for commission of a traffic violation under this section is the performance by a driver of prohibited conduct, which includes a voluntary act or the omission to perform an act which said driver is physically capable of performing.

      (11)     It shall not be a defense to prosecution for a violation of this section that:

      (a)       The defendant’s conduct was not performed intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence; or

      (b)       The defendant’s conduct was performed under a mistaken belief of fact, including, but not limited to, a mistaken belief of the defendant regarding the speed of the defendant’s vehicle; or

      (c)       The defendant’s vehicle has a greater operating or fuel-conserving efficiency at speeds greater than the reasonable and prudent speed under the conditions then existing or at speeds greater than the maximum lawful speed limit.

(Ord. 10-2001 § 1)

 

10.04.100 Section 1102 deleted.
    The provisions of Section 1102 are deleted from the Model Traffic Code, as adopted in this City, but the City acknowledges and asserts its power and authority to regulate speeds within its jurisdiction, subject only to limitations set forth in applicable laws of the State of Colorado. However, certain of the powers referred to in this Section 1102 (which is derived from Section 42-4-1102, C.R.S.) are delegated to the Traffic Engineer in Section 10.04.180 of this chapter. (Ord. 10-2001 § 1)

 

10.04.105 Section 1203 added—Time-limited parking restrictions.
    A new Section 1203 is added to the Model Traffic Code to read as follows:

 

1203. Time-limited parking restrictions.

      (1)       When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle on any highway or street within the city, between the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m., for a period of time longer than is permitted in accordance with any schedule adopted and published by the Traffic Engineer pursuant to the authority granted to said Traffic Engineer under Section 10.04.180 of the Municipal Code. Such schedules shall include, but not necessarily be limited to: Schedule IX, covering areas where parking time is limited to three (3) hours, except as otherwise provided in Subsection (4) of Section 10.04.105; and Schedule IX-A, covering areas where parking time is limited to fifteen (15) minutes.

      (2)       Unless such schedules and signs indicate to the contrary, the time-limited parking restrictions provided for in Subsection 1203(1) shall not apply on Sunday or on public holidays designated by ordinance or resolution of City Council.

      (3)       Signs giving notice of such time-limited parking restrictions need not be spaced any closer than at opposite ends of any city block; provided that at least two (2) such signs must be located on each block or portion thereof that is subject to a time-limited parking restriction and further provided that all such signs must be located on the side of the street which is subject to the time-limited parking restriction.

      (4)       Business Parking Permits. Upon application and review, the City Administrator, or his or her designee, shall issue parking permits to business owners with businesses contiguous to or on streets subject to a three (3) hour limitation pursuant to Schedule IX of Section 10.04.105, for use by vehicles owned by or in the custody of the customers, representatives, contractors, visitors and invitees of such business owners. The parking permit shall not be used by employees or owners of any downtown business. A “business owner” for purposes of this Subsection means the owner or operator of a commercial business or enterprise, who, because of the nature of his or her business, and upon proof submitted to the City, requires parking for its customers, representatives, contractors, visitors and invitees in excess of three (3) hours.

                 (a)      Application. A business parking permit may be obtained by filing a written application with the City, which application shall state the name and business address of the applicant. In considering applications for business parking permits, the City shall determine the need for a permit and may require proof of the following:

                     (i)   A statement or documentation indicating the business in which the applicant is engaged.

                     (ii)  That an applicant has a legal right to possession of the premises claimed as a business and a valid City sales tax license, if applicable.

                     (iii) That enforcement of a three (3) hour parking limitation will materially delay or interfere with the rendering of services provided by a qualifying business owner.

                 (b)      A vehicle displaying a valid permit issued pursuant to this subsection may be parked on a street otherwise subject to a three (3) hour limitation pursuant to Schedule IX of Section 10.04.105, for a period of five (5) hours.

                 (c)      No more than three (3) business parking permits per business owner shall be issued at any given time. For businesses with multiple owners, the number of permits shall not exceed three (3).

                 (d)      The permittee shall be responsible for ensuring the removal of the permit from the vehicle after usage or upon termination of the five (5) hour limitation.

                 (e)      If the permit is damaged or lost such that it must be replaced, the permittee, upon application therefor, shall be issued and pay for a replacement permit.

                 (f)       No person shall use or display any permit issued under this Subsection in violation of any provision of this code.

                 (g)      Any person may have business parking permits revoked if the use of the permit is used in violation of this Section. The City Administrator, or his or her designee, shall have the right to revoke such permits upon twenty-four (24) hours’ notice to the permittee.

                 (h)      The City Administrator, or his or her designee, shall provide all necessary reports on permits to the Cañon City Police Department to assist with parking enforcement.

(Ord. 5-2017 § 2; Ord. 26-2001 § 2)

 

10.04.110 Subsection 1204(1) modified—Places where parking is prohibited.
    Subsection 1204(1) of the Model Traffic Code is amended by the addition of a new Subsection 1204(1)(l) [following Subsection 1204(1)(k)] to read as follows:

 

      (l)        Between the sidewalk and the curb, where there is space between the sidewalk and curb, or between the sidewalk and the parking lane on any street that has no curbs, when there is a space between the sidewalk and the parking lane.

(Ord. 10-2001 § 1)

 

10.04.115 Section 1204 modified—Places where parking is prohibited.
    Subsection 1204(8) is added to the Model Traffic Code, to read as follows:

 

      (8) (a)  Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this Subsection 1204(8), whenever a concrete or other hard-surfaced curb, or portion thereof, is painted yellow, it shall be illegal to stop, stand or park any motor vehicle, or portion of a vehicle, in the highway or street that is immediately adjacent to such painted curb. The prohibition contained in this paragraph shall apply even if there is no signage on or near to such painted curb indicating that parking is prohibited. The color yellow, when applied to a curb, or a portion of a curb, shall signify that stopping, standing or parking a motor vehicle adjacent to such painted curb, or portion thereof, is prohibited.

      (b)       It shall not be unlawful to park a motor vehicle on a highway or street adjacent to a curb that is painted yellow if, but only if, signage that is adjacent to or stenciled onto such painted curb permits motor vehicles to be parked adjacent to such painted curb for short periods of time that are stated on such signage or stenciled message; provided that the period during which a motor vehicle may be parked at such location shall not exceed the time allowed.

(Ord. 26-2001 § 3)

 

10.04.118 Section 1205 amended—Parking at curb or edge or roadway.
    A new Subsection 1205(4) is added to the Model Traffic Code, to read as follows:

 

      (4)       Angle parking shall be permitted on roadways where official traffic control devices, including but not necessarily limited to painted lines indicating the boundaries of individual angled parking spaces on such roadways, clearly indicate that such parking is permitted. Subject to the prior approval of City Council and, when applicable, the requirements of Subsection 1205(3), with respect to the determination required from the Department of Transportation relative to angle parking on State highways, the Traffic Engineer shall determine where angle parking will be permitted.

(Ord. 26-2001 § 4)

 

10.04.120 Section 1209 modified—Owner liability for certain violations.
    Section 1209 of the Model Traffic Code is redesignated as Subsection 1209(1) and a new Subsection 1209(2) is hereby added to read as follows:

 

      (2)       In any prosecution for a violation of any ordinance governing the stopping, parking or operating of a vehicle, where the operator of the vehicle is not known, the owner of said vehicle shall be liable upon conviction for the payment of any fine assessed, unless the owner of the vehicle can furnish sufficient evidence that the vehicle was, at the time of the violation, in the care, custody or control of another person. To avoid liability for payment, the owner of the motor vehicle is required within twenty (20) days after notification by the issuance of the appropriate summons and complaint for the type of violation charged, to furnish to the municipal prosecutor the name and address of the person who had the care, custody or control of such vehicle.

(Ord. 10-2001 § 1)

 

10.04.125 Section 1211 amended—Limitations on backing.
    Section 1211 of the Model Traffic Code is amended to read as follows:

 

1211. Limitations on backing.

      (1)       The driver of a vehicle, whether on public property or private property which is used by the general public for parking purposes, shall not back the vehicle unless such movement can be made with safety.

      (2)       The driver of a vehicle shall not back the vehicle upon any shoulder or roadway of any controlled-access highway.

(Ord. 27-2003 § 3)

 

10.04.126 Section 1212 added—Parking restrictions applicable to certain commercial vehicles, recreational vehicles and trailers on residential streets.
    The Model Traffic Code is amended to add a new Section 1212 to read as follows:

 

1212. Parking Restrictions Applicable to Certain Commercial Vehicles, Recreational Vehicles and Trailers on Residential Streets. No person shall park or store any commercial vehicle, recreational vehicle, or trailer in violation of any provision of Section 12.26.030 of the Cañon City Municipal Code, the provisions of which are, by this reference, incorporated into this Section 1212.

(Ord. 1-2013 § 2)

 

10.04.130 Section 1401 modified—Reckless driving—Penalty.
    Section 1401 of the Model Traffic Code is amended to read as follows:

 

1401. Reckless driving—Penalty.

      (1)       Any person who drives any motor vehicles, bicycle, or motorized bicycle anywhere within the jurisdiction of the City, as described in Subsection 10.04.050(A) of the Cañon City Municipal Code, in such a manner as to indicate either a wanton or a willful disregard for the safety of persons or property is guilty of reckless driving. A person convicted of reckless driving of a bicycle or motorized bicycle shall not be subject to the provisions of Section 42-2-127, C.R.S.

      (2)       Any person who is convicted of reckless driving shall be punished by a fine of not less than two hundred forty dollars ($240.00), nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Upon a second or subsequent conviction of reckless driving within any period of twelve (12) consecutive months, such person shall be punished by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00), nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment for not less than ten (10) days nor more than one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

(Ord. 15-2009 § 3; Ord. 10-2001 § 1)

 

10.04.140 Section 1402 modified—Careless driving—Penalty.
    Section 1402 of the Model Traffic Code is amended to read as follows:

 

1402. Careless driving—Penalty.

      (1)       Any person who drives any motor vehicle, bicycle, or motorized bicycle anywhere within the jurisdiction of the City, as described in Subsection 10.04.050(A) of the Cañon City Municipal Code, in a careless and imprudent manner, without due regard for the width, grade, curves, corners, traffic, and use of the streets and highways and all other attendant circumstances, is guilty of careless driving. A person convicted of careless driving of a bicycle or motorized bicycle shall not be subject to the provisions of Section 42-2-127, C.R.S.

      (2)       Any person who is convicted of careless driving shall be punished by a fine that is not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00), or by imprisonment of not more than ninety (90) days, or both; provided that if the person’s actions are the proximate cause of bodily injury or death to another, such person shall be punished by a fine that is not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00), nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment for not fewer than ten (10) days, nor more than one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

(Ord. 15-2009 § 4; Ord. 10-2001 § 1)

 

10.04.150 Subsection 1409 modified—Compulsory insurance—Penalty.
    Subsection 1409 of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

1409. Compulsory insurance—Penalty.

      (1)       No owner of a motor vehicle required to be registered in this state shall operate the vehicle or permit it to be operated on the public streets and highways of the city when the owner has failed to have a complying policy or certificate of self-insurance in full force and effect as required by law. [See Sections 10-4-619 and 10-4-624, C.R.S.]

      (2)       No person shall operate a motor vehicle on the public streets and highways of the City without a complying policy or certificate of self-insurance in full force and effect as required by law.

      (3)       When an accident occurs, or when requested to do so following any lawful traffic contact or during any traffic investigation by a peace officer, no owner or operator of a motor vehicle shall fail to present to the requesting officer immediate evidence of a complying policy or certificate of self-insurance in full force and effect as required by law.

      (4)(a)   Any person who violates the provisions of Subsection 1, 2, or 3 of this section commits a traffic offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a minimum mandatory fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00). The court may suspend up to one-half of the fine upon a showing that appropriate insurance, as required pursuant to Section 10-4-619 or 10-4-624, C.R.S., has been obtained. Nothing in this paragraph (a) shall be construed to prevent the court from imposing a fine greater than the minimum mandatory fine.

      (b)       Upon a second or subsequent conviction under this section within a period of five (5) years following a prior conviction under this section, the defendant shall be punished by a minimum mandatory fine of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). The court may suspend up to one-half of the fine upon a showing that appropriate insurance as required pursuant to Section 10-4-619 or 10-4-624, C.R.S., has been obtained.

      (c)       The court may establish a payment schedule for a person convicted of violating the provisions of Subsection 1, 2, or 3 of this Section 1409.

      (5)       Testimony of the failure of any owner or operator of a motor vehicle to present immediate evidence of a complying policy or certificate of self-insurance in full force and effect as required by law, when requested to do so by a peace officer, shall constitute prima facie evidence, at a trial concerning a violation charged under Subsection 1 or 2 of this section, that such owner or operator of a motor vehicle violated Subsection 1 or 2 of this section.

      (6)       No person charged with violating Subsection 1, 2, or 3 of this section shall be convicted if the person produces in court a bona fide complying policy or certificate of self-insurance that was in full force and effect as required by law at the time of the alleged violation.

 

      (7)       No portion of any fine imposed and collected by the Cañon City Municipal Court with respect to any violation of this section shall be subject to the provisions of Subsection 42-4-1409(9), C.R.S., which applies to fines collected with respect to violations of state law, rather than violations of local ordinances.

(Ord. 3-2005 § 1: Ord. 10-2001 § 1)

 

10.04.155 Section 1412 amended—Restrictions concerning the operation and use of bicycles and skateboards on certain sidewalks.
    A new Subsection a.5 is added to the Model Traffic Code, to read as follows:

 

      a.5       It is unlawful for any person to drive, operate or cause to be operated any motor vehicle, including, but not limited to, any self-propelled vehicle, moped, go-cart, golf cart, motor scooter, electric personal assistive mobility device or “EPAMD,” as defined in C.R.S. § 42-1-102(28.7), engaged electronic assisted bicycle, hoverboard, or similar mode of transportation, except upon established sidewalks specifically designated by the City Council and marked for such purpose. A person may operate an electrical assisted bicycle, as defined in C.R.S. § 42-1-102(28.5), as may be amended, with the electrical motor disengaged on sidewalks where bicycles are authorized to travel. Electric personal assistive mobility devices or “EPAMDs” shall be permitted only if the user is dismounted. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit or restrict the use or operation of an “other power-driven mobility device” (OPDMD), as used and defined by the American with Disabilities Act (ADA) Title II and III, provided that the user operates the OPDMD at the speed of pedestrian traffic;

 

    A new Subsection 1412(12) is added to the Model Traffic Code, to read as follows:

 

      (12) (a)    It is unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle or use a skateboard on any sidewalk that is adjacent to Main Street, on both sides thereof, at any location east of Second Street and west of Ninth Street.

      (b)       At all locations northerly of Royal Gorge Boulevard and southerly of Macon Avenue it is unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle or use a skateboard on any sidewalk that is adjacent to the east side of Second Street; both sides of Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Seventh and Eighth Streets; and the west side of Ninth Street.

      (c)       The prohibitions contained in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this subsection shall apply without regard to whether signage prohibiting the riding of bicycles and/or the use of a skateboard on the sidewalks described in such paragraphs is erected at or near such locations.

(Ord. 43-2017 § 3; Ord. 26-2001 § 5)

 

10.04.160 Section 1413 modified—Eluding or attempting to elude a police officer.
    Section 1413 of the Model Traffic Code is redesignated as Subsection 1413(1) and a new Subsection 1413(2) is hereby added to read as follows:

 

      (2)       Unless the Municipal Court specifically finds that imposition of the minimum fine would be unconscionable according to all of the facts and circumstances presented to it during a sentencing hearing, the minimum fine for a conviction of a violation of Section 1413 (eluding or attempting to elude a police officer) shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00). In all other respects, punishment of a person convicted of violating Subsection 1413(1) shall be within the limits provided for in Subsection 10.04.060(B) of the Municipal Code.

(Ord. 10-2001 § 1)

 

10.04.165 Section 1425 added—Unnecessary vehicle noise.
    A new Section 1425 is added to the Model Traffic Code to read as follows:

 

1425. Unnecessary vehicle noise.

      No person shall intentionally operate any vehicle at such a speed on a curve or turn or accelerate or decelerate such vehicle in such a manner as to create loud and unnecessary noise through the squealing of tires upon the pavement or to cause damage to the roadway.

(Ord. 6-2010 § 1)

 

10.04.170 Section 1701 modified—Traffic offenses classified—Schedule of fines.
    Section 1701 of the Model Traffic Code is deleted and the following Section 1701 is substituted therefor:

 

1701. Traffic offenses classified—Schedule of fines.

      (1)       It is a traffic offense for any person to violate any provision of the Model Traffic Code, as adopted and modified in this Chapter 10.04.

      (2)       Pursuant to C.M.C.R. 210(b)(4), the court may by order, which may from time to time be amended, supplemented, or repealed, designate the traffic offenses, the penalties for which may be paid at the office of the Court Clerk or violations bureau, together with any surcharge calculated pursuant to Section 1.16.090 of the Municipal Code, that is payable with respect to all Municipal Code violations other than parking violations.

      (3)       The court, in addition to any other notice, by published order to be prominently posted in a place where fines are to be paid, shall specify by suitable schedules the amount of fines to be imposed for violations, designating each violation specifically in the schedules. Such fines will be within the limits set by ordinance.

      (4)       Fines, costs and surcharges pursuant to said Section 1.16.090 shall be paid to, receipted by, and accounted for by the Violations Clerk or Court Clerk.

      (5)       Penalty Assessment Notices.

      (a)       Notice, Form and Contents. At the time that any person is arrested or otherwise contacted for the commission of any violation of the Model Traffic Code, except when the provisions of Subsection 1701(5)(c) prohibit, the contacting officer may offer to give a notice to the person in charge of or operating the motor vehicle involved, which notice shall be in the form of a penalty assessment notice. Such notice shall contain the information required by Section 1707 and C.M.C.R. 206(b)(4) relating to the information required on a summons and complaint. Should the person to whom the penalty assessment notice is tendered accept said notice, such acceptance shall constitute an acknowledgement of guilt by such person of his or her violation of the offense stated in such notice and a promise on such person’s part to pay the fine specified in the schedule contained in Subsection C of 10.04.060 of the Municipal Code for the violation involved, and the appropriate surcharge pursuant to Section 1.16.090 of the Municipal Code, at the office of the Clerk of the Municipal Court in Cañon City, either in person or by mail within twenty (20) days from the date of notice; but any arrested person who accepts a penalty assessment notice but who does not furnish satisfactory evidence of identity or who the officer has reasonable and probable grounds to believe will disregard a written promise to pay the specified fine and surcharge may be taken by the officer to the nearest known post office facility and required to remit the amount of the specified fine and surcharge to the Municipal Court Clerk immediately by mail in United States currency or other legal tender, by money order or personal check. Refusal or inability to remit the specified fine and surcharge by mail when required shall constitute a refusal to accept a penalty assessment notice. The officer shall advise the person arrested of the points to be assessed in accordance with Section 42-2-127, C.R.S., and, if applicable, of the option for a points reduction, as provided for in Subsection 10.04.060(F). Acceptance and payment of the prescribed fine and surcharge shall be deemed a complete satisfaction for the violation, and the violator shall be given a receipt which so states when such fine and surcharge are paid in currency or other form of legal tender. Checks tendered by the violator to and accepted by the Clerk of the Municipal Court and on which payment is received by the Clerk of the Municipal Court shall be deemed sufficient receipt.

      (b)       Notice, Refusal or Failure to Comply. Should the violator refuse to accept the penalty assessment notice prescribed by Subsection 1701(5)(a) when such notice is tendered by the contacting officer, the officer shall proceed in the manner employed when no penalty assessment notice is tendered. Should the violator accept the notice but fail to pay the prescribed penalty within twenty (20) days thereafter, the penalty assessment notice shall be construed to be a summons and complaint for a charge of violating the ordinance specified in said notice, and the prosecution of said violation shall thereafter be heard in the Municipal Court, in which event the violator shall be privileged to answer the charge made against him or her in the same manner as is provided in situations where no penalty assessment is offered; except that the maximum penalty which may be imposed shall not exceed the penalty set forth in the schedule of fines contained in Subsection C of Section 10.04.060 of the Municipal Code for the designated violation.

      (c)       Exceptions. The provisions of Subsection 1701(5)(a) shall not apply:

      (I)       Respecting a violation of Section 1101 of the Model Traffic Code, where the person charged exceeded the maximum lawful speed limit by more than nineteen (19) miles per hour; or

      (III)     When the person charged has caused or contributed to the cause of an accident resulting in bodily injury or death to another person; or

      (IV)     When the person charged violated any of the following sections of the Model Traffic Code: Section 1401, 1409 or 1413, or committed any other violation for which the person charged, if convicted, will be assessed more than six (6) points by the Colorado Department of Revenue, Division of Motor Vehicles.

      (d)       Penalties. Every person who is convicted of a violation of any provision of the Model Traffic Code, to which the provisions of Subsection 1701(5)(a) apply, shall be fined in accordance with Subsection C of Section 10.04.060 of the Cañon City Municipal Code, whether the violator acknowledges guilt by payment of the fine and surcharge or is found guilty by the Municipal Court.

(Ord. 18-2012 § 1; Ord. 6-2010 § 2; Ord. 15-2009 § 2; Ord. 26-2001 §§ 6, 7; Ord. 10-2001 § 1)

 

10.04.180 Traffic Engineer.
    A.  The office of Traffic Engineer is established. The City Engineer is designated as the Traffic Engineer and, as such, shall exercise the powers and duties provided for in this section, subject to the review of the City Council.

    B.   At such times as the Traffic Engineer may be absent from the City or unable to perform his or her duties, the said duties shall be vested in the Chief of Police or such other municipal official as may be determined and authorized by City Council by resolution or ordinance.

    C.   Subject to: (1) the review of City Council; (2) the requirements of applicable state law; and (3) the requirements of applicable ordinances of the City, the Traffic Engineer shall have the authority to exercise and implement any and all of the powers granted to “municipal authorities” in Section 42-4-1102, C.R.S., as amended, and as said section may be amended following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this section. All such powers are incorporated into this section by this reference. Except in cases of emergency, as determined by agreement between the City Administrator and the Traffic Engineer, the review by City Council that is provided for in this subsection shall occur prior to the Traffic Engineer’s exercise or implementation of any power delegated to the Traffic Engineer in this subsection.

    D.  In addition to the powers and duties delegated elsewhere in this section and subject to the requirements of applicable state law, the Traffic Engineer shall have authority to cause the erection and display of appropriate official signs and other official traffic control devices and to otherwise do those things necessary to cause the implementation of any traffic regulation or designation enacted by or pursuant to any ordinance of the City Council, as enumerated in Subsection (1) of Section 42-4-111, C.R.S., as amended, and as said section may be amended in the future.

    E.   The Traffic Engineer shall have the authority to adopt and publish each of the following schedules:

 

Traffic Control Schedules for Designated Streets

Schedule I

Through streets

Schedule II and III Combined

Decreased and increased speed limits

Schedule IV

Minimum speed

Schedule V

One way streets and alleys

Schedule VI

Nonmotorized traffic and motor-drive cycles excluded

Schedule VII

Stopping, standing or parking during certain hours on certain streets prohibited

Schedule VIII

Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets

Schedule VIII-A

Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets to general public

Schedule IX

Parking time limited on certain streets, (3) hours, except as otherwise provided in Subsection (4) of Section 10.04.105

Schedule IX-A

Parking time limited on certain streets, 15 minutes

Schedule X

Parking meter zones

Schedule XI

Right turn on steady red signal prohibited

Schedule XII

Left turn on steady red signal prohibited

Schedule XIII

Weight limitations upon vehicles using certain streets

Schedule XIV

Weight limitations upon vehicles using certain structures

Schedule XV

Traffic signals authorized

Schedule XVI

Ride stops authorized

Schedule XVII

Authorized and approved stop signs to regulate and control vehicular traffic entering or crossing a public roadway from a place other than a roadway (see Section 704 of the Model Traffic Code, as amended)

 

    F.   Any schedule permitted under Subsection E of this section that was in effect at the time of the adoption of the 2003 Model Traffic Code shall remain in effect until such schedule is amended or modified by the Traffic Engineer in accordance with the authority granted hereunder. No such revised or amended schedule shall be valid until three (3) true and correct copies of the same shall have been filed in the office of the City Clerk, for review by the public, and in the Municipal Court. Additional copies shall be provided to the City Administrator, Chief of Police, City Attorney, any special prosecutor, and Director of Public Works.

    G.  Subject to the prior approval of the City Council, the Traffic Engineer is authorized to designate on Schedule XI those intersections where right turns on a steady red signal are prohibited and, on Schedule XII, those intersections where left turns onto one way streets on a steady red signal are prohibited. After any such designation has been made by the Traffic Engineer and approved by the City Council, the Traffic Engineer may cause the erection of appropriate official signs to notify drivers of such prohibitions. Any person making a turn that is prohibited by any sign authorized and erected pursuant to this subsection commits a violation of Section 603 of the Model Traffic Code. (Ord. 5-2017 § 1; Ord. 27-2003 § 4; Ord. 26-2001 §§ 8, 9; Ord. 10-2001 § 1)

 

10.04.190 Validity.
    If any part or parts of the 2003 Model Traffic Code, as adopted and modified in Chapter 10.04 of the Cañon City Municipal Code, are for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of said Code. The City Council declares that it would have passed the ordinance adopting said Code and all local modifications, irrespective of the fact that any one part or parts of said Code might be declared invalid. (Ord. 27-2003 § 5: Ord. 10-2001 § 1)

 

10.04.210 Use of certain words and terms.
    Unless the context within which the word or term is used provides clearly and specifically to the contrary, “violation,” “traffic violation,” “offense,” “traffic offense,” “infraction,” “traffic infraction” and “misdemeanor,” if and when used in the Model Traffic Code, as adopted and amended in this chapter, shall mean or refer to a violation of an ordinance of the City that is punishable as provided in this chapter following a determination of guilt or liability. Accordingly, such words and terms shall not necessarily have the same meanings and penalty implications as are provided for in the Colorado Revised Statutes. (Ord. 10-2001 § 1)

 

10.04.220 Removal and relocation of certain vehicles.
    A.  Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle, attended or unattended, parked or standing upon any portion of a street or highway right-of-way within the city in such a manner as to interfere with the free movement of vehicular traffic, the necessary maintenance of the street or highway, the maintenance or repair of the lines or other facilities of any City or other public utility, or the route for a parade authorized by a permit issued by the City Administrator or designee, the police officer may require that such vehicle be removed immediately. If the owner or other person in charge of such vehicle cannot be readily located or fails or refuses to move the vehicle immediately upon request, the police officer may cause such vehicle to be removed and placed elsewhere within the city in a position where it does not interfere with the flow of traffic or such necessary maintenance or repair operations or any permitted public parade.

    B.   In the event of abandonment of a vehicle upon any portion of a street or highway right-of-way, except as provided for in Subsection A of this section, or on property within this municipality other than public rights-of-way, the owner of such property shall notify the Police Department and, after a period of seventy-two (72) hours, the Police Department may cause the abandoned vehicle to be removed and placed in storage in the nearest garage or other place of safety designated or maintained by the municipality. (Ord. 26-2001 § 10)

 

10.04.230 Article II—Definitions.
    Article II, Section 102 of the Model Traffic Code is amended as follows:

 

      (55.3)  “Posted construction zone” means a maintenance, repair or construction zone designated by appropriate signage in accordance with the provisions of Section 614 of the Model Traffic Code and/or Sections 42-4-614(2) and (3), C.R.S.

      (55.5)  “Posted school zone” means a school zone that is clearly designated by appropriate signage, in accordance with the provisions of Section 615 of the Model Traffic Code and/or Section 42-4-615, C.R.S.

      (78)     “Stop” means, when required, the complete cessation of movement. “Stop” or “Stopping” means, when prohibited, any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.

(Ord. 15-2009 § 5; Ord. 27-2003 § 7)

 

10.04.236 Section 236 modified—Child restraint systems required—Definitions—Exemptions.
    Section 236 of the Model Traffic Code is hereby repealed and reenacted to read as follows:

 

236. Child restraint systems required—Definitions—Exemptions.

      1.        As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires:

      a.        “Child care center” means a facility required to be licensed under the “Child Care Licensing Act,” Article 6 of Title 26, C.R.S.

      a. 3.     “Child booster seat” means a child passenger restraint system that meets the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards set forth in Section 49 CFR 571.213, as amended, that is designed to elevate a child to properly sit in a Federally approved safety belt system.

      a. 5.     “Child restraint system” means a specially designed seating system that is designed to protect, hold, or restrain a child in a motor vehicle in such a way as to prevent or minimize injury to the child in the event of a motor vehicle accident that is either permanently affixed to a motor vehicle or is affixed to such vehicle by a safety belt or a universal attachment system, and that meets the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards set forth in Section 49 CFR 571.213, as amended.

      a. 7.     “Child safety belt-positioning device” means a device that positions a safety belt around a child in a manner that safely restrains such child in a seating position that conforms to all applicable Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards.

      b.        “Safety belt” means a lap belt, a shoulder belt, or any other belt or combination of belts installed in a motor vehicle to restrain drivers and passengers, except any such belt that is physically a part of a child restraint system. “Safety belt” includes the anchorages, the buckles, and all other equipment directly related to the operation of safety belts.

      c.        “Seating position” means any motor vehicle interior space intended by the motor vehicle manufacturer to provide seating accommodation while the motor vehicle is in motion.

      2. a.     Unless exempted pursuant to Subsection 3 of this section, every child, who is under four (4) years of age and weighs under forty (40) pounds, being transported in this state in a privately-owned noncommercial passenger vehicle or in a vehicle operated by a child care center, shall be provided with one of the following child restraint systems suitable for the child’s size and shall be properly fastened into such child restraint system which is in a seating position which is equipped with a safety belt or other means to secure the system according to the manufacturer’s instructions:

      I.         If the child is less than one year of age and weighs less than twenty (20) pounds, the child shall be properly restrained in a rear-facing child restraint system.

      II.        If the child is one year of age or older, but less than four (4) years of age, and weighs less than forty (40) pounds, but at least twenty (20) pounds, the child shall be properly restrained in a forward-facing child restraint system.

      b.        Unless excepted pursuant to Subsection 3 of this section, every child, who is at least four (4) years of age or weighs forty (40) pounds or more, being transported in this state in a privately-owned noncommercial vehicle or in a vehicle operated by a child care center, shall be properly secured by one of the following safety devices approved for a child of such age or weight by the United States Department of Transportation, or in a safety belt, whichever is appropriate for the child:

      I.         Except as otherwise provided in subparagraph (I.5) of this paragraph (b), if the child is at least four (4) years of age but less than six (6) years of age and is less than fifty-five (55) inches tall, the child shall be properly restrained in a child booster seat or with a child safety belt-positioning device.

      I.5.      If the child is at least four (4) years of age but less than six (6) years of age and is less than fifty-five (55) inches tall, and if the child is being transported in a vehicle equipped with only a two-point lap-belt-only system available for the child, the child shall be properly restrained with a lap belt.

      II.        If the child is six (6) years of age or older or is fifty-five (55) inches tall or more, the child shall be properly restrained with the motor vehicle’s safety belt properly adjusted and fastened around the child’s body.

      c.        It is the responsibility of the driver transporting children, subject to the requirements of this section, to ensure that such children are provided with and that they properly use a child restraint system or safety belt system.

      3.        Except as provided in Section 42-2-105.5(4), C.R.S., the requirements of Subsection 2 of this section shall not apply to a child who:

      a.        (No provision);

      b.        Is being transported in a motor vehicle as a result of a medical emergency;

      c.        Is being transported in a commercial motor vehicle, as defined in Section 42-2-402(4)(a), C.R.S., that is operated by a child care center; or

      d.        Is the driver of a motor vehicle and is subject to the safety belt requirements provided in Section 42-4-237, C.R.S.

      4.        (No provision);

      5.        No person shall use a safety belt or child restraint system, whichever is applicable, under the provisions of this section, for children under sixteen (16) years of age in a motor vehicle unless it conforms to all applicable Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards;

      6.        Any violation of this section shall not constitute negligence per se or contributory negligence per se;

      7.        Any person who violates any provision of this section commits a traffic violation and, upon conviction of such violation, shall be punished in accordance with the fine schedule set forth in Subsection 10.04.060(C) of the Municipal Code;

      8.        The fine provided for in Subsection 10.04.060(C) may be waived if the driver presents the court with satisfactory evidence of the acquisition, purchase, or rental of an approved child restraint system by the time of the court appearance;

      9.        No driver in a motor vehicle shall be cited for a violation of subparagraph (I) of paragraph (b) of Subsection 2 of this section unless such driver was stopped by a law enforcement officer for an alleged violation of Articles 1 to 4 of Title 42, C.R.S., other than a violation of Section 42-4-236 or 42-4-237, C.R.S., or of the Model Traffic Code, other than this Section 236 or Section 237.

(Ord. 15-2009 § 6)

 

10.04.614 Designation of highway maintenance, repair, or construction zones—Signs—Increase in penalties for moving violations.
    Section 614 of the Model Traffic Code is hereby repealed and reenacted to read as follows:

 

614. Designation of highway maintenance, repair, or construction zones—Signs—Increase in penalties for moving violations.

      1.        If maintenance, repair, or construction activities are occurring or will be occurring within four (4) hours on a local street or state highway located within the city, such portion of the street or highway may be designated as a highway maintenance, repair, or construction zone. Any person who commits a moving violation of the Model Traffic Code in a maintenance, repair, or construction zone that is designated pursuant to the provisions of this section is subject to increased penalties and surcharges.

      2.        Any such zone shall be designated by displaying an appropriate sign in a conspicuous place at the beginning of the zone advising that maintenance, repair, or construction activity is taking place or will be taking place within the zone within four (4) hours. Such sign shall notify the public that increased penalties for moving violations of the Model Traffic Code are in effect in such zone. A second sign shall be erected or placed at the end of any such zone indicating that the increased penalties for such moving violations are no longer in effect. A maintenance, repair, or construction zone begins at the location of the sign indicating that increased penalties are in effect and ends at the location of the sign indicating that the increased penalties are no longer in effect.

      3.        Signs used for designating the beginning and end of a maintenance, repair, or construction zone shall conform to Colorado Department of Transportation requirements. Such signs may be displayed on any fixed, variable, or moveable stand. Such signs also may be placed on a moving vehicle if required for certain activities, including, but not limited to, highway or street painting work.

      4.        Unless otherwise prohibited by law, maintenance, repair or construction zones may be designated and signs conforming to the requirements of this Section 614 may be displayed by:

      a.        Authorized City employees;

      b.        Persons performing maintenance, repair or construction work pursuant to contracts with the City; and/or

      c.        Persons, including employees or agents of other entities, authorized by law, franchise or permit to perform maintenance, repair or construction work within city streets.

(Ord. 15-2009 § 7)

 

10.04.719 Leaving roadway to avoid traffic control.
    There is hereby added to the Model Traffic Code a new Section 719 to read as follows:

 

719. Leaving Roadway to Avoid Traffic Control. It is unlawful for the driver of a motor vehicle to leave a roadway and cross public or private property to intentionally avoid an official traffic control device. Persons who violate this section shall be punished, upon conviction, by a fine in the amount that is provided for at Subsection 10.04.060(C) for “0 point” violations.

(Ord. 15-2009 § 8)

 

10.04.720 Driving under restraint prohibited.
    There is hereby added to the Model Traffic Code a new Section 720 to read as follows:

 

720.           Driving Under Restraint Prohibited.

      (1)       It is unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle or off-highway vehicle upon any street or highway in the City of Cañon City with knowledge that the person’s license or privilege to drive, either as a resident or nonresident, is under restraint for an outstanding judgment.

      (2)       Any person in violation of Subsection (1) of this Section shall be punished, upon conviction, by a fine in the amount that is provided for at Subsection 10.04.060(C), subsection 4, for a “3 point” violation, and assessed a three-point penalty. The Municipal Court, upon any person who is convicted of or pleads no contest to a violation of subsection (1) of this section, shall not waive or reduce the three-point penalty in accordance with Colorado Revised Statutes Section 42-2-138(2.5).

(Ord. 34-2017 § 3)

Chapter 10.08 RAILROAD REGULATIONS
10.08.010 Sight obstruction at crossings unlawful.
    No person shall park any railroad car, engine or vehicle upon any track adjacent to a mainline track within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any mainline crossing, or in such a manner as to constitute a visual obstruction of any mainline crossing within the city. (Prior code § 10.08.040)

 

10.08.020 Street obstruction restrictions.
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to obstruct the free passage of any street or public highway within the city by means of any railroad car, locomotive or other railway vehicle for a period exceeding five (5) minutes at any one time, or ten (10) minutes during any sixty (60) minute period. (Prior code § 10.08.010)

 

10.08.030 Flagger required for switching at crossings.
    It is unlawful for any person to switch any railroad car, locomotive or other railway vehicle across any street within the city without having a flagger on the crossing ahead of such vehicle in a position where he or she may be seen by persons approaching the crossing. It shall be the duty of the flagger to signal and warn the person of the approach of such vehicle. (Prior code § 10.08.020)

 

10.08.040 Moving cars without locomotive unlawful.
    It is unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made within the city any flying switch, or to permit or allow any railroad car to run upon the railroad track detached and loose from a locomotive. (Prior code § 10.08.030)

 

10.08.050 Violation—Penalty.
    Any person violating any provision of this Chapter 10.08, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in an amount that does not exceed the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010. (Ord. 17-2013 § 48; Ord. 15-1993 § 1; prior code § 10.08.050)

Title 11 (RESERVED)

Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Chapter 12.04 CITY BASELINE AND MONUMENTS
Chapter 12.08 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
Chapter 12.12 WORK AND ENCROACHMENT ON CITY PROPERTY
Chapter 12.24 BUILDING NUMBERING SYSTEM
Chapter 12.26 PROHIBITIONS WITH RESPECT TO THE PARKING AND STORAGE OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND TRAILERS ON RESIDENTIAL STREETS
Chapter 12.30 HISTORIC PRESERVATION

Chapter 12.04 CITY BASELINE AND MONUMENTS
12.04.010 Baseline established—Location.
    A fifty-foot base on the stone water table of the Masonic Building at the southeast corner of Main and Sixth Street is established as a standard for all measurements in the city, and additions thereto. (Prior code § 12.08.030)

 

12.04.020 Monuments—Locations.
    Monuments to govern street lines in the city, and additions thereto, and a baseline for the measurement of the same, are established as follows:

    A.  On Main Street, at the intersection of each and every street with Main Street, beginning with and including the intersection of Second Street with Main Street, and extending to and including the intersection of Fourteenth Street with Main Street, which such monuments are made of two-inch square iron with a pin in the center, and are located about ten feet from the point of intersection of the middle line of each street with the middle line of Main Street, upon a line forming the diagonal of a rectangle, and extending in a northerly direction from such point, one side of which rectangle is Main Street and the other side is the intersecting street, respectively;

    B.   On Third Street, at the intersection of each and every street with Third Street, beginning with and including the intersection of Main Street with Third Street, to and including the intersection of Rudd Avenue with Third Street, which such monuments are made of two-inch square iron with a brass pin in the center, and are each located about ten feet from the point of intersection of the middle line of each street with Third Street, and on a fine forming the diagonal of a rectangle, extending in a westerly direction from such point, one side of which rectangle is Third Street and the other side is the intersecting street, respectively;

    C. 1.          On Seventh Street, two sets of monuments at the intersection of each and every street with Seventh Street, beginning with and including the intersection of Macon Avenue with Seventh Street, to and including the intersection of College Avenue with Seventh Street, one row of which monuments (being the westerly row) is made up of two-inch square iron with a brass pin in the center, and the other row is made of iron pipe filled with cement with a brass pin inserted therein,

    2.   The set at the intersection of Seventh Street and Macon Avenue is about one foot apart, and is located about ten feet from the intersection near a line forming the diagonal extending in a westerly direction from the point of intersection, one side of which rectangle is the centerline of Seventh Street and the other side is the centerline of the intersecting street respectively; the remaining sets being similarly located, except that each set is one foot further apart than the preceding one;

    D.  On Eleventh Street, at the intersection of each and every street with Eleventh Street, beginning with and including the intersection of Main Street with Eleventh Street, to and including the intersection of College Avenue with Eleventh Street, which such monuments are made of iron pipe filled with cement with a brass pin inserted therein, and are each located about ten feet from the point of intersection of the middle line of each street with Main Street, upon a line extending in a westerly direction and forming the diagonal of a rectangle, one side of such rectangle being Eleventh Street, and the other side the intersecting street, respectively. (Prior code § 12.08.010)

 

12.04.030 Monuments—Division at Seventh Street.
    The monuments of Third Street and those on Seventh Street made of two-inch square iron are to be used for streets west of Seventh Street, and the monuments of Eleventh Street and those on Seventh Street made of iron pipe are to be used for streets east of Seventh Street. (Prior code § 12.08.020)

Chapter 12.08 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
12.08.010 Title for citation.
    This chapter shall be known and designated as the “public improvement ordinance of Cañon City.” (Prior code § 12.04.010)

 

12.08.020 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter:

    A.  “Lot” or “parcel,” for all purposes under this chapter, means any tract in one body belonging to one owner or group of owners, whether embracing one or more than one lot, according to a recorded plat, or any unplatted lands by any definite description thereof.

    B.   “Owner” means the record owner as set forth in the records of the Fremont County assessor’s office, of any property, at the time of first publication required by Section 12.08.110. (Prior code § 12.04.020)

 

12.08.030 Proceedings and notices.
    In all proceedings and notices authorized by this chapter, figures, general descriptions and quantities may be used, except in the assessment of certain amount per front foot or per square foot or per lot of given size. (Prior code § 12.04.280)

 

12.08.040 Authority to make improvements.
    Public works and improvements may be made and improvement districts may be created and maintained pursuant to the provisions of the ordinances of the City or of the statutes of the state providing therefor, provided, that if such improvements are ordered pursuant to any petition filed by property owners, as provided in this chapter, such petition shall contain a statement as to whether the improvements shall be made pursuant to this chapter or pursuant to the statutes of the state, with a proper reference thereto, and all orders, resolutions and ordinances adopted in connection with such improvements shall contain a proper reference to the Colorado Statutes or this chapter, as the case may be, as authority therefor. (Prior code § 12.04.040)

 

12.08.050 Public contracts—Statutory authority.
    The provisions of the Colorado Statutes relating to public contracts and to contracts for construction of public and local improvements, shall be applicable to contracts let for such improvements, except as otherwise provided by the Charter of the City. (Prior code § 12.04.260)

 

12.08.060 Initiation of improvements—Costs.
    A.  Property publicly owned may be improved and public works or improvements may be made at the expense of the City at large, or of the property owners benefited thereby, or at the expense of both the City at large and the property owners so benefited; provided, that if the portion of the cost of any improvement payable by the City at large shall exceed twenty-five percent of the total cost of such improvement, the same shall not be ordered unless and until authorized by the taxpaying electors of the City, as provided by the Charter, Article XIII, Section 3.

    B.   The city shall pay its share of the cost of construction or improvement of any street upon which any park, playground, municipal building or shop, or other real estate owned by the City shall abut the same as other abutting property owners, and the amount so payable by the City shall not be included in calculating the percentage limitation set forth in Subsection A of this section.

    C.   The city shall pay its share of the cost of the acquisition of lands for vehicular parking lots and the cost of construction of improvements of any street, parking lot or parkway, and the ornamentation thereof, when the cost of the construction of improvements is assessed by area, to the extent that the City owns real estate within the public improvement district, and the amount so payable by the City shall not be included in the calculation of the percentage limitation set forth in Subsection A of this section. (Prior code § 12.04.030)

 

12.08.070 Petition by property owners.
    The owners of a majority of the frontage on any street or alley, in case the construction or improvement of streets, alleys or sidewalks is desired, or the owners of a majority of the area affected, in the case improvements are desired, the cost of which is assessable according to area, may file their written petition with the Council subscribed by them, requesting the construction of any public works or improvement, or the improvement of any existing public work or improvement, describing the area affected and improvements desired, and if the desired construction or improvement shall be such that it can be constructed as requested and conforms to any master plan, or part thereof, for the improvement of the City, the Council shall create a district and comply with such petition. (Prior code § 12.04.290)

 

12.08.080 Protests.
    Improvements for streets or alleys, except sidewalks, shall not be made if the owners of more than fifty percent of the frontage to be assessed, exclusive of publicly owned property, shall file with the Council written protest or objection to the proposed assessment in any case where more than half of the cost of the improvement is required to be paid by special assessment against real estate. (Prior code § 12.04.300)

 

12.08.090 Districts—Council authority.
    A.  The Council may create districts for the construction, repair, alteration or maintenance of any such improvement, embracing all or any part of the area of the City. Noncontiguous areas may be included in the same district.

    B.   The Council in general will form public improvement districts and authorize bonds therefor during the months of December, January, February and March of any year, in order that the construction of the work authorized by the improvement district may be performed during the clement portion of the year. Petitions for the formation of improvement districts received after March 1st of any year will, in general, be acted upon by the Council so as to allow for formation of the districts and the issuance and sale of bonds therefor in the next succeeding months of December, January, February and March. (Ord. 8-1988 § 1; prior code § 12.04.060)

 

12.08.100 Preliminary survey—District formation.
    A.  Before ordering any public works or improvement, and before creating any district therefor, the Council shall cause a preliminary survey to be made so as to determine the area to be affected thereby, the kind of materials to be used in its construction, the estimated cost thereof, and the respective benefits to be derived from the improvement to the City at large, and the property owners affected, as a whole, including publicly owned property, and the proportion of the cost of the works or improvement to be borne by each.

    B.   If the Council determines that the public works or improvement should be made, it shall by resolution:

    1.   Define the boundaries of the district;

    2.   Adopt details and specifications with respect to the materials to be used and the type of work to be done;

    3.   Determine generally the property to be assessed for the improvement;

    4.   Require the City Engineer to make a map of the district showing the location of the works or improvements, and a schedule showing the approximate amounts to be assessed against the several lots or parcels in the district; and

    5.   Determine the number of installments and plan payment of the assessments and the rate of interest to be charged on all deferred payments. (Ord. 8-1988 § 1; prior code § 12.04.070)

 

12.08.110 Districts—Notice to property owners.
    A.  The City Clerk shall give notice to all property owners whose real property is proposed to be assessed for the property improvement, by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, twice, one week apart, the last of which publications shall be made not less than ten days prior to the Council meeting at which the ordinance creating the district and authorizing the improvement shall be considered on first reading, of the following:

    1.   The kind of improvements proposed to be made;

    2.   The number of installments in which the assessment against the property are to be paid, when such installments will be payable, and the rate of interest to be paid on deferred installments;

    3.   The boundaries of the district;

    4.   The proposed method or methods of assessment and the estimated cost per linear front foot, area, or dollar of valuation, as the case may be;

    5.   The date when the ordinance creating the district and ordering the improvement will be considered by the Council on first reading;

    6.   That at the time of the first publication of the notice, the map, estimates and schedules of assessments, with all proceedings in the matter, are on file in the office of the City Engineer and can be examined by any interested party during office hours at any time;

    7.   That all objections to the proposed improvement or the proposed method of assessment will be heard by the Council at the meeting at which such ordinance is to be considered, or at some subsequent meeting thereof before final action upon such ordinance.

    B.   The City Clerk shall mail by ordinary mail, postage prepaid, to owners of all real property located in the proposed improvement district and whose real property may be assessed, at their last known address determined by the City Engineer from telephone directories, city directories and records in the office of the assessor of Fremont County, between the first and second publications, a copy of the notice being published. (Prior code § 12.04.080)

 

12.08.120 Objections—Form and filing.
    A.  All objections to any improvement or assessment made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be in writing and subscribed by the party making the same, or by his, her or its attorney or agent duly authorized in writing to sign the same on behalf of the party making such objection or objections, and the same shall be filed with the City Clerk before the time set for hearing such objection.

    B.   Objection that the Council did not have authority to order the improvement, or that the assessment against any parcel exceeds the benefits thereto from the improvement, shall be deemed waived, and no right of action to enjoin the making of the improvement or the collection of assessments therefor shall exist unless such objections are first presented to the Council at the time set for hearing the same. Any such right of action shall be barred unless commenced within thirty days after action of the Council in overruling such objection or objections. (Prior code § 12.04.320)

 

12.08.130 Objections—Adjustment.
    At the time set in the notice for hearing objections, the Council shall hear the same and make such adjustments as it may deem proper and just and it shall adopt an ordinance creating the district and ordering the improvements, and if bonds are to be issued to pay for such improvements, providing for the issuance of such bonds. The ordinance shall also contain a recital of the disposition of all objections made as herein provided. (Prior code § 12.04.090)

 

12.08.140 Council findings.
    The finding by the Council in any ordinance, resolution or proceeding that any improvement was ordered after notice duly given and hearing held, shall be conclusive of such facts in every court or tribunal. (Prior code § 12.04.310)

 

12.08.150 Irregular lots—Assessments based upon area.
    A.  Where a district contains lots or parcels that are of irregular dimensions, the relative areas of the several benefited lots or parcels shall be the basis for calculating assessments to be levied against such lots and parcels with respect to the cost of street, alley and sidewalk improvements. When all such parcels or lots contain approximately the same acreage, the assessments may be apportioned equally among all such lots or parcels, without regard to frontage abutting the improvements. In such cases, equal apportionment of costs shall be the preferred method of assessment.

    B.   In all cases where a method of assessment other than the front footage method is adopted by City Council, the method of assessment so adopted shall be presumed valid unless it is established by an owner of property within the district, who has filed a timely objection, by clear and convincing evidence, that the application of such method of assessing the objector’s property would be inequitable and place upon the property of such objector an assessment which is unnecessarily disproportionate, when compared to the amounts to be assessed against other properties within the district, and that the benefits to the objector’s property, accruing as a result of the improvements, are substantially less than the benefits accruing to other lots and parcels within the district that win be assessed similar amounts under the method of assessment adopted by City Council. (Ord. 13-1995 § 1)

 

12.08.155 Assessment methods proposed in the petition.
    A.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 12.08.150 and 12.08.160, if the owners of a majority of the lots and parcels in a proposed improvement district, representing greater than fifty percent of the total area of the district, excluding rights-of-way and other publicly held property within the district, clearly specify in their petition a preferred method of assessment, City Council will adopt such method of assessment, unless it finds that the adoption of such method would be inequitable with respect to the amount of assessments to be levied under such method against property within the proposed district owned by persons who did not join in the petition.

    B.   Where a preferred method of assessment is proposed in a petition meeting the requirements of Subsection A of this Section 12.08.155, Council shall presume that the method of assessment so proposed is equitable as to all lots and parcels within the district if no objection to the adoption of such method is filed by any owner of property to be included within the district prior to the adoption of the ordinance creating the district. (Ord. 13-1995 § 2)

 

12.08.160 Apportionment of costs.
    A.  Except as otherwise provided in Subsection C of this section, the cost of the construction or improvement of streets, alleys, sidewalks, curbs and gutters shall be assessed against the property benefited thereby according to the linear measurement of the portion of the property abutting the street, alley or thoroughfare so constructed or improved; provided, that the cost of improving intersections may be assessed on land without regard to lot or land lines, on a frontage, zone or other equitable basis, and the cost of improving the street or alley abutting the longer of the two corner lot lines may be assessed to a depth substantially equal to the length of such line, in accordance with the benefits, as the same may be determined by the Council.

    B.   The costs of the construction or improvement of storm sewers and sanitary sewers shall be assessed against the property benefited, according to area.

    C.   The cost of the acquisition of lands for vehicular parking lots, the cost of improving lands for such parking lots, the cost of the improvement of any street or sidewalk by the installation or construction of any parking, parkway, and the cost of the ornamentation of any parking, parkway, street or sidewalk, and the planting, care or removal of grass, trees, shrubbery, plants, lights, benches, trash receptacles, through and along, in, on or over streets, boulevards, sidewalks, parkways and places may be assessed against the property benefited according to area when so determined by the Council.

    D.  The cost of all other public works or improvements not above mentioned shall be assessed against the real property benefited, ad valorem, provided that tile cost of any public works or improvement may be made payable out of revenues derived therefrom, when authorized by the qualified electors, as provided in the Charter. (Prior code § 12.04.050)

 

12.08.170 Improvement bonds not needed when.
    When the total estimated cost of any construction or improvement exclusive of collection, inspection and incidental costs, and interest to be added, shall not exceed five thousand dollars, according to the finding in any ordinance authorizing the improvement, the Council may order payment of the cost of such construction or improvement, without issuance of bonds, out of any funds held by it, when not prohibited by the Charter of Cañon City; provided, that all revenues derived from interest upon and collection of the special assessments levied against real property of such improvements, as well as the principal of such assessments and all tax sale certificates and property obtained from such assessments, shall belong to and be returned to the fund out of which such advance was made; and provided, further, that if any funds so used shall be needed before the same shall be repaid out of such special assessments, the Council may use other funds held by the City to reimburse the fund out of which the advance was made, and all certificates and property obtained and all revenues payable thereafter shall belong to the fund from which the money was last obtained. (Prior code § 12.04.330)

 

12.08.180 Assessment objections—Notice of hearing.
    A.  When the total cost of any construction or improvement is definitely ascertainable, the Council shall determine the total cost for administration and interest on bonds issued, or to be issued, up to the time of payment of the first installment of the assessment, the amount of such total cost payable by the City, and the amount to be assessed on each lot or parcel in the district, including lots or parcels publicly owned; and the City Clerk shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the city a notice containing such determination and advising all interested parties of the date for hearing of objections to such determination and assessments. Such notice shall be published twice, one week apart, and the last of such publications shall not be less than ten days prior to the date set for hearing such objections.

    B.   The City Clerk shall mail by ordinary mail, postage prepaid, to all real property owners at their last known address determined by the City Engineer from telephone directories, city directories and records in the office of the county assessor, between the first and second publications, a copy of the notice being published.

    C.   The administrative fee provided for herein may be reduced by the Council to reflect the value of improvements in a proposed improvement district which could not otherwise be required by the municipality and which are determined by the Council to be necessary or beneficial to the public in general. (Ord. 6-1987; prior code § 12.04.110)

 

12.08.190 Filing of petitions.
    A “petition” is any written instrument filed under this chapter, except petitions initiated for improvement districts pursuant to Section 12.08.070, but specifically including any response to notice given under the terms of Section 12.08.110 and Section 12.08.310 (public hearings required by Sections 12.08.150 and 12.08.180) shall be subject to the following provisions:

    A.  Any letter, written memorandum or other written communication shall be considered as a petition or an objection. Each petition shall set forth:

    1.   The name of the property owner(s);

    2.   The street address of the real property, and shall be addressed to the City Council and filed with the Clerk of the City;

    3.   A specific statement or indication of whether the signer is in favor of or opposed to the formation of the district;

    4.   The front footage of the property owned.

    B.   The first petition and only the first petition received by the City from any property owner shall be considered by the Council.

    C.   Property owners who have filed petitions need not be present at any public hearing to be held by the Council covering matters addressed by their petitions.

    D.  All petitions relating to matters covered by or included within a bill for an ordinance which will be considered by the Council shall be filed with the City Clerk at least three and one-half working days (eighty-four hours) before the Council meeting at which the ordinance bill will be considered on first reading.

    E.   Oral arguments at any public hearing of the Council by any property owner may be dispensed with by the Mayor in the event the owner has filed a petition. (Ord. 16-1988: Ord. 8-1988 § 2: prior code § 12.04.115)

 

12.08.200 Adjustment of assessments.
    Objections to the apportionment and assessment of costs shall be heard and determined by the Council at the time stated in the notice, or at some adjourned date; and upon such hearing the Council shall make such adjustments of such apportionment and assessments as it may deem just and equitable, and adopt an ordinance apportioning and assessing such costs against the several lots or parcels in the district. (Prior code § 12.04.120)

 

12.08.210 Local assessment roll.
    The Director of Finance shall prepare a local assessment roll in book form, showing in suitable columns each piece of land assessed, the total amount of assessment, the amount of each installment of principal and interest (if, in pursuance of this chapter, the same shall be payable in installments), and the date when each installment will become due, with suitable columns for use in case of payment of the whole amount or of any installment or penalty. (Prior code § 12.04.140)

 

12.08.220 Assessments—Payment requirements.
    Payments may be made to the Director of Finance at any time within thirty days after the final passage of the assessing ordinance. At the expiration of such thirty-day period, the Director of Finance shall deliver the local assessment roll to the county treasurer therein showing all payments made thereon, with the date of each payment, certified by the Director of Finance under the seal of the City, with his warrant for the collection of the same. The county treasurer shall receipt for the same, and all such rolls shall be numbered for convenient reference. (Prior code § 12.04.190)

 

12.08.230 Assessments—Due date.
    A.  All special assessments for local improvements shall be due and payable within thirty days after the final adoption of the assessing ordinance, without demand; provided, that all such assessment may, at the election of the owner, be paid in installments with interest as provided in this chapter.

    B.   The Director of Finance shall cause notice of assessments due for improvements constructed to be published within ten days after the adoption of the assessing ordinance on final reading in one issue of the Cañon City Daily Record, and likewise shall mail the notice by ordinary mail, postage prepaid, to the owner of each parcel of real estate being assessed within the same period of time. (Prior code § 12.04.150)

 

12.08.240 Assessments—Lien provisions.
    A.  All assessments made in pursuance of this chapter, together with all interest thereon and penalties for default in payment thereof, and all costs in collecting the same, shall, from the date of the final passage of the assessing ordinance, constitute a perpetual lien, and shall have priority over all other liens except general state, county, city, town or school taxes.

    B.   As to any subdivision of any land assessed pursuant to this chapter, the assessment shall in each case be a lien upon all of the subdivisions in proportion to their respective areas.

    C.   No delays, mistakes, errors or irregularities in any act or proceeding authorized by this chapter shall prejudice or invalidate any final assessment, but the same may be remedied by subsequent amending acts or proceeding, as the case may require, and when so remedied, the same shall take effect as of the date of the original act or proceeding.

    D.  If in any court of competent jurisdiction any final assessment made in pursuance of this chapter is set aside, then the ordering authority may, upon notice as required in the making of an original assessment, make a new assessment in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 12.04.130)

 

12.08.250 Installment payments—Regulations.
    Failure to pay the whole assessment within the period of thirty days shall be conclusively considered and held to be an election on the part of all persons interested, whether under disability or otherwise, to pay in such installments. All persons so electing to pay in installments shall be conclusively held and considered as consenting to such improvements, and such election shall be conclusively held and considered as a waiver of any right to question the power or jurisdiction of the City to construct the improvements, the quality of the work, the regularity or sufficiency of the proceedings, or the validity of the lien thereof. (Prior code § 12.04.160)

 

12.08.260 Installment payments—Due when.
    In case of such election to pay in installments, the assessments shall be payable in two or more equal annual installments of principal, the first of which installments shall be payable, as prescribed by the Council, in not more than five years, and the last in not more than twenty years, with interest in all cases on the unpaid principal. The number of installments, the period of payment, and the rate of interest shall be determined by the Council and set forth in the assessing ordinance. (Prior code § 12.04.170)

 

12.08.270 Payment by part owner.
    The owner of any divided or undivided interest in the property assessed may pay his share of any assessment, upon producing evidence of the extent of his interest satisfactory to the treasurer having the roll in charge. (Prior code § 12.04.210)

 

12.08.280 Installment payments—Default penalties.
    A.  Failure to pay any installment, whether of principal or interest, when due, shall cause the whole of the unpaid principal to become due and collectible immediately, and the whole amount of the unpaid principal and accrued interest shall thereafter draw interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction of a month, until the day of sale, as hereinafter provided; but at any time prior to the day of sale, the owner may pay the amount of all unpaid installments, with interest at one percent per month or fraction of a month, and all penalties accrued, and shall thereupon be restored to the right thereafter to pay in installments in the same manner as if default had not been suffered.

    B.   The owner of any property not in default as to any installment of paying, may at any time pay the whole of the unpaid principal with the interest accruing to the maturity of the next installment of interest or principal.

    C.   The period of any statute of limitations shall not commence to run against any such assessment until the last installment thereof shall become due and payable according to the assessing ordinance. (Prior code § 12.04.180)

 

12.08.290 Default—Real estate sale authorized when.
    The county treasurer shall receive payment of all assessments appearing upon the assessment roll, with interest, and in case of default in the payment of any installment of principal or interest when due, shall advertise and sell any and all property concerning which such default is suffered, for the payment of the whole of the unpaid assessments thereon, and such advertisements and sales shall be made at the same time or times, in the same manner, under all the same conditions and penalties and with the same effect as are provided by general law for sales of real estate in default of payment of general taxes. (Prior code § 12.04.200)

 

12.08.300 Collections by county treasurer.
    All collections made by the county treasurer upon such assessment roll in any calendar month shall be accounted for and paid over to the Director of Finance on or before the tenth day of the next succeeding calendar month, with separate statements for all such collections for each improvement. (Prior code § 12.04.220)

 

12.08.310 Special assessment bonds—Issuance conditions.
    A.  For the purpose of paying all or such portion of the cost of any improvement constructed under the provisions of this chapter as may be assessed against the property specially benefited and not paid by the City, special assessment bonds of the City may be issued, of such date and in such form as may be prescribed by the Council, bearing the name of the street, alley or district improved, and shall be in registered form, in a sufficient period of years after date to cover the period of payment above provided, but subject to call as provided in this chapter, and in such denominations as the Council shall determine in the ordinance establishing the improvement district.

    1.   All such bonds shall be issued upon a date to be set by the Council, and the Director of Finance shall preserve a record of the same in a suitable book kept for that purpose.

    2.   All such bonds shall be subscribed by the facsimile signature of the Mayor, countersigned and attested by the Director of Finance, with the seal of the City affixed thereto.

    3.   The bonds shall be payable out of the moneys collected on account of the assessments made for the improvements, and all moneys collected from such assessment for any improvement shall be applied to the payment of the bonds issued, until payment in full is made of all the bonds, both principal and interest.

    B.   When three-fourths of the bonds for an improvement constructed under the provisions of this section have been paid and cancelled, and for any reason the remaining assessments are not paid in time to pay the remaining bonds for the district, and the interest due thereon, the City shall pay (if so provided in the ordinance authorizing the issuance of the bonds) the bonds when due, and the interest due thereon, and reimburse itself by collecting the unpaid assessments due the district.

    C.   Such bonds may be used in payment of the cost of the improvement as specified herein; or the Council, upon advertisement once a week for three (3) consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, may sell sufficient of such bonds to pay such cost in cash for the best bid submitted, in accordance with the terms of the notice of sale, provided that all bids may be rejected at the discretion of the Council; in addition, the City Council may sell such bonds as may be authorized by ordinance, without the requirement of an advertised sale. (Prior code § 12.04.230)

 

12.08.320 Special assessment bonds—Form.
    All such bonds shall be negotiable in form, payable to a named payee, shall bear interest as may be determined by the Council, not to exceed twelve percent (12%) per year, and shall be payable semiannually. (Prior code § 12.04.240)

 

12.08.330 Special assessment bonds—Calling.
    Whenever the Director of Finance has funds in the treasury to the credit of any improvement, exceeding six (6) months’ interest on the unpaid principal of the bonds issued therefor and outstanding, he shall mail to the registered owners of the bonds to be redeemed, by certified mail, to the address shown in the bond registration records maintained by him or her, giving notice of such redemption date and advising the registered owner to present the bonds to be redeemed at the office of the Director of Finance in the City, on such date, for payment in full, at par, with interest accrued, and that after such redemption date the bonds called for redemption will cease to bear interest. All such bonds shall be redeemed in their numerical order. (Prior code § 12.04.250)

 

12.08.340 Property sales—Certificates of purchase.
    A.  At any sale by the County Treasurer of any property for the purpose of paying any special assessment for local improvements made under the provisions of this chapter, the Finance Officer may purchase any such property without paying for the same in cash, and shall receive certificates of purchase therefor in the name of the City. The certificates shall be received and credited at their face value, with all interest and penalties accrued, on account of the assessments in pursuance of which the sale was made. The certificates may thereafter be sold by the Finance Officer at their face value, with all interest and penalties accrued, and by him assigned to the purchaser in the name of the City, and the proceeds credited to the fund created by ordinance for the payment of such assessments respectively.

    B.   Such assignments shall be without recourse, and the sale and assignments shall operate as a lien in favor of the purchaser and assignee as is provided by law in the case of sale of real estate in default of payment of general taxes. (Prior code § 12.04.270)

Chapter 12.12 WORK AND ENCROACHMENT ON CITY PROPERTY
12.12.010 Purpose.
    This chapter provides procedures and regulations for the placement of structures and infrastructure, construction, excavation, encroachments, and work activities within or upon any public right-of-way or other City property, and is intended to protect the integrity of City property, as well as the health, safety, and welfare of the public. To achieve these purposes, it is necessary to require permits for temporary or continuing uses of the public rights-of-way and to establish permit procedures. (Ord. 24-2017 § 1)

 

12.12.020 Definitions.
    “Clear Zone” means the total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the traveled way, available for safe use by errant vehicles, more generally defined as an unobstructed, relatively flat area beyond the edge of the traveled way that allows a driver to stop safely or regain control of a vehicle that leaves the traveled way. This area may consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope, and/or a clear run-out area. The desired minimum width is dependent upon traffic volumes and speeds and on the roadside geometry. The Clear Zone width is at the discretion of the City Engineer based on characteristics of the roadway and traffic, but is typically two (2) feet from the back of the curb when present or ten (10) feet from the edge of the pavement when no curb is present.

    “Horizontal Landscaping” means landscaping that is generally low to the ground and includes shrubs or plants shorter than thirty (30) inches, sod, seed, and other living ground cover, rock, stone, brick, concrete, asphalt or other like materials for non-living ground cover. Rock, stone, or brick shall not exceed a nominal size of six (6) inches or be stacked or placed to a height greater than eight (8) inches. Includes irrigation pipe and irrigation appurtenances.

    “Incidental Encroachment” means an encroachment which is incidental to the general public’s use of the right-of-way, accompanying or consequential to a land owner’s use of their property but not a major part of their use, and typical in nature throughout the City.

    “Minor Encroachment” means an encroachment which does not impede vehicle or pedestrian traffic, affect the rights of the City or other third parties in the encroachment area, or is temporary in nature.

    “Major Encroachment” means any encroachment which is not a minor or incidental encroachment.

    “Public property” means any and all property, right-of-way or other real or personal property owned or controlled by a public entity.

    “Right-of-way” means any public street, way, place, alley, sidewalk, utility easement, owned or controlled by the City.

    “Vertical Landscaping” means shrubs or plants taller than thirty (30) inches, trees, and/or rocks, stones, and boulders exceeding a nominal size of six (6) inches or are stacked or placed to a height greater than eight (8) inches.

    “Vision Triangle” means a triangular area on a lot at the intersection of two (2) streets or a street and a railroad or alley, two (2) sides of which are lot lines measured from the corner intersection of the lot lines to a distance specified. The third side of the triangle is a line across the corner of the lot joining the ends of the other two (2) sides. Where the lot lines and intersections have rounded corners, the lot lines will be extended in a straight line to a point of intersection. The vision clearance area shall contain no plantings, walls, structures or temporary or permanent obstructions exceeding two and one-half (2-1/2) feet in height, measured from the top of the curb or existing street grade. The vision triangle shall be measured as provided in Section 17.20.200.

    “Work” means any labor performed on, or any use or storage of equipment or materials, including, but not limited to, construction of streets and all related appurtenances, fixtures, improvements, sidewalks, driveway openings, bus shelters, bus loading pads, street lights, and traffic signal devices. It shall also mean construction, maintenance, or surveying, that requires street lane closures or excavation; and repair of all underground structures such as pipes, conduit, ducts, tunnels, manholes, vaults, buried cable, wire, or any other similar structure located below surface, and installation of overhead poles and wires or conductors, used for any purpose. (Ord. 24-2017 § 1)

 

12.12.030 Police powers.
    The permittee’s rights hereunder are subject to the police powers of the City, which include the power to adopt and enforce ordinances, including amendments to this section, necessary to the safety, health, and welfare of the public. The permittee shall comply with all applicable laws and ordinances enacted, or hereafter enacted, by the City or any other legally constituted government unit having lawful jurisdiction over the subject matter hereof. The City reserves the right to exercise its police powers, notwithstanding anything in this section, any permit issued hereunder, any franchise, or any other permit to the contrary. Any conflict between the provisions of this Section, any franchise or any permit and any other present or future lawful exercise of the City’s police powers shall be resolved in favor of the latter. (Ord. 24-2017 § 1)

 

12.12.040 Incidental encroachments—No permit or license agreement required.
    Incidental encroachments such as private horizontal landscaping or mailbox pillars, driveway markers, or trash receptacles with a capacity of ninety-six (96) gallons or less that are placed adjacent to the traveled lanes for removal on the scheduled date of pick-up, or any other object deemed by the City Engineer to be incidental will not require a permit or license agreement. (Ord. 24-2017 § 1)

 

12.12.050 Minor encroachments—License agreement required.
    A.  No person shall construct or install any minor encroachment, as determined by the City Engineer, such as fences, private vertical landscaping, or place any object temporarily in the public right-of-way or public property without first obtaining a Revocable License Agreement approved by the City Engineer.

    B.   A fee for processing the Revocable License Agreement shall be set by City Council resolution from time to time. The revocable license agreement granted by the City is revocable at will by the City.

    C.   Application.

    1.   An application for a minor encroachment shall be made on a form provided by the City. Upon submission of a complete application, the City Engineer shall forward copies of the applications to all appropriate departments for review and comment. The application shall be accompanied by any applicable fee.

    2.   Upon approval by appropriate departments, the City Engineer shall prepare a Revocable License Agreement to be signed first by the applicant and final signature by the City Engineer and the City Administrator.

    D.  Standards for Approval. A revocable license agreement may be issued if the application meets the following criteria:

    1.   The proposed encroachment does not create an obstruction to vehicle, bicycle or pedestrian traffic in any way within existing or planned travel lanes and/or pathways;

    2.   The proposed encroachment does not infringe upon any easement rights held by the City, other public agencies or utilities;

    3.   The proposed encroachment does not obstruct the vision triangle at intersections of streets, alleys, or driveways as determined by the City Engineer;

    4.   The proposed encroachment will not be within the Clear Zone, as determined by the City Engineer, based on the characteristics of the roadway and the traffic;

    5.   The proposed encroachment does not create or contribute to a safety hazard;

    6.   The proposed encroachment meets all standards and requirements of the City for location and improvements;

    7.   The proposed encroachment will not have to be relocated in the next forty-eight (48) months due to a planned City project and as determined by the City Engineer; and

    8.   City street trees approved and maintained by the City are not subject to the regulations in this chapter. (Ord. 24-2017 § 1)

 

12.12.060 Major encroachments—Permit required.
    A.  No person except the City, or a person exempted by contract with the City, shall undertake or permit to be undertaken any major encroachment involving the construction, excavation, work and/or encroachment in the public right-of-way or public property, or operate and maintain any utility within the right-of-way without first obtaining a permit from the City as set forth in this section. Each permit obtained, along with associated documents, shall be maintained on the job site and available for inspection upon request by the City. Except that, pursuant to Section 17.45.060(B), no application or permit shall be required for the installation, placement, operation, maintenance, or replacement of micro wireless facilities that are suspended on cable operator-owned cables or lines that are strung between existing utility poles in compliance with the National Safety Code, subject to the exceptions listed therein.

    B.   No permittee shall perform construction, excavation, work in, or create an encroachment of an area larger or at a location different than that specified in the permit or permit application. When construction, excavation, or work is commenced under an approved permit, it becomes necessary to perform construction, excavation, or work in a larger or different area than originally requested under the application; the permittee shall notify the City immediately and within twenty-four (24) hours shall file a supplementary application for the additional construction, excavation, or work.

    C.   Permits for construction, excavation or work shall not be transferable or assignable and work shall not be performed in any place other than that specified in the permit. The applicant may subcontract the work to be performed under a permit provided that the holder of the permit, as well as all subcontractors, obtain a contractor’s license, all insurance and financial security as required. The permittee shall be and remain responsible for the performance of the work under the permit. The physical construction of public improvements in new developments is the responsibility of the developer of the land. Ownership of those improvements remains with the developer of the land until acceptance by the City. Any person performing work on those improvements which are within a public way, or on an area proposed for dedication as a public right-of-way or utility easement, but prior to acceptance by the City, shall obtain a permit from the City, and permission from the owner of the improvements and the proposed public way. The permittee shall be financially responsible to the owner of the improvements to carry out all remedial work necessary to receive acceptance by the City of those improvements. This financial obligation shall apply only to the work in the public way done by the permittee.

    D.  Any work or use of other City property, other than rights-of-way, may be allowed by the City only if it is appropriate in the City’s discretion or authorized by other City ordinances or regulations. Such use may be subjected to the provisions of this section in addition to any other terms and conditions required by the City.

    E.   Once the construction, excavation or work has been completed and accepted by the City, the Permit shall expire, unless an encroachment on public property remains. In that case, the Permit shall continue until terminated or the encroachment is removed. Regardless of whether a permittee maintains a permit for a continuing encroachment, any new work on the encroachment will require a new permit pursuant to this chapter.

    F.   The installation of utility and communications facilities in rights-of-way controlled by the Colorado Department of Transportation shall nonetheless require the City’s approval, and compliance with applicable City ordinances. (Ord. 24-2017 § 1)

 

12.12.070 Major encroachments—Application and conditions.
    A.  An applicant for a permit for a major encroachment to allow construction, excavation, work or encroachment in the public right-of-way under this section shall:

    1.   File a written application made upon a form provided by the City, which will include information necessary or convenient for the administration and enforcement of this section, including, but not limited to, a statement that the applicant or its contractor is not delinquent in payments due to the City on prior work. A fee, payable upon application, for processing the Permit shall be pursuant to applicable rules, regulations or specifications of the City or as set by City Council resolution from time to time.

    2.   Attach copies of all permits or licenses (including required insurance, deposits, bonds, and warranties) required to do the proposed work, and to work in the public rights-of-way, if license or permits are required under the laws of the United States, the State of Colorado, or the ordinance or regulations of the City.

    3.   Provide a satisfactory plan of work showing:

    a.   The date of commencement and completion of the construction, excavation or work;

    b.   A statement that such work will be performed in strict compliance with the requirements of this chapter and any other applicable provision of the Code;

    c.   Protection of the subject property and adjacent properties when the City determines such protection is necessary;

    d.   Protection of shade and ornamental plants and the restoration of turf when the City determines that damage may occur to such plants or turf;

    e.   A description and illustration or plan concerning the exact location, depth, length, width, surface area and nature of the construction, excavation, or work desired to be made, together with the location of any underground utilities within a radius of ten (10) feet;

    f.    A satisfactory traffic control and erosion protection plan and permit, in accordance with Chapter 20.10, for the proposed construction, excavation, or work; and

    g.   List of all anticipated subcontractors.

    B.   All permits issued for construction, excavation or work may be granted only for the time to complete the work. The applicant is required to review the permit prior to the expiration of the permit.

    C.   Permits shall not be issued to any person, firm or corporation that is not licensed with the City in accordance with Chapter 5.12 of this Code except concerning construction, excavation or work performed pursuant to an applicable and current franchise agreement with the City and the departments of the City.

    D.  The permit shall be issued with terms and conditions as necessary and appropriate to implement this section and protect the public health, safety and welfare, including provisions for insurance, indemnification, a hold harmless and damage release for the City, warranty, and repair periods, requirements for as-built plans and requirements to reimburse the City for any costs it incurs as a result of relying on inaccurate “as-built” drawings submitted to the City.

    E.   Permit Fees. Upon completion of the Work, the applicant shall pay to the City, a permit fee in an amount set pursuant to applicable rules, regulations or specifications of the City or as set by City Council resolution from time to time. Permit fees shall be waived for work done on behalf of the City. Pursuant to C.R.S. § 38-5.5-108 and Chapter 17.45, in exchange for permission to attach wireless service facilities to poles or structures in a right-of-way owned by the City, payment shall not be in excess of the amounts set forth in 47 U.S.C. § 224 and 47 C.F.R. § 1.1409.

    F.   Indemnification. Any permittee who applies for a permit shall agree to indemnify and save harmless the City, its authorized agents, officers, representatives and employees from and against any and all claims, penalties, liability or loss resulting from claims or court actions, whether at law or in equity, arising directly or indirectly out of any act or omission of the contractor, his agents, officers, representatives or employees, in constructing, excavating or performing any work on any street, alley, sidewalk, public right-of-way or city-owned property.

    G.  Insurance. The permittee shall post with the City Engineer certification of general liability insurance covering such excavation work. All insurance policies required in this section shall include complete operation coverage for a period of two (2) years from the date of application for each permit. Failure to maintain such insurance shall not relieve any applicant from liability. Such proof of insurance shall contain a clause that the City shall be notified by the insurer not less than thirty (30) days prior to any change in the policy or cancellation of such policy. All liability insurance shall be approved by the City Attorney as to form. City Council shall set the minimum coverages required by resolution. All policies shall be applicable to all premises and operations. The policy shall include coverage for bodily injury, broad form property damage (including completed operations), personal injury (including coverage for contractual and employee acts), blanket contractual, products, and completed operations. The policy shall contain a severability of interests provision, and shall be endorsed to include the City and the City’s officers, employees, and contractors as additional insureds. No additional insured endorsement shall contain any exclusion for bodily injury or property damage arising from completed operations. All liability insurance shall be approved by the City Attorney as to form.

    H.  Performance Bond.

    1.   Each permittee, before being issued a permit, shall provide the City, at the permittee’s expense, with a performance bond in a form and amount approved by the City. The bond shall be in an amount equal to one hundred fifteen percent (115%) of the City’s estimate of the cost of restoration of the site of the construction, excavation or work or five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), whichever is greater. The cost of restoration shall include, without limitation, the removal of defective material, re-compaction of subgrade and base material and construction of surface improvements. For permittees who typically have greater than ten (10) permits annually have the option of providing one bond annually in the amount of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00).

    2.   The condition of such bond shall be that the permittee shall comply with all the ordinances and specifications of the City relating to excavating or working in any street, alley, sidewalk or other public right-of-way or city-owned property.

    3.   Such bond shall be approved by the City Engineer as to sufficiency and by the City Attorney as to form, and shall remain in full force and effect for a period of two (2) years from and after the date any excavation is made.

    4.   In the event of a breach of any of the conditions of the bond, the City Engineer shall give notice of same to the surety, shall cause to be remedied the condition wherein the bond is breached, and the City Attorney shall bring action in the name of the City to recover the penalty of the bond, or so much thereof as may be necessary to reimburse all costs and expenses the City may have incurred incidental thereto.

    5.   No permit under this Section shall be issued to any applicant whose bond, or any portion thereof, has been declared forfeit, unless and until such bond shall be reinstated or a new bond filed as provided in this chapter.

    6.   The provisions of Subsections 1 through 5 of this Section shall not apply to any municipalities, quasi-municipal entities, ditch companies, utilities and the City.

    I.    Time of Completion. All work covered by the permit shall be completed by the date stated on the application. Permits shall be void if work has not commenced within thirty (30) days of issuance, and in such case, performance bonds shall be returned with any applicable administrative or City costs deducted. A permit renewal fee will be charged for every thirty (30) days of the work included under the permit.

    J.    Standards and Specifications. The permittee shall be fully responsible for the cost and actual performance of all work in the public way. The permittee shall do all work, including restoration and repair of unpermitted disturbances, in conformance with any and all construction specifications, and the City’s minimum standards and specifications pursuant to the City of Cañon Standard Construction Specifications. These standards shall apply to all work in the public way unless otherwise indicated by the permit.

    K.  Location and Relocation of Facilities.

    1.   The location of the permittee’s facilities shall be subject to the prior approval of the City, shall be located to maximize the potential use of the right-of-way, minimize interference with the City’s use and facilities, and conform to requirements of City standards and specifications.

    2.   If at any time the City requests the permittee to relocate its facilities in order to allow the City to make any use of rights-of-way, or if at any time it shall become necessary or convenient to move or change the permittee’s facilities within or adjacent to streets or rights-of-way in any manner, either temporarily or permanently, because of a change in the grade or by reason of the improving, repairing, constructing, or maintaining of any street or rights-of-way, by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, by reason of installation of any type of City utility facilities or other improvement, or by reason of any program from the undergrounding of such facilities, the City shall notify the permittee at least ninety (90) days in advance, except in the case of emergencies, of the City’s intention to perform or have such work performed. The permittee shall thereupon, at its sole cost and expense, accomplish the necessary relocation, removal, or change within a reasonable time from the date of the notification, but in no event later than three (3) working days prior to the date the City has notified the permittee that it intends to commence its work or immediately in the case of emergencies. Exceptions will be granted by the City Engineer for utility main line or significant facility relocation, for which the City and affected utility will coordinate and agree upon a reasonable time frame for the relocation. Upon the permittee’s failure to accomplish such work, the City may perform such work at the permittee’s expense and the permittee shall reimburse the City within thirty (30) days after receipt of a written invoice. Following relocation, all affected property shall be restored to, at a minimum, the condition which existed prior to construction by the permittee at the permittee’s expense, and revised as-built plans submitted to the City.

    3.   The City may require the relocation of facilities which are not installed in the approved location or corridor following the procedures set out in Subsection (2) above.

    L.   Emergency Procedures. Any person maintaining facilities in the public way may proceed with repairs upon existing facilities without a permit when emergency circumstances demand that the work be done immediately. Emergency work is defined to mean any work necessary to restore water, sewer, gas, phone, and electric facilities. Repairs on other facilities in the public way may also be administratively classified as emergency by the City. The person doing the work shall apply to the City for a permit on the first working day after such work has commenced. All emergency work will require prior telephone notification to the City Police Department and the appropriate fire protection agency. (Ord. 12-2019 § 16; Ord. 24-2017 § 1)

 

12.12.080 Existing encroachments.
    A.  Any permittee holding an existing right-of-way permit obtained from the City prior to enactment of this chapter shall be subject to the requirements of such permit, notwithstanding the provisions this chapter.

    B.   Any encroachment, existing as of the adoption of this chapter, is subject to all of the provisions of this chapter, except as provided for herein. An existing encroachment shall not be required to obtain a license pursuant to Section 12.12.050 or a permit pursuant to Section 12.12.060. Upon alteration of an existing encroachment or work within an existing encroachment, the applicable license or permit shall be obtained pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 24-2017 § 1)

 

12.12.090 Administration and enforcement.
    A.  Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 17.45 concerning wireless service facilities, the following shall apply:

    1.   If a permittee does not successfully complete all work required under a permit issued by the City pursuant to this chapter, the City may take corrective measures and charge the cost of such corrective measures to the permittee. Such costs shall include the actual cost of any work deemed necessary by the City Engineer, plus reasonable administrative and inspection costs and any civil penalties imposed pursuant to this chapter.

    2.   Civil Penalties. The City Engineer is hereby authorized to impose and collect civil penalties not to exceed two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) per violation per day if an alleged violator who is served a written notice of violation, identifying one or more specific violations of this chapter or of an approved permit, fails to take the remedial action set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations set forth therein within ten (10) days after the notice of violation is served upon the owner or operator (or such longer period as is authorized in writing by the City Engineer, if a cure cannot reasonably be accomplished in ten (10) days), except as provided herein. If the violation is for working or having worked in the public way without first having obtained a permit, or not having proper traffic control in place before work commenced, the City Engineer may issue a notice of violation requiring immediate compliance with this chapter, may order any and all work to cease immediately and any civil penalty may be imposed from the time of service of the notice.

    a.   The amount of the penalty shall depend upon the severity of the violation and may be appealed to the City Administrator using the same process as is provided for in subsection b below. The City shall not prosecute any alleged violator nor seek the imposition of criminal penalties with respect to any violation for which a civil penalty was imposed and paid pursuant to this subsection.

    b.   Notice of a violation, including details of the alleged violation(s) shall be served by personal delivery or by mail to the last known address of the permittee. The notice shall be effective upon the date of mailing or personal delivery. The permittee may file a written protest objecting to the notice within twenty-four (24) hours of the effective date of the notice.

    c.   If no protest is filed, then the charges shall become due and payable on the date set forth in the notice, which date shall be after the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal.

    d.   In the event a protest is filed, a hearing on such protest shall be held before the City Administrator or its designee within fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of the written protest. If any violations are affirmed upon completion of such hearing, then the charges shall become due and payable ten (10) days after the issuance of the order upon such protest.

    3.   Criminal Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter 12.12 is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in an amount that does not exceed the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010. The City may also maintain an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin any violation of this chapter, or of any permit issue pursuant hereto.

    4.   Revocation of Permits.

    a.   In addition to the remedies above, any permit may be revoked or suspended by the City after notice to the permittee for:

    b.   Violation of any condition of the permit or of any provision of this section.

    c.   Violation of any provision of any other ordinance of the City or state law relating to the work.

    d.   Existence of any condition or performance of any act which the City determines does constitute or cause a condition endangering life or damage to property.

    e.   Suspension or revocation by the City and a stop work order shall take effect immediately upon notice to the person performing the work in the public way, or to the permittee’s last known address.

    f.    A stop work order may be issued by the City to any person or persons doing or causing any work to be done in the public way without a permit, or in violation of any provision of this section, or any other ordinance of the City.

    g.   Any stop work or suspension order or revocation of any permit may be appealed by the permittee to the City Administrator by filing a written notice of appeal within ten (10) days of the order or revocation.

    h.   Notice of revocation of an encroachment permit shall be sent by the City to the permittee at the address provided in the application. Revocation of the permit shall be effective ten (10) days after the date of the notice. Permittee shall be obligated to remove the encroachment within thirty (30) days of the effective date of the revocation.

    5.   The City Engineer shall refuse to issue a permit under this chapter to any person who shall have suffered two (2) convictions hereunder within a period of five (5) years from the date of the first or former conviction, for a period of at least one year after such second conviction. (Ord. 24-2017 § 1)

Chapter 12.24 BUILDING NUMBERING SYSTEM
12.24.010 Street names to be posted.
    At the intersections of each street or avenue, there shall be placed on at least one of the four (4) corners the names of the intersecting streets, and the same shall be placed upon posts or other suitable places and shall be marked so as to be distinctly read. (Prior code § 12.28.090)

 

12.24.020 Building numbering required.
    It is made the duty of all owners or occupants of all buildings situated in the city to number them in the manner set out in this chapter and as may hereafter be provided by the City Council by ordinance. (Prior code § 12.28.010)

 

12.24.030 Decimal system—Existing numbers.
    The decimal system of numbering houses is adopted, but the numbers heretofore assigned to buildings, except as hereinafter provided, shall remain the numbers of such buildings respectively until otherwise changed by the City Council by ordinance or resolution. (Prior code § 12.28.020)

 

12.24.040 One hundred numbers per block.
    One hundred (100) numbers shall be assigned to each block, beginning at First Street in the west division of the city, calling it “100,” running easterly on each street until reaching the north and south street in each instance, when new numbering shall be followed, one hundred (100) numbers to each block eastward, commencing at such north and south streets as zero. (Prior code § 12.28.030)

 

12.24.050 Streets north and south from Main Street.
    Buildings on north and south streets or avenues shall be numbered north and south from Main Street as zero, allowing one number to each twenty (20) feet. For less space than twenty (20) feet, one-half numbers may be used. (Prior code § 12.28.040)

 

12.24.060 Even and odd numbers.
    In numbering, only full blocks shall be given hundred numbers, and across all undivided tracts intervening between portions laid out into blocks, the lines of streets shall be considered to cross in regular continuance of streets in additions, and on all streets or avenues running north and south, even numbers shall be placed on the east side; and on all streets and avenues running east and west, the even numbers shall be placed on the south side. All odd numbers alternating in each case shall be placed on the opposite side of the street thereon. (Prior code § 12.28.050)

 

12.24.070 Numbers per lot size.
    One hundred (100) numbers are allotted for each block, but two (2) numbers shall be used for each frontage of forty-four (44) feet, and one number for each twenty-five (25) foot lot, except in the business portion of the city, where one-half numbers may be used. (Prior code § 12.28.060)

 

12.24.080 Assignment of numbers.
    The City Administrator shall appoint some suitable person to assign each house its proper number. (Prior code § 12.28.070)

 

12.24.090 Size and placement of figures.
    Each of the figures of every number shall not be less than two and one-half (2.5) inches in length and so marked as to be distinctly and easily read. Such numbers shall be placed in a conspicuous place on or above the front door of the building to which the same are attached. (Prior code § 12.28.080)

 

12.24.100 Failure to number building—Penalty.
    Any person being the owner or occupant of any building who, after being notified of the proper number for the building, shall for thirty (30) days thereafter, decline or refuse to number any building owned or occupied by him or her in conformity with the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 12.28.100)

Chapter 12.26 PROHIBITIONS WITH RESPECT TO THE PARKING AND STORAGE OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND TRAILERS ON RESIDENTIAL STREETS
12.26.010 Application of chapter provisions.
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the parking and storage of certain commercial vehicles, recreational vehicles and trailers on residential streets within the City limits of the City of Cañon City. (Ord. 1-2013 § 1)

 

12.26.020 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter:

    A.  “Commercial vehicle” means and includes: any vehicle used to transport cargo or passengers for profit, hire, or otherwise to further the purposes of a business or commercial enterprise; any vehicle described in Section 42-4-235(1)(a), C.R.S.; or any vehicle described in Section 17.08.010(C) of this Code.

    B.   “Park or parking” means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than very briefly for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading of property or passengers.

    C.   “Recreational equipment” means any detached trailer, whether commercially manufactured or homemade, either loaded or empty, that is used for transporting equipment or animals used for recreational purposes, including boat trailers, snowmobile and motorcycle trailers, horse trailers, and similarly used vehicles.

    D.  “Recreational vehicle” means and includes: any recreational vehicle described in Section 17.08.010(C) of this Code; and any “motor home” or “noncommercial or recreational vehicle” described at Section 101 of Article II of the Model Traffic Code. (See subsections 40 and 44 of Section 101, Article II, 2003 MTC, respectively.)

    E.   “Residential street” means any street (or portion thereof) that is situated within the boundaries of any residential zone district within the City or immediately adjacent to any such residential zone district.

    F.   “Street” means the entire width between the boundary lines of every right-of-way provided for public use for the purpose of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and placement of utilities, including the terms “highway,” “road,” “lane,” “avenue,” “drive,” “alley,” “parkway,” “shoulder,” or other similar designation.

    G.  “Store, stored or storing” means the leaving of a vehicle unattended.

    H.  “Trailer,” as used in this chapter, means and includes: any camper trailer, semitrailer, trailer, trailer coach or utility trailer described in Section 101 of Article II of the Model Traffic Code (See subsections 10, 67, 82, 83(a) and 87 of Section 101, Article II, 2003 MTC); any “utility trailer” as described at Section 17.08.010(C) of this Code; and any “recreational equipment” described in Subsection C of this section. (Ord. 1-2013 § 1)

 

12.26.030 Parking and storage of commercial and recreational vehicles and trailers on residential streets prohibited.
    A.  Except as permitted in Subsection B of this section, no commercial vehicle exceeding eighteen feet (18′) in length, eighteen feet (18′) in combined length for a vehicle with trailer, or eight feet (8′) in height, whether loaded or unloaded, shall be parked or stored on any residential street.

    B.   A commercial vehicle of the type described in Subsection A may be parked on a residential street:

    1.   During the expeditious loading and unloading of such vehicle; or

    2.   When and while such vehicle is being used to render services to a property located within two hundred feet (200′) of where the vehicle is parked; or

    3.   When and while such vehicle is being used to perform the special operations for which it was designed, including, but not limited to, the construction, operation, removal or repair of utility service lines or public utility property or facilities, or public streets and rights-of-way.

    C.   No recreational vehicle, and no trailer, whether connected to a towing vehicle or disconnected, shall be parked or stored on any residential street for any period longer than forty-eight (48) hours.

    D.  No recreational vehicle shall be used for dwelling or sleeping purposes while parked on any residential street for any period longer than forty-eight (48) hours.

    E.   No commercial vehicle, recreational vehicle, recreational equipment or trailer shall be parked on any residential street at a location that is closer than twenty-five (25) feet from the intersection of two (2) streets or closer than fifteen (15) feet from the intersection of a street and an alley (measured along the edges of the public rights-of-way), or closer than ten (10) feet from any public or private driveway, or in a manner or location that blocks any sidewalk. (Ord. 1-2013 § 1)

 

12.26.040 Enforcement.
    The requirements of this chapter may be enforced by any police officer or any parking enforcement officer of the City. The City’s Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to issue Warning Notices with respect to any apparent violations of Section 12.26.030 of this chapter (or of its counterpart Section 1212 of the Model Traffic Code). Such Warning Notices may be personally served or affixed to unattended vehicles parked or stored in apparent violation of said Section 12.26.030. (Ord. 1-2013 § 1)

 

12.26.050 Violations—Penalties.
    A.  Violations of any of the provisions of Section 12.26.030 shall be charged and enforced as violations of Section 1212 of the Model Traffic Code, into which the provisions of this Chapter 12.26 are hereby incorporated. Punishment for such violations shall be as provided for in Section 10.04.060(C)(1) of the Cañon City Municipal Code. (Ord. 1-2013 § 1)

Chapter 12.30 HISTORIC PRESERVATION
12.30.010 Title.
    This chapter shall be known and cited as the Cañon City Historic Preservation Ordinance. (Ord. 27-2018 § 1)

 

12.30.020 Purpose and declaration of policy.
    A.  It is hereby declared as a matter of public policy that the protection, preservation and enhancement of sites and structures of cultural, historical and architectural significance located within the city is a public necessity, and is required in the interest of the economic development, civic pride, and general welfare of the people of the City of Cañon City.

    B.   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and welfare through:

    1.   The designation, preservation, protection, enhancement and perpetuation of those structures that reflect outstanding elements of the city’s cultural, social, economic, political, architectural, historic or other heritage;

    2.   The enhancement of property values and the stabilization of historic neighborhoods and districts;

    3.   The promotion of civic pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past as represented in the city’s landmarks and historic areas;

    4.   The protection and enhancement of the city’s attractiveness to tourists, visitors, home buyers, employers, residents, potential investors and shoppers, thereby supporting local business, commerce, and industry;

    5.   The promotion of good urban design and the perpetuation of open space; and

    6.   The provision of educational opportunities to increase public appreciation of the city’s unique heritage.

    C.   The intent of this chapter is to create a method to draw a reasonable balance between private property rights and the public interest in preserving the city’s unique heritage and historic character by ensuring that demolition or alteration of properties with historical significance shall be carefully considered. (Ord. 27-2018 § 1)

 

12.30.030 Definitions.
    Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common usage and so as to give this chapter its most reasonable application.

    1.   “Alteration” means any proposed modification to a designated historic district, site or structure, which could have an effect on the character of the historic resource relative to the criteria by which it was designated. Examples of alterations for structures may include additions, any exterior modifications, including signage to be affixed to the façade.

    2.   “Alteration Certificate” means a certificate issued by the Historic Preservation Commission indicating its approval of plans for the alteration, construction, restoration, removal or demolition of a designed historic resource.

    3.   “Certificate of Exemption” means a certificate issued by the Historic Preservation Commission authorizing alteration, construction, restoration, removal or demolition of a structure even though an Alteration Certificate has previously been denied.

    4.   “Commission” means the Cañon City Historic Preservation Commission.

    5.   “Commissioner” means a member of the Historic Preservation Commission.

    6.   “Compatible” shall mean consistent with, harmonious with and/or enhances the mixture of complementary architectural styles either of the architecture of an individual structure or the character of the surrounding structures.

    7.   “Construction” means the act or process of adding an addition to an existing structure, the remodeling of an existing structure, or the erection of a new structure.

    8.   “Contributing Building” means a building that is at least fifty (50) years old or older or is associated with significant people or events. In the context of this chapter, a contributing building is one of significance used for defining context and which retains a significant amount of its physical integrity and character-defining features.

    9.   “Demolition” means any act or process that destroys in part or in whole a district, structure or site.

    10. “Exterior Architectural Feature” means the architectural style, design, general arrangement and components of the outer surfaces of a structure, including but not limited to the color, texture, materials, type, size and style of all windows, doors, roofs, lights, siding, signs and other fixtures appurtenant to the structure.

    11. “Historic District” means a significant concentration, linkage or continuity of historic resources united historically or aesthetically by plan or physical development.

    12. “Historic Resource” means a historic district, site or structure.

    13. “Historic Site” means a location of a significant event, historic occupation or activity where the location itself maintains historical, cultural or architectural value and significance to the community regardless of the value of any existing building or structure.

    14. “Historic Structure” means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent or near permanent location on or in the ground, or attachment to something having permanent location on the ground.

    15. “Noncontributing Building” means a building, regardless of age, that has lost its integrity. These buildings do retain value as residential or commercial properties, but do not possess the significance or physical integrity necessary to be listed as a contributing building. (Ord. 27-2018 § 1)

 

12.30.040 Historic Preservation Commission established.
    A.  There is hereby created a Historic Preservation Commission for the City of Cañon City, which shall have principal responsibility for matters of historic preservation as set forth in this chapter.

    B.   The Commission shall consist of five (5) Commissioners who shall be appointed by the City Council.

    C.   The Commissioners shall serve three (3) year staggered terms from the date of appointment. To stagger the initial terms of membership, the original Commission shall consist of: one (1) member to serve one (1) year term; two (2) members to serve two (2) year terms; and two (2) members to serve three (3) year terms. At least forty percent (40%) of the Commissioners shall be professional in preservation-related disciplines, such as architecture, landscape architecture, architectural history, archaeology, history, planning, American studies, American civilization, cultural geography or cultural anthropology. If the required number of professional members cannot be found to serve on the Commission, this requirement may be waived until the next vacancy occurs, at which time the City shall again diligently seek professional representation. In the case of a lack of professional appointees, the Commission may, with Council approval, be allowed to retain professional consultants to advise the Commission as necessary to fulfill its duties.

    D.  All Commissioners shall serve without compensation, except for such amounts determined appropriate by the City Council to offset expenses incurred in performance of their duties.

    E.   Commissioners may be removed for cause by the City Council.

    F.   The Commission shall, by majority vote, elect one (1) Commissioner to serve as chairperson to preside over the meetings, and one (1) Commissioner to serve as vice-chairperson. The Commissioners so designated shall serve in these capacities for terms of one (1) year, and may serve successive terms.

    G.  The Commission shall, by majority vote, elect an individual to serve as secretary. The secretary need not be a Commissioner, shall take minutes of each meeting, shall be responsible for publication and distribution of copies of the minutes, reports, and decisions of the Commission to its members, and shall give notice as provided by law of all public meetings conducted by the Commission. The secretary shall also be responsible for transmitting minutes and any other required reporting to the State Historic Preservation Office.

    H.  The City Council shall also appoint two (2) alternate Commissioners who shall have the same qualifications provided for by this section. (Ord. 27-2018 § 1)

 

12.30.050 Meetings of the Commission.
    A.  The Commission shall hold at least one (1) regularly scheduled meeting per month, unless there is no business to come before the Commission or the Commission is unable to obtain a quorum to conduct business. Meetings shall be scheduled by resolution of the Commission at the beginning of each calendar year. The Commission chairperson may call a meeting at any time.

    B.   The Commission shall act only at meetings.

    C.   No Commissioner shall vote on any matter that may materially or apparently affect the property, income, or business interest of that Commissioner.

    D.  The chairperson, and in his or her absence the vice-chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.

    E.   All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public. Minutes shall be kept of all Commission proceedings, and sent to the State Historic Preservation Office upon approval.

    F.   A quorum for the Commission shall consist of a majority of the regular membership (excluding vacant seats). A quorum is necessary for the Commission to hold a public hearing or take official action. A tie vote shall be deemed a denial of the motion or recommended action. (Ord. 27-2018 § 1)

 

12.30.060 Powers and duties of the Commission.
    A.  To adopt its own procedural regulations.

    B.   To conduct an ongoing survey to identify properties, structures and areas in the city that are culturally, architecturally and/or historically significant to the city, county, state or nation.

    C.   To keep a register of all districts, sites and structures that have been locally designated as historic resources.

    D.  To hold public hearings for reviewing applications for construction, alteration, restoration, removal or demolition affecting proposed or designated historic districts, sites and structures.

    E.   To issue or deny alteration certificates and certificates of exemption for historic districts, sites and structures.

    F.   To adopt criteria and specific design standards or guidelines for review of historic resources and for review of proposals to alter, restore, demolish or move designated historic structures and/or resources.

    G.  To review structures, resources and areas nominated for designation as a historic districts, sites or structures and recommend that the City Council make such designations by ordinance.

    H.  To act as a resources for owners within designated historic districts and for owners of designated historic sites and structures on physical and financial aspects of preservation, renovation, restoration and rehabilitation, including the process for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places.

    I.    To develop and assist in public education programs, including but not limited to walking tours, brochures, lectures and conferences.

    J.    To advise the City Council on matters related to preserving the overall historic character of the city.

    K.  To actively pursue financial assistance for historic preservation programs.

    L.   To oversee and maintain on behalf of the city any historic property or full or partial interest in historic real property, including easements, that the city may own or accept as a gift or otherwise, upon authorization and approval of the City Council.

    M.  To testify before all boards and commissions, including the Planning Commission and the Board of Adjustment, on any matter affecting a designated historic resource.

    N.  To undertake any other action or activity necessary or appropriate to the implementation of its powers and duties or to the implementation of the purpose of this chapter.

    O.  To prepare an annual report of the Commission’s activities for the State Historic Preservation Office, including at a minimum the number and types of cases reviewed and their dispositions, new historic designations made, progress on historic survey activities, education activities, and credentials of new commission members and staff, if any. (Ord. 27-2018 § 1)

 

12.30.070 Designation of historic district, site or structure.
    Pursuant to the procedures set forth herein, the City Council may, by ordinance:

    A.  Designate in the city as having cultural, architectural or historical significance a historic structure, an integrated group of structures and features on a single lot as a historic site, or a larger grouping as a historic district.

    B.   Each such designating ordinance shall include a description of the historic characteristics of the district, site or structure that justify its designation, and a description of the particular features that should be preserved, and shall include a legal description of the location and boundaries of the district, site or structure.

    C.   The designating ordinance may also indicate alterations that would have a significant impact upon, or be potentially detrimental to, the historic district, site or structure.

    D.  Any historic designation of a district, site or structure shall be in furtherance of and in conformance with the purposes and criteria set forth in this chapter.

    E.   The property included within a designated district or site and designated historic structures shall be subject to the controls and standards set forth in this chapter and shall be eligible for such incentive programs as may be developed by the Commission. (Ord. 27-2018 § 1)

 

12.30.080 Procedure for designating historic district, site or structure.
    A.  Nomination for designations shall be made to the Commission on forms prepared by it and may be submitted by the Commission, the property owner, or a citizen. Nominations for historic district, site or structure must contain the approval of all current owners of record.

    B.   Upon nomination, the Commission shall contact the owner(s) of record of all affected property or properties, either in person or in writing, outlining the reasons and effects of designation as a historic resource.

    C.   Once an application is complete, the Commission shall hold a public hearing on the nomination no more than sixty (60) days after the filing of a complete application as determined by the City Manager or designee. Notice of the date, time, place and general subject matter of such hearing shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. In addition, the Commission shall post notice of the hearing on the nominated property, structure(s) or cite(s) at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. Finally, written notice shall be sent by first class mail at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing to all affected property owners, as determined from county records, whose property would be included in the proposed historic designation.

    D.  At the public hearing, the Commission shall hear evidence in support of or against the proposed designation and review the application for conformance with the established criteria for designation and with the purposes of this section.

    E.   Within thirty (30) days after the public hearing, the Commission shall recommend approval, modification and approval or denial of the application for designation. If recommended for approval, the Commission shall refer the application to the City Council.

    F.   Within thirty (30) days after the referral from the Commission, the City Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed designation. Notice of the date, time, place and general subject matter of such hearing shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. In addition, notice of the hearing shall be posted on the nominated property, structure(s) or area(s) at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing.

    G.  At the public hearing, the City Council shall hear evidence in support of or against the proposed designation and review the application for conformance with the established criteria for designation and with the purposes of this section.

    H.  Within thirty (30) days of the public hearing, the City Council shall approve, modify and approve, or deny the proposed designation. If the designation is approved, the City Council shall adopt a designating ordinance.

    I.    Within fifteen (15) days of the effective date of the designating ordinance, the Commission shall record with the county clerk and recorder a certified copy of the ordinance.

    J.    If the Commission determines that a proposed district, site or structure does not meet the criteria for designation as a historic resource, any of the affected property owners may appeal the Commission’s decision by filing a written appeal with the City Council within thirty (30) days of the Commission’s decision. (Ord. 27-2018 § 1)

 

12.30.090 Criteria for designation.
    The Commission shall consider the following criteria when reviewing nominations for designation:

    A.  Designation as an Historic Resource. All resources proposed for historic designation shall be at least fifty (50) years old and shall possess architectural, social, geographic or environmental importance by meeting one (1) or more of the following criteria:

    1.   Exemplifies specific elements of an architectural style or period.

    2.   Is an example of the work of an architect or builder who is recognized for his or her national, statewide, regional or local expertise.

    3.   Demonstrates superior craftsmanship or high artistic value.

    4.   Represents an innovation in construction, materials or design.

    5.   Represents a style particularly associated with the area.

    6.   Represents a built environment of a group of people in an era of history.

    7.   Represents a pattern or grouping of elements representing at least one criteria in this Subsection A.

    8.   Has undergone a significant historic remodel.

    9.   Is the site of a historic event that had an effect upon society.

    10. Exemplifies cultural, political, economic or social heritage in the community.

    11. Represents an association with a notable person.

    12. Is identified with historical personages or groups or which represents important events in national, state or local history.

    13. Enhances a sense of identity with the community.

    14. Is an established and familiar natural setting or visual feature in the community.

    B.   Historic Districts. In addition to complying with Subsection A above, districts proposed for historic designation shall demonstrate a pattern of physical elements or social activities. Significance is determined by applying the criteria of this chapter to patterns and unifying elements.

    1.   Historic district designation will not be considered unless the application contains written approval of all property owners within the proposed historic district boundaries.

    2.   Properties that do not contribute to the significance of the proposed historic district may be included within the boundaries if the noncontributing buildings do not noticeably detract from the proposed historic district’s sense of time, place and historic development. Noncontributing elements will be evaluated for their magnitude of impact by considering their size, scale, design, location or information potential.

    C.   Any historic landmark listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the Colorado State Register of Historic Properties shall be deemed to qualify for local designation under this chapter; however, such landmarks shall not be locally designated until an application for designation is filed and processed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 27-2018 § 1)

 

12.30.100 Alteration certificate required.
    A.  No persons shall cause or permit to be caused on or in a designated historic resource any construction, alteration, restoration, removal or demolition without first obtaining an alteration certificate for the proposed work from the Commission.

    B.   The Building Division shall not issue a building permit for work on or in a designated historic resource until an alteration certificate or exemption certificate has been obtained by the property owner.

    C.   An application for any construction, alteration, or demolition on or in a historic resource must be filed with the Commission on a form provided by the Commission.

    D.  The Commission shall consider the application and determine whether the proposal preserves the criteria for which the resource was designated, or adds to the architectural, cultural or historical significance of the resource. The Commission shall make its review pursuant to the procedures in Section 12.30.080.

    E.   Criteria to Review Alteration Certificate Application. In reviewing a proposed alteration, the Commission shall consider the project in terms such as design, finish, material, scale, mass and height and if the alteration is compatible with the historic designation. The Commission shall use the following criteria to determine compatibility of a proposed alteration:

    1.   The effect upon the general historical and architectural character of the district, site or structure;

    2.   The architectural style, arrangement, texture and material used on the existing and proposed structures and their relation and compatibility with other structures;

    3.   The size of the structure, its setbacks, its site, location and the appropriateness thereof, when compared to existing structures and the site;

    4.   The compatibility of accessory structures and fences with the main structure on the site, and with other structures;

    5.   The effects of the proposed work in creating, changing, destroying, or otherwise impacting the exterior architectural features of the resource upon which such work is done;

    6.   The condition of existing improvements and whether they are a hazard to public health and safety;

    7.   The effects of the proposed work upon the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of the resource;

    8.   The ability to comply with the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings, a section of the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for The Treatment of Historic Properties, of the Department of the Interior Regulations (36 C.F.R. Part 67), as may be amended from time to time; and

    9.   Guidance provided by the National Park Service Historic Preservation Briefs, as the same may exist from time to time.

    F.   Historic Districts—Additional Criteria for Contributing Buildings. In addition to the considerations set forth in Subsection E above, in reviewing a proposed alteration of a contributing building within a historic district, the Commission shall consider the following:

    1.   The effect upon the general historic and architectural character of the building;

    2.   The architectural style, arrangement, texture and material used on the existing and proposed buildings and their relation and compatibility with other historic landmarks, including state and national designations;

    3.   The effects of the proposed work in creating, changing, destroying or otherwise affecting the exterior architectural features of the building upon which such work is done;

    4.   The effects of the proposed work upon the protection, enhancement and perpetuation of the building;

    5.   The condition of existing improvements and whether they are a hazard to public health and safety;

    6.   The compatibility of accessory buildings, structures and fences with the main building and with other historic landmarks; and

    7.   Substantial compliance with the Secretary of the Interior Standards as they apply to building exteriors only, except those relating to paint color, which shall not apply.

    G.  Historic Districts—Additional Criteria for Noncontributing Buildings. In addition to the considerations set forth in Subsection E above, in reviewing a proposed alteration of a noncontributing building within a historic district, the Commission shall consider the following:

    1.   Noncontributing buildings should be compatible with contributing building;

    2.   Noncontributing buildings should not attempt to mimic or duplicate the historic features of contributing buildings; and

    3.   Contemporary designs that creatively draw upon the important characteristics of a historic district are favored.

    H.  If an alteration certificate is approved, the designated resource will retain its historic designation.

    I.    If an alteration certificate is denied, any of the affected property owners may appeal the Commission’s decision by filing a written appeal with the City Council within thirty (30) days of the Commission’s decision. (Ord. 27-2018 § 1)

 

12.30.110 Certificate of exemption.
    A.  If an alteration certification is denied or the affected property owner(s) cannot comply with the recommendations from the Commission for changes necessary for the issuance of an alteration certificate, the owner or owners may make application for a certificate of exemption.

    B.   Application for a certificate of exemption shall be made on a form prepared by the Commission. The Commission shall schedule a public hearing and provide notice as outlined in Section 12.30.080.

    C.   The Commission shall consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a certificate of exemption:

    1.   The cost of the proposed construction, alteration, restoration, or demolition, and the estimated additional cost, if any, of complying with the recommendations of the Commission for changes necessary for the issuance of an alteration certificate;

    2.   A report from a licensed engineer or architect concerning the structural soundness of the historic resource and their suitability for rehabilitation;

    3.   The estimated market value of the historic resource in its current condition, after completion of the proposed work, after any changes in the proposed work recommended by the Commission, and in the case of a demolition, after renovation of the historic resource for other uses;

    4.   The amount paid for the historic resource, the date of purchase, the party from whom the historic resource was purchased, and the relationship, if any, between the applicant and the person from whom the historic resource was purchased;

    5.   If the historic resource is income-producing, the annual gross income and itemized operating and maintenance expenses from the historic resource for the previous two (2) years;

    6.   The remaining balance on any mortgage or other financing secured by the historic resource;

    7.   Any appraisals of the historic resource’s value obtained by the applicant or other affected property owners within the previous two (2) years;

    8.   Any listing of the historic resource, or a portion thereof, for sale or rent, price asked and offers received, if any, during the previous two (2) years;

    9.   The real estate taxes on the historic resource for the previous two (2) years; and

    10. Any other information that may be relevant for the Commission’s consideration of the application.

    D.  The Commission shall review the evidence and testimony presented and issue written findings and conclusions within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the application. If a certificate of exemption is granted, the applicant may proceed with the construction, alteration, restoration, removal or demolition without further delay imposed by this chapter.

    E.   If a certificate of exemption is denied, the affected property owners may appeal the Commission’s decision by filing a written appeal with the City Council within thirty (30) days of the Commission’s decision. (Ord. 27-2018 § 1)

 

12.30.120 Revocation, enforcement and penalties.
    A.  If a structure or special feature of a designated historic resource has been altered in such a way so as to negate the features necessary to retain designation, the owner may apply to the Commission for a revocation of the designation or the Commission shall recommend revocation of the designation to the City Council in the absence of the owner’s application to do so. The procedure for revoking a designation shall be the procedure outlined in Section 12.30.080.

    B.   Revocation of the designation shall be the only enforcement and penalty recourse for a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 27-2018 § 1)

Title 13 PUBLIC UTILITIES*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 23-2020, 24-2020 and 4-2021. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.
Chapter 13.04 WATER REGULATIONS
Chapter 13.06 BACKFLOW PREVENTION AND CROSS-CONNECTIONS
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 13.08 WATER RATES AND FEES
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 13.10 STORMWATER UTILITY
Chapter 13.12 CESSPOOLS, SEPTIC TANKS AND GREASE TRAPS
Chapter 13.16 UTILITY RATE CASES
Chapter 13.18 DUTY OF FRANCHISEES TO REIMBURSE THE CITY FOR COSTS INCURRED BY THE CITY IN INVESTIGATING, NEGOTIATING AND “PROVING FRANCHISES AMENDMENTS THERETO AND PROPOSED TRANSFERS OF FRANCHISES

Chapter 13.04 WATER REGULATIONS
13.04.010 Application of chapter provisions.
    The provisions of this chapter apply to the installation, operation and maintenance of all water distribution facilities under the control of the Water Department and to the physical aspects of connecting the properties and structures of water users to the water system operated by the Water Department and providing water service to such water users. See Chapter 13.08 regarding tap fees and water rates. (Ord. 8-2008 § 1)

 

13.04.020 Definitions.
    A.  As used in this chapter and Chapter 13.08, the meaning of certain words and phrases shall be as set out in this section:

    0.5 “Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU)” means a secondary dwelling unit established in conjunction with, but clearly subordinate to, a single-family dwelling unit that is the principal structure on the lot, attached to the principal structure or as a separate accessory structure or portion thereof on the same lot as otherwise defined in Chapter 17.15 Cañon City Municipal Code.

    1.   “Association” means a unit owner’s association organized under Section 38-33.3-301, C.R.S, or any other applicable state statute, and may include an organization established to own and maintain common open space in a planned unit development. Association also means a homeowner’s association authorized to transact business in Colorado.

    2.   “Bulk Water User” means users who are not connected to the City water system and who provide their own transportation containers and vehicles to purchase water in bulk at the City’s water dispensing station in accordance with Department regulations.

    3.   “Common Interest Community” means real estate described in a declaration with respect to which a person, by virtue of such person’s ownership of a unit, is obligated to pay for real estate taxes, insurance premiums, maintenance, or improvement of other real estate described in a declaration. Ownership of a unit does not include holding a leasehold interest in a unit of less than forty (40) years, including renewal options. The period of the leasehold interest, including renewal options, is measured from the date the initial term commences. (See Section 38-33.3-10103(8), C.R.S.)

    4.   “Condominium” means a common interest community in which portions of the real estate are designated for separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of the separate ownership portions. A common interest community is not a condominium unless the undivided interests in the common elements are vested in the unit owners. (See Section 38-33.3-103(9) C.R.S.) Condominium may also mean real property that was divided into individual air space units pursuant to the Colorado Condominium Ownership Act. (See C.R.S. Section 38-33-101, et seq.)

    5.   “Cooperative” means a common interest community in which the real property is owned by an association, each member of which is entitled by virtue of such member’s ownership interest in the association to exclusive possession of a unit. (See C.R.S. Section 38-33-103(10).)

    6.   “Contractor” means a person duly licensed to work in the city in accordance with the requirements of the laws and codes applicable in the City of Cañon City.

    7.   “Correctional Facility” means any prison and/or prison complex operated by the Colorado Department of Corrections (“CDOC”) that is served by the Water Department through one or more master meters for distribution within the prison or complex and any similar facility operated by a person other than CDOC.

    8.   “Department” means the Water Department of the City, a water activity enterprise.

    9.   “Developer” means any person who participates as owner, promoter, developer or sales agent in the planning, platting, development, promotion, sale or lease of a planned development district, planned unit development, subdivision or other residential, commercial, industrial or other land development.

    10. “Duplex” means a structure or facility in single ownership situated upon a single lot or parcel that contains two (2) separate dwelling units connected by a common sidewall that, for purposes of metering, are considered one user.

    11. “Dwelling Unit” means living quarters that include facilities for sleeping and the preparation of meals, but does not include living quarters furnished in a hotel or motel for which a daily rental rate is charged. The term “dwelling unit” does not include motor homes, trailers, or other recreational vehicles using the facilities of a park furnishing facilities for such vehicles, nor does the term “dwelling unit” include hospital rooms or living quarters in a rest home certified as such by the state of Colorado.

    12. “Engineer” means the City Engineer.

    13. “Group User” means any person that, pursuant to an agreement with the Department, purchases water from the Department for sale and/or distribution to third parties who are connected to the water system of the group user.

    14. “Inside Water User” or “Inside User” means the owner of any property located within the corporate limits of the City of Cañon City that is directly connected to the Department’s system.

    15. “Meter” means a device that is approved by the Department, meets the City of Cañon City Standard Construction Specifications and is used for the purpose of measuring and recording the amount of water that passes through the device, indicating the volume of water consumed by a water user. In most cases, the meter constitutes the point of delivery of water sold by the Department and separates the “system side” of a water service line from the “customer side” of such line.

    15.5 “Meter Charge” means the basic charge billed to and payable by each water user connected to the water system for the privilege of being so connected. The meter charge is one of the two (2) components of water rates payable by such users and is billed without regard to actual water consumption. Consumption charges are the second component of water rates applicable to such users.

    16. “Mixed-Use Facility” means a building designed, planned, approved, constructed and/or used partly for residential use and partly for commercial or other non-residential use. Mixed-use facilities include residences containing Home Occupations, as defined in Title 17. For purposes of tap fees and metering, mixed-use facilities shall be considered to be one user.

    17. “Multi-Unit Facility” means a structure, facility or complex that contains two (2) or more units, each capable of being separately owned and/or occupied, including, but not limited to, shopping centers, strip malls and other commercial centers, condominiums, townhouse complexes, duplexes, single-family residences with accessory dwelling units, mobile home parks, mixed-use facilities, motels, hotels, lodges, bed and breakfast operations, retirement homes, group homes, hospitals and similar operations.

    18. “Multi-Unit,” when used to describe a class of water rate, means the water rate chargeable with respect to a multi-unit facility that is served through a single water meter, subject to certain limited exceptions provided for in Sections 13.08.060 and 13.08.070 of Chapter 13.08.

    19. “Non-residential,” when used to describe a class of water rate, means the water rate chargeable with respect to water delivered by the Department to: any property, structure, building or facility that does not contain dwelling units and is not a multi-unit facility.

    20. “Open Space” or “Parks” mean areas or parcels that are designated and/or approved by the City as open natural areas, groomed park lands, golf courses, rest areas, outdoor recreational areas, drainage facilities or other similar facilities that may or may not contain accessory non-dwelling structures, such as restrooms, maintenance facilities, pavilions, and/or buildings of similar function.

    21. “Outside Water User” or “Outside User” means any person owning real property located outside the corporate limits of the City of Cañon City that is connected to the Department’s water system, including group users.

    22. “Person” means any individual, corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, municipality, quasi-municipal entity, business trust, estate, trust, limited liability company, partnership, association, or other legal entity capable of entering into binding contracts.

    23. “Property Owner” means the person holding record title to any real property who applies for or receives water service from the Department at such property. “Property Owner” and “Water User” will generally have the same meaning in this title, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.

    24. “Residential Structure” means a structure or facility used solely for the inhabitance of human beings as a single dwelling unit.

    25. “Service Lines” means the two (2) sections of pipe used for conveying water from the water main to the premises of the water user, as follows:

    a.   That section of the line installed by the property owner and maintained by the Department between the main and the shutoff or water meter, whichever is closest to the property line or the property line, if there is no shutoff and the meter is contained within a structure on the property (sometimes called the “system-side” service line); and

    b.   That section of the service line installed and maintained by the property owner which is on the premises side of either the water meter or the curb box, whichever is closest to the property line or the property line (sometimes called the “customer-side” service line).

    26. “Shutoff” or “Curbstop/Meterstop” means a device that is approved by the Department and meets the City of Cañon City Standard Construction Specifications and is used for the purpose of shutting off and/or isolating the “customer-side” of the water service line from the “system-side” of the water service line.

    27. “Specific Standards” or “Department Standards” or “City Standards” mean the specifications regarding material, maintenance and/or installation of water system facilities prepared by the Water Superintendent or the City Engineer including, but not necessarily limited to, applicable provisions of the City of Cañon City Standard Construction Specifications.

    28. “Tap” or “Water Tap” means the physical connection to a Department water main of a service line leading to the property of a water user that is made for purposes of providing water service to such property.

    29. “Tap Fee” means the raw water and plant investment charge made by the Department for the initial privilege of connecting to the Department system to receive water service, a portion of which must be deposited into the City’s Raw Water Acquisition and Preservation Fund, and the balance of which must be deposited into the City’s Water Fund. Tap fee also means the raw water and plant investment charges associated with increasing the size of any existing water tap.

    30. “Townhouse” means a one-family dwelling unit, with a private entrance, which is part of a structure whose dwelling units are attached horizontally in a linear arrangement, divided by a lot and/or parcel line, that is or is capable of being separately owned or occupied, and has a totally exposed front and rear wall to be used for access, light, and ventilation. For purposes of tap fees and water metering, each individual townhouse owner shall be considered one water user.

    31. “Transmission Main” means a water pipe that is intended by the Department to be used exclusively for the transmission of water and not for distribution of water to individual customers. Except in rare instances, transmission mains will not be tapped for water service to individual water users.

    32. “Undersized Water Main” shall include any water main that is less than four (4) inches in diameter and such other water mains as are designated as undersized on the Department’s water main master plan.

    33. “Unit,” as used in this chapter and in Chapter 13.08, means an enclosed area consisting of a free-standing, detached building or structure, or a portion thereof, having vertical and horizontal boundaries and characterized by at least one private entrance, that is or is capable of being separately owned and/or occupied.

    34. “Water Department” has the same meaning as “Department.”

    35. “Water Mains” or “Mains” mean water pipes in streets, easements or other rights-of-way, used for the conveyance of potable water, to which individual service lines are or may be connected. Individual water users may be served directly from water mains by means of service lines connected thereto.

    36. “Water Superintendent” means the City Administrator or the City employee assigned by the City Administrator to perform the functions of the Water Superintendent under this title, or the designee of the Water Superintendent when duties under this title have been delegated by the Water Superintendent.

    37. “Water User” or “User” means a person that owns property to which water service is made available by the Department. After a water service connection has been made and water service has been established, water user and property owner shall generally have the same meaning.

    B.   If a term used in this chapter or in Chapter 13.08 is not defined in this section, but is defined in Title 17 or in the City’s Subdivision and Development Regulations or in the City of Cañon City Standard Construction Specifications, the definition used in Title 17 or in such regulations or standards shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. (Ord. 13-2011 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 10-2010 § 1; Ord. 8-2008 § 1)

 

13.04.030 Water records.
    Under the direction of the Engineer, there shall be prepared and maintained records of this City that show, as nearly as practicable from available information, records and notes, an accurate description of the entire waterworks of the City and its Water Department, including all grounds belonging to the City and/or Department for the purpose of the waterworks, as the same are at present completed, in sections most convenient for the proper keeping of such records. Under the direction of the Water Superintendent, there shall be prepared and maintained additional records that indicate, as nearly as practicable from the information in such records and notes, the locations of all active water mains and all points where such mains are believed to have been tapped. (Ord. 8-2008 § 1)

 

13.04.040 Permit authority.
    A.  Possession of permits required by Subsections B or C, or both B and C, of this section shall be the authority for a contractor to perform work specified in this chapter within the city’s rights-of-way. All work undertaken pursuant to either such permit shall be done with reasonable dispatch and in accordance with applicable City standards. All contractors applying for either such required permit must be licensed with the City and bonded to perform work within the city’s rights-of-way.

    B.   No person, other than employees of the Department, shall perform any excavation work required or authorized in this chapter within the city’s rights-of-way without first having obtained a valid excavation permit pursuant to Chapter 12.20 of this Code.

    C.   No person shall connect any service line to a water main without first having obtained a valid permit provided for in Section 13.04.050. Such permit shall be in addition to an excavation permit if the person making the connection also performs associated excavation work within a city right-of-way. (Ord. 8-2008 § 1)

 

13.04.050 Connecting to mains—Permit and procedures.
    A.  An application shall be made to the Engineer’s office for a permit to tap the mains of the Department. If granted, such permit shall be signed by the Engineer or designee and shall contain the following information:

    1.   The name of the person for whose benefit such permit is granted;

    2.   The size of the tap/stop for discharging the water from the main to the service line and the point (as nearly as possible) at which the tap is to be made;

    3.   The address and legal description of the property to be served;

    4.   The contemplated use of the water to be delivered through the connection authorized in the permit; and

    5.   Any other information reasonably requested by the Water Superintendent or Engineer on a written application form or in written instructions to applicants.

    B.   A record of all such permits shall be kept in a book maintained for that purpose at City Hall, which record shall set forth the substance of every such permit. No water user served by the Department shall be entitled to more water than is necessary for the use stated on the permit. No water user shall use water for a purpose that is different than that stated on the permit. When no use is specified on the permit, domestic household uses shall be the presumed use unless and until the Water Superintendent and the water user agree otherwise in writing.

    C.   The burden of proving the issuance of a permit with respect to any property shall be on the owner of such property. Such proof must be made prior to the Department’s authorizing any service connection. No person shall be entitled to a water service connection unless proof of such permit is presented to the Department and/or is clearly evidenced in the Department’s permanent records.

    D.  All service connections or taps on all mains served by the Department shall be made by Department personnel or by persons specifically engaged by the Department to perform such work. Connections will be made only after the mains have been inspected, tested, approved and accepted by the Department. Any excavation necessary for tapping shall be completed prior to the arrival of Department personnel. The property owner or other applicant shall provide, at no cost to the Department, the tapping saddle or tapping sleeve and corporation stop necessary to make the service connection.

    E.   Each service connection may be used to serve only the property identified in the water tap application and permit. Permitted taps may not be moved from one property to another; provided however that the subdivision of a lot or parcel shall not result in the loss of water service to one of the resulting lots created through the subdivision of a lot or parcel, if such subdivided lot or parcel had been receiving or was entitled to receive water service pursuant to valid permit and/or water service connection prior to the subdivision of such lot or parcel. (Ord. 8-2008 § 1)

 

13.04.060 Connecting to mains—Supervision and enforcement.
    Following the issuance of any permit required by Section 13.04.040 to any person to lay service lines in place in the City, it shall be the duty of the Water Superintendent to see that all connections are made and that all other work is performed in accordance with the ordinances, regulations, requirements, standards, policies and administrative directives of the City. No developer, property owner or contractor acting on behalf of any property owner shall deny Department personnel access to places were water service connections are to be made or have been made. The denial of such access shall be grounds for the denial of new water service by the Department or termination of existing water service, as the case may be. (Ord. 8-2008 § 1)

 

13.04.070 Mains, lines and meters—Ownership and maintenance.
    A.  The following shall be and remain City property and shall be maintained by the Department:

    1.   All water mains and transmission mains, including their fittings and appurtenances, which are located under public streets and rights-of-way or within any private right-of-way or easement dedicated, granted or conveyed to the City or otherwise owned or held by the City for the installation and maintenance of water mains and/or transmission mains;

    2.   All service lines extending from the water main to the meter or shutoff, whichever is closest to the property line;

    3.   All service lines extending from the water main to the property line if the meter of a water user is installed within an improvement on the property of the water user and there is no outside shutoff;

    4.   Any meter pit containing a meter that is one inch or less in diameter;

    5.   The meters, shutoffs, remote readout devices, fittings and installation appurtenances of each water user; provided that the Department’s cost of repairing or replacing any item listed in this paragraph may be billed to and payable by the water user.

    B.   Private water mains, backflow prevention devices and other facilities owned and/or controlled by a group user or an association are not Department property and will not be maintained or replaced by the Department.

    C.   The following shall be the property of the property owner and shall be maintained by or at the expense of the property owner:

    1.   All water pipelines and customer-side service lines and all appurtenances thereto, including private meters, service lines and fittings which are on the customer side of the curb stop, meter or shutoff.

    2.   All backflow prevention devices, assemblies and systems required by the Department.

    3.   Any meter pit containing a water meter that is larger than one inch in diameter.

 

    D.  All privately-owned items described or referred to in Subsections B and C of this section shall conform to the specific standards of the Department and shall be installed, maintained, tested, repaired and replaced as provided by applicable Federal, State and local laws, rules, regulations, standards and policies. The Department shall have the right to discontinue and/or withhold water service to any water user that fails to properly maintain any customer-side service line, including appurtenances thereto, or any backflow prevention device or assembly described or referred to in Subsection B or C. (Ord. 8-2008 § 1)

 

13.04.080 Service lines—Installation.
    A.  All water services shall be extended from water mains of the Department to specific properties, as described in the permits issued and/or records kept by the Department. Connections to service lines feeding adjacent or neighboring properties and/or dwelling units are prohibited, except when expressly permitted by specific provisions of this chapter or by a written contract permitted under this chapter and approved by City Council.

    B.   No water service line that is less than three-fourths of one inch in diameter shall be installed or used to transport potable water from a water main to the shutoff or meter of any water user. Larger service lines shall be installed and used when necessary to adequately serve the supply requirements of the water user.

    C.   Service lines shall be sized by the water user to adequately supply the requirements of the property and use or uses being or to be served. The Water Department will not be responsible for deficiencies in water service caused by a property owner’s installation of inappropriately sized taps, service lines and/or meters. The Water Department may refuse to provide water service through a proposed tap, service line or meter that, in the opinion of the Engineer or Water Superintendent, is too small to adequately serve the property and facilities proposed for water service.

    D.  Unless otherwise provided in the City of Cañon City Standard Construction Specifications, seamless copper tubing designated as Type K soft copper shall be used for service lines sized three-fourths inch through one inch. Materials meeting the specification of the Water Superintendent, such as ductile iron pipe or plastic pipe, may be used for service lines larger than one inch, unless otherwise provided in the City of Cañon City Standard Construction Specifications.

    E.   Service lines may not be installed in trenches containing pipes which carry any substance other than potable water. Such service lines shall be separated laterally from wastewater pipes by a minimum of ten (10) feet. (See the City of Cañon City Standard Construction Specifications.)

    F.   Service lines shall be the same size as the tap installed on the water main between the main and the meter. Additionally, the meter shall be the same size as the tap. (Ord. 8-2008 § 1)

 

13.04.090 Service lines—Shutoff requirements.
    A.  A shutoff of the same size as the service line shall be installed at the property line unless a pit meter with stop has been installed at the property line. The shutoff shall be equipped with a curb box and lid in accordance with City of Cañon City Standard Construction Specifications.

    B.   Any vault, meter pit or area containing a meter greater than one inch in diameter shall be kept accessible and in good working condition by the property owner. Any such box or meter pit that is not properly taken care of by the property owner shall be cleaned, repaired or relocated by the Water Department, if not promptly cleaned, repaired or relocated by the property owner’s qualified contractor following notice from the Department. Such costs shall be added to the water user’s utility billing statement and shall be payable in full on or before the due date for the payment of water service charges appearing on such billing statement, unless other payment arrangements are approved in writing by the Director of Finance.

    C.   The Department shall not be liable to any property owner, tenant, or other party in possession of any property to which water is conducted for the failure on the part of the Department and its personnel to readily find a shutoff, box or lid in order to shut off the water to any property. (Ord. 8-2008 § 1)

 

13.04.100 Service lines—Maintenance duties.
    A.  The owner or occupant of any property to which water is conducted shall keep all customer-side service lines and related fixtures tight and in good repair so as to prevent the waste of water. When aware of any leak, the water user shall forthwith eliminate the waste of water by repairing or replacing all defective water lines and/or fixtures that are causing or contributing to the cause of the leak.

    B.   The water user shall request the Department to turn off water service when repairs to the water service lines or any other component are necessary on the customer side of the meter and defer any work thereon until the water service has been turned off by Department personnel, who shall respond to such requests with reasonable dispatch.

    C.   Each water user shall be responsible for the repair of all leaks emanating from any segment of the customer-side service line through which water service is received. If any leak is of a serious nature and/or has not been repaired within a reasonable period of time, as determined by the Water Superintendent, the customer-side service line may be disconnected by the Department at either the shutoff, meter or main, and such user’s water service shall be discontinued until the customer-side service line has been repaired by the water user to the reasonable satisfaction of the Water Superintendent. (Ord. 8-2008 § 1)

 

13.04.110 Location of water facilities.
    A.  Department water mains, pumps, pump houses and storage tanks may be extended, enlarged or constructed within the service area of the Department, as defined from time to time by the Water Superintendent; provided that all such improvements are accomplished in conformance with the City of Cañon City Standard Construction Specifications and authorized by the Water Superintendent or Engineer. All such facilities may be located anywhere within the Department’s service area at sites designated or approved by the Water Superintendent or Engineer.

    B.   No transmission main, water main, or other water service facility shall be extended, enlarged, installed or constructed at any location other than upon real property owned or controlled by the City or the Department or within the right-of-way of a public street or other public way, a perpetual dedicated utility easement, or a perpetual easement otherwise created or existing for the benefit of the Department. The preferred location of all water mains shall be within public streets or within platted private streets open to public use.

    C.   Except as otherwise might be provided in this chapter or in a separate agreement authorized or approved by formal action of City Council, the costs of all water system improvements requested by any water user, applicant for water service, developer or property owner shall be borne by the person requesting the water service making such improvements necessary. (Ord. 8-2008 § 1)

 

13.04.115 Sizing of water mains.
    A.  Sizing of water mains shall be determined by the Engineer or Water Superintendent, subject to the following requirements:

    1.   Except for permanent cul-de-sacs of less than five hundred (500) feet in length, the minimum size of any new water main within the service area of the Water Department shall be eight (8) inches in diameter.

    2.   In streets that have a permanent cul-de-sac less than five hundred (500) feet in length, the Engineer or Water Superintendent may authorize a water main that is six (6) inches in diameter.

    3.   In locations where it is determined by the Engineer or the Water Superintendent that a water main must be larger than eight (8) inches in diameter, the water main shall be of such size as the Engineer or Water Superintendent shall specify.

    4.   All determinations made pursuant to Subsections 2 and 3 of this subsection shall take into account, among other relevant factors, the Water Department’s most recent water main master plan, copies of which shall be kept in the Engineer’s office and in the offices of the Department of Public Works. Such water main master plan, by necessity, is and will remain a fluid and flexible plan, the requirements of which may change from time to time, and at any time, depending upon existing and anticipated demands upon the water service system and the location, condition, age, sizing and functionality of existing water system facilities and components.

    5.   All water main and appurtenance designs shall be approved by the Engineer or Water Superintendent prior to commencement of installation. Such design shall conform to the City of Cañon City Standard Construction Specifications, and all installations shall conform to the approved design.

    6.   The water main sizing requirements set forth in this subsection shall apply in all new subdivisions and/or developments within the Department’s service area unless the Engineer or Water Superintendent approves a Water Service Development Plan providing for different sizing of one or more water mains, in which case the approved plans will control.

    B.   If, pursuant to Subsections 3 and 4 of Subsection A, the Engineer or Water Superintendent requires a water main larger than eight (8) inches fronting or abutting any or all sides of the real property to be served, the applicant shall pay for and install such larger water main(s). Upon the satisfactory completion of the installation any water main larger than eight (8) inches in diameter, the Water Department will promptly reimburse to the person that installed such water main a sum which represents the excess in the cost of materials for such water main over what would have been the cost of materials had only an eight (8) inch water main been installed, if the greater size of the water main(s) is due to a water system need, rather than a project need of the person who installed such main(s), as determined by the Engineer or Water Superintendent. The applicant will not be entitled to and will not be reimbursed for any excess labor or other costs that were incurred in connection with the installation of the larger water main. (Ord. 8-2008 § 1)

 

13.04.116 Cash-in-lieu of installation payments.
    If the Department requires an undersized water main fronting or abutting an applicant’s property to be replaced at the applicant’s expense in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the applicant may, in lieu of making the installation, and with the consent of the Water Superintendent and Engineer, pay to the Water Department an amount equal to the cost of the required water main installation. The amount of any such “cash-in-lieu-of-installation” payment shall be determined by the Engineer, who shall establish and periodically review and adjust, when changing costs indicate a need for adjustment, a cost-per-linear-foot standard to be applied uniformly for purposes of calculating cash-in-lieu of installation payment amounts. (Ord. 8-2008 § 1)

 

13.04.117 Water main upgrades and extensions—Single lots/single units.
    A.  An applicant for new water service to any single unit on a single residential lot or parcel that is abutted by an existing water main shall be subject to water main sizing requirements and installation costs as follows:

    1.   Inside City Limits. If the size of a water main fronting or abutting any property located within the City, whose owner has applied for new water service, is less than four (4) inches in diameter, the applicant shall install an eight (8) inch water main across the full frontage of such property. If the property is abutted on more than one side by water mains that are less than four (4) inches in diameter, the applicant shall install an eight (8) inch water main across the full frontage of the side of the property where the water service line will enter the property and also shall pay one-half of the cash-in-lieu of installation amount for all the other frontage(s) of such property that abut such undersized water main(s). Cash-in-lieu of installation amounts shall be determined as provided in Section 13.04.116.

    2.   Outside City Limits. If an applicant requests new water service to a property located outside the City and if the size of a water main abutting the property to be served is less than four (4) inches, the applicant shall pay for and install an eight (8) inch water main across the full frontage of such property. If a property is abutted on more than one side by water mains that are less than four (4) inches in diameter, the applicant shall pay for and install an eight (8) inch water main across the full frontage of the side where the water service line will enter the property and also shall pay the full cash-in-lieu of installation amount for all other frontage(s) of such property that abut such undersized water main(s).

    3.   The Water Superintendent or Engineer may waive the water main upgrade requirement applicable to frontages not crossed by a water service line when doing so would not be inconsistent with the Department’s water main master plan or otherwise be detrimental to the water system.

    B.   In addition to the requirements set forth in Subsection A, an applicant for new water service to a single parcel may be required to install, at the applicant’s sole cost, a new water main, meeting the sizing requirements set forth in Section 13.04.115, connecting the water system to the property to be served. Such water main extension shall be necessary when there is no water main connecting the property to the water system or when a water main of inadequate size connects the property to the water system. A water main which fails to meet the minimum sizing requirements specified in Section 13.04.115 will be deemed to be of inadequate size for purposes of this subsection unless the Engineer determines in writing that the property may be adequately served using the existing undersized main to bring water to the property and that using the undersized main for such purpose will not be inconsistent with the Department’s water main master plan or otherwise detrimental to the water system.

    C.   No application for water service to any non-residential single lot or parcel that is abutted by an undersized water main shall be granted unless the water main(s) fronting such property are upgraded by replacing the existing water main(s) with new water main(s) sized in accordance with the applicable provisions of Section 13.04.115 on all sides of the lot or parcel that are abutted by undersized water mains.

    D.  Upgrades to existing water mains abutting lots or parcels that are proposed for subdivision or other development requiring a site plan review shall be addressed in Water Service Development Plans required pursuant to Section 13.04.125. (Ord. 8-2008 § 1)

 

13.04.118 Installation of meters—Components.
    A.  All water service to any water user, regardless of location, shall be metered. All meters, up to one inch, shall be furnished by the Department and paid for by the applicant according to a fee schedule established by the Water Superintendent. Meters larger than one inch shall be supplied by the applicant and shall meet or exceed Department specifications. Such meters, once installed, shall be owned by the Department and may be replaced or repaired at any time by the Department.

    B.   Applicants for water service shall be required to pay a meter fee in an amount set by the Water Superintendent to cover the actual cost of any meter furnished by the Department and the actual cost of purchasing and installing the components listed at paragraphs 1 and 2 of this subsection, when applicable:

    1.   When the meter is installed at the curb or property line, and without regard to whether the meter is located in the public right-of-way, the meter fee will cover the water meter with Automatic Meter Read (AMR) register, angle meter stop, approved backflow prevention device, meter pit, and meter pit top.

    2.   When the water meter is installed in the building to be served, and without regard to whether the shutoff is located in the public right-of-way, the meter fee will cover the water meter, shutoff and box, required approved backflow prevention device, and remote readout register.

 

    C.   The applicant must also provide and install at the applicant’s sole cost all system-side and customer-side service lines and all fittings and installation appurtenances not covered by the meter fee. (Ord. 8-2008 § 1)

 

13.04.119 Multi-unit facilities—Metering requirements.
    A.  Condominiums and Cooperatives—Single Building or Structure.

    1.   Condominiums and cooperatives contained in a single building or structure shall receive water service through a master meter and shall be treated as one multi-unit water user for the purposes of Title 13. In the event the owner, developer or association of such a condominium or cooperative desires to have the individual units within a condominium or cooperative treated by the Department as separate individual water users, application for such treatment shall be made to the Engineer.

    2.   If the Engineer approves any such application, each unit in such condominium or cooperative and the common elements of the condominium or cooperative shall be separately metered through outside pit meters. A water tap permit will be required for each such unit and/or common element that will be eligible to receive water service from the Department.

    3.   For new construction, all tap fees for all separately-metered units and all separately-metered common elements within a condominium or cooperative shall be paid prior to the connection of any unit or common element to the water system.

    4.   Each unit owner, once such owner’s unit has been connected to the water system, shall be billed for water consumed according to the applicable rate schedule for single unit inside or outside residential or non-residential water users, depending upon the location and use of the unit.

    5.   After a common element of a condominium or cooperative has been connected to the water system, charges for water service to such common element shall be paid for by the owner, developer or association, as arranged with the Department, according to the applicable rate schedule for single unit inside or outside residential or non-residential water users, depending upon the location and use of the element being served.

    B.   Detached Condominiums. Each unit, and the common areas of a common interest community consisting of detached condominium units, shall be separately metered and shall be treated by the Department as an individual water user for the purposes of Title 13.

    C.   Townhouses. Each dwelling unit, and the common areas of a common interest community consisting of townhouses (or of any other townhouse complex), shall be separately metered and each shall be treated by the Department as an individual residential water user for the purposes of Title 13.

    D.  Duplex Units. Each duplex shall receive water service through a master meter and shall be treated by the Department as a multi-unit water user for the purposes of Title 13.

    E.   Motels, Hotels, Lodges and Bed and Breakfast Facilities. Motels, hotels, lodges, bed and breakfast facilities and similar operations shall receive water service through a single meter and shall be treated by the Department as one multi-unit water user for the purposes of Title 13, except that tap fees for motels, hotels, lodges and bed and breakfast facilities, depending upon their location inside or outside of the city, shall be determined with respect to Schedule A-1 or B-1 of Appendix 13.08, whichever is applicable (and not with respect to Schedule A-2 or B-2).

    F.   Manufactured Home Parks. Manufactured home parks where spaces and/or units shall receive water service through a master meter and shall be treated by the Department as a multi-unit water user for the purposes of Title 13. If the owner of a manufactured home park elects to separately meter individual spaces within the manufactured home park—on the customer side of the master meter connecting the manufactured home park to the Department’s system—such separate metering of spaces shall not relieve the owner of the manufactured home park from the obligation to pay for all water sold and delivered to such owner at the master meter. Instead, such individual metering shall be a means by which the owner of the manufactured home park may determine the actual consumption by each space and common area within the manufactured home park. No occupant of a space within a manufactured home park shall be charged by the owner of the manufactured home park for water service at a rate that is in excess of the rate charged by the Department to such owner.

    G.  Mixed-Use Structures. Mixed-use structures and operations shall receive water service through a single meter and shall be treated by the Department as one multi-unit water user for the purposes of Title 13.

    H.  Multiple-Bed Facilities. Group homes, retirement homes, hospitals and similar multiple-bed facilities and operations shall receive water service through a single meter and shall be treated by the Department as one multi-unit water user for the purposes of Title 13, except that tap fees for such group homes, retirement homes, hospitals and similar multiple-bed facilities, depending upon their location inside or outside the city, shall be determined with respect to Schedule A-1 or B-1 of Appendix 13.08, whichever is applicable (and not with respect to Schedule A-2 or B-2). When any such facility is served by or through more than one master meter, the water service customer receiving water through each such master meter shall be treated as one multi-unit water user for purposes of Title 13.

    I.    Correctional Facilities. Meter locations relative to water service provided by the Department to correctional facilities shall be as provided by contract between the City/Water Department and the entity operating such correctional facilities.

    J.    Commercial Centers. Any commercial center or complex consisting of one or more buildings constructed on a single parcel by a common owner for lease to two (2) or more tenants for commercial or other non-residential uses or purposes, or for mixed-use, shall receive water service through a master meter and shall be treated as one multi-use water user for purposes of Title 13. The Engineer may authorize the owner of a commercial center to establish separate metering to spaces occupied by tenants; provided that such separate metering is on the customer-side of the master meter and is used for internal accounting and billing purposes only.

    K.  Accessory Dwelling Units. Each accessory dwelling unit shall receive water service through a master meter that serves the principal structure and shall be treated by the Department as a multi-unit water user for the purposes of Title 13, except that no second tap fee shall be charged or chargeable by the Department with respect to a property containing a principal single-family residential structure and an ADU.

    L.   For purposes of Title 13, the treatment of any project or facility that is not addressed in Subsections 13.04.119(A) through (K) shall be as determined by the Engineer, or by City Council in connection with its approval of any land use application requiring the approval of City Council. The Engineer and City Council shall be guided by the other provisions of this chapter, water system needs and capabilities, and sound engineering practices when making such determinations.

    M.  Additional Conditions Applicable to All Multi-Unit Facilities. Additional conditions, consistent with the water system master plan and the rules, regulations and policies of the Department, may be required or imposed by the Engineer, and/or by City Council, in connection with the approval of any land use application requiring the approval by the Engineer and/or City Council.

    N.  Nothing in this Section 13.04.119 shall be interpreted or construed to authorize any land use that is contrary to the provisions of the City’s Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision and Development Regulations and/or other land use laws and regulations. (Ord. 23-2011 § 2; Ord. 13-2011 §§ 3—5; Ord. 8-2008 § 1)

 

13.04.120 Special provisions with respect to water service to properties outside of city boundaries.
    A.  Water service to properties within the Department’s service area, but outside of the corporate limits of the city, will be authorized, if at all, only after the following requirements have been met:

    1.   All new water service to be provided to properties located outside of the corporate limits of the city shall be provided pursuant to the terms, provisions, conditions and limitations of a written water service contract, signed by the property owner and approved by formal action of City Council. Water service contracts must provide for the possible annexation of all properties to which such water service will be provided under such contract. In consideration of the Department’s agreement to provide water service, all such water service contracts also may require: (a) the delivery of water shares, as provided in Subsection 2 of this subsection; (b) the installation of certain infrastructure improvements, except those improvements related to the water system, and right-of-way dedication (to assure that development will be in accordance with standards applicable in the city) if property is located within the City Annexation Priority Areas identified in the City’s Comprehensive Plan, as amended; and (c) the payment of applicable impact fees and/or surcharges, if any.

    2.   Requests for residential water service for three (3) or more single-family residential dwelling units (or the equivalent thereof) involved in a subdivision (or other development) application to the Fremont County Board of Commissioners will require the delivery of water rights to the Department as a prerequisite to the Department’s agreement to provide water service. The Department will accept shares of the Cañon City Hydraulic and Irrigating Ditch Company (“Hydraulic Ditch shares”) in satisfaction of this requirement. For purposes of this subsection, each such share shall be considered to represent 0.02743 cubic feet per second of time (“cfs”) of water that may be diverted and used by the Department.

    a.   One Hydraulic Ditch share will allow water service for three (3) to twenty (20) single-family residential units. Any request for water service for more than twenty (20) residential units will require delivery of one additional Hydraulic Ditch share for each additional twenty (20) residential units or portion thereof. The Department will not accept any apportioned share providing for less raw water than is required in this Subsection (A)(2)(a), nor will it grant any credit or allowance for any unused portion of a previously surrendered water share.

    b.   Requests for a use other than water service to single-family residences will require the applicant to provide water demand data to the Department to enable it to determine equivalent dwelling units (EDU). For the purposes of conversion to EDUs, one EDU will be equal to a maximum daily usage of eight hundred seventy-five (875) gallons. The Engineer will have the final authority in determining the acceptability and accuracy of the data submitted.

    i.    For demand equal to three (3) to twenty (20) EDUs, one Hydraulic Ditch share will be required. All demands for greater than twenty (20) EDUs will require one additional Hydraulic Ditch share for each additional twenty (20) EDUs or portion thereof. Also, as with residential requests, the Department will not accept any apportioned Hydraulic Ditch share, nor will it grant any credit or allowance for any unused portion of a previously surrendered water share.

    ii    If the water demand of a business or industrial use entering into a water service contract with the Department increases, for any reason, to a level above what was approved at the time the water service contract was executed, then one or more Hydraulic Ditch shares or additional Hydraulic Ditch shares, as the case may be, will be required by and shall be due to the Department at or before a time specified in the water service contract or, if no delivery date for such water rights was specified in the water service contract, within sixty (60) days following the Department’s written notice to the water user. The benchmark for any such requirement shall be the same as applies in Subsection (A)(2)(b).

    3.   For purposes of Subsection 2, water rights acceptable to the Department and representing an equivalent volume of raw water may be substituted for Hydraulic Ditch shares, if such substitution is approved by the Water Superintendent. Water represented by such substituted water rights: must be capable of being diverted at one of the City’s approved points of diversion; must be decreed for use in a municipal water system; and must have an adjudication date acceptable to the Department.

    B.   The requirements set forth in this subsection shall apply with respect to all land proposed for annexation into the City. (Ord. 22-2017 § 1; Ord. 8-2008 § 1)

 

13.04.125 Water service to subdivisions and other developments.
    A.  Any person who develops land within the service area of the Department under circumstances that require a site plan and site plan review, a lot line adjustment, a minor subdivision plat or a major subdivision plat, shall be obligated to submit to the Engineer for review and approval a Water Service Development Plan prepared in accordance with: (1) the provisions and requirements of this section; (2) any applicable provisions of the City’s Subdivision and Development Regulations; and (3) the City’s Standard Construction Specifications.

    B.   Such Water Service Development Plan shall address both on-site and off-site water facilities necessary for the Department to provide adequate water service to the proposed subdivision or other development at full build out. Such plan also shall take into account the Department’s water main master plan regarding the sizing, routing, looping and/or other configuration of transmission and distribution lines, both within and outside of the site of the proposed subdivision or other development. Such plan also shall address water storage, water pumping and fire protection needs of the subdivision or other development and all water main extensions and/or enlargements that are or may be needed for the Department to provide adequate water service to the subdivision or other development in a manner that is not detrimental to the water system as a whole.

    C.   All owners, subdividers, developers, contractors and builders shall include in their Water Service Development Plan written details and specifications for the proposed water mains, fire hydrants, pumps and tanks in and around their subdivision or other development, which shall include demand, fire flows, capacity, size, type of material or manufacturer, and location of mains, fittings, fire hydrants, tanks, pumps and pump houses, and the location of loops and grids to existing Department mains.

    D.  The Water Development Plan for a multi-unit facility project shall include details of the proposed water metering system for the project, and such other items and information as the Engineer shall deem necessary to evaluate the water distribution and metering system for the project.

    E.   Unless otherwise provided in this chapter or in a written agreement between such party and the Department, the installation of all required items included in an approved Water Service Development Plan shall be at the sole expense of the owner, developer, subdivider, contractor or builder.

    F.   Any material, item or method not covered by the specific standards shall be determined by agreement of the Engineer and the engineer representing the project. If the two (2) engineers fail to agree on any issue addressed in a Water Service Development Plan, a final determination with respect to such issue will be made by the Engineer.

    G.  Department water mains, pipelines and service lines may be extended within the service area of the Water Department to make potable water available to areas that have been or are being annexed. All such extensions shall be in accordance with the provisions of any annexation agreement to which the City is a party and other applicable law, including the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 8-2008 § 1)

 

13.04.127 Water line rebates and agreements.
    A.  The Water Superintendent may enter into contracts on behalf of the Department whereby a portion of the cost of the installation of a water main extension or enlargement required by the Department and paid for by the other party to the contract may be recovered, on an equitable pro-rata basis, from water users who subsequently tap such water main, as extended or enlarged. Such contracts shall be known as “water main rebate agreements.”

    B.   No water main rebate agreement shall be prepared or executed by the Water Superintendent unless such agreement is requested in a written application, the form of which shall be provided by the Water Superintendent, filed by the person or persons entitled to request such agreement. Such application must be filed no later than six (6) months from the date the subject water main extension or enlargement was accepted by the City, as determined by the records of the Engineer. Such date shall be the “acceptance date.”

    C.   No water main rebate agreement shall be executed by the Water Superintendent until the Engineer has received “as built”

documents and has received and reviewed complete and accurate records and supporting documentation showing the actual cost of the water main extension or enlargement that will be the subject matter of the agreement. Such records and documentation must be received within six (6) months of the acceptance date. Any application for a water main rebate agreement which is not supported by such as built drawings, records and other supporting documentation shall be an incomplete application. An incomplete application shall be void and of no force and effect.

    D.  No water main rebate agreement shall have a term which ends later than on the tenth (10th) anniversary date of the acceptance date provided for in Subsection B of this section unless a longer term is approved by Council. Following the end of such term, neither party to the rebate agreement shall have further rights or obligations under such agreement.

    E.   Every water main rebate agreement executed by the Water Superintendent shall be recorded at the expense of the other party to such agreement. Such party shall pay all recording costs prior to the recording of the agreement with the Fremont County Clerk and Recorder. Unless recorded, no such agreement shall be binding upon the Department.

    F.   No water main rebate agreement shall impose upon the Department a duty to collect refund amounts with respect to any new connection to the enlarged or extended water main from the person making such new connection unless the application for the agreement was received by the Department prior to the time such new connection was authorized by the Department.

    G.  Every water main rebate agreement shall provide that the Department’s obligations under such agreement shall be limited to the Department’s using its best efforts to collect prorated refund amounts from those who connect to the extended or enlarged water main after the written application for the agreement has been received by the Department and prior to the termination date provided for in the agreement.

    H.  Every water main rebate agreement also shall provide that the Department shall not be liable to any other party to the agreement for any failure by the Department to have collected the appropriate refund amount from a person connecting to the extended or enlarged water main, except that the Department may be liable with respect to such refund amount if it is proven by clear and convincing evidence in a legal proceeding that such refund was not collected or was not distributed after collection as a result of gross negligence or fraud.

    I.    Each other party to any such agreement must provide to the Department, prior to preparation and execution of the water main rebate agreement, their current address and give the Department written notice of any change of address occurring during the term of the rebate agreement. Funds collected by the Department pursuant to a water main rebate agreement that are not claimed by the party entitled to receive such funds within one year of the Department’s sending notice of the receipt of such funds to such party at the last known address of such party shall be forfeited to and become the exclusive property of the Department. The last known address of any such party shall be the address stated in the rebate agreement or the last address provided to the Department by the written notice of change of address required under this subsection.

    J.    All calculations of refunds to be collected by the Department and distributed to the other party to a water main rebate agreement shall be made by the Engineer under a formula approved by the Water Superintendent. Such formula shall take into account the actual cost of extending or enlarging the water main, as determined by the Engineer. Calculations of refund amounts shall be based upon the relationship between the frontage of the property receiving new water service and the total frontage of all properties abutting the extended or enlarged water main on both sides thereof.

    K.  Whenever the Department extends or enlarges a water main, or participates financially in a water main extension or enlargement (by paying a portion of the cost of materials, or otherwise) the Department shall be entitled to recover its actual costs of such extension or enlargement through rebates from the owners of adjacent property that is connected to such enlarged or extended main within ten (10) years following the completion of the extension or enlargement of such water main. The Department shall maintain for public reference a complete list of all water main improvements with respect to which rebates to the Department will be required pursuant to the provisions of this subsection, including the applicable cost per linear foot incurred by the Department to pay for each such improvement. The amount of any rebate that becomes payable pursuant to this subsection will be calculated in the same manner as rebates under water main rebate agreements are calculated.

    L.   Rebate amounts collectible by or otherwise owing to the Department pursuant to any of the provisions of this section must be paid in full prior to the making of any new water service connection(s) for the benefit of any person connecting to an extended or enlarged water main with respect to which such provisions apply. (Ord. 8-2008 § 1)

 

13.04.130 Fire hydrant use restrictions and exceptions.
    A.  Except as provided in Subsection B of this section, no water shall be drawn or used from any fire hydrant connected to the water system of the Department, whether such fire hydrant is located inside or outside of the corporate limits of the city.

    B.   Exceptions to General Prohibition. Water may be drawn from fire hydrants:

    1.   By employees and agents of the Cañon City Area Fire Protection District (or any other fire protection district or department responsible for extinguishing fires in the vicinity of the fire hydrant) only for purposes of extinguishing fires or for other purposes permitted by contract between the City and the District or Department.

    2.   By employees and authorized agents of the City, when used for any municipal purpose.

    3.   By persons under contract with the City for the performance of public improvement contracts let by the City, provided that such water so drawn is used exclusively for purposes authorized or otherwise contemplated in the contract with the City and further provided that all such water so used is measured by a meter issued by the Department. It shall be unlawful for any person under contract with the City for the performance of a public improvements contract to use water drawn from a fire hydrant for any project or other purpose that is not provided for or otherwise contemplated in the contract.

    4.   By other governmental or quasi-governmental entities, such as Fremont County or the Fremont County Sanitation District, pursuant to the terms of any agreement between the City and such other entity.

    5.   By licensed contractors, to whom the Department has issued a meter to measure such contractor’s water usage, for use in connection with any private project or projects.

    C.   Licensed contractors who are authorized to draw water from fire hydrants pursuant to Subsection (B)(5), shall be subject to the following conditions and requirements:

    1.   Unless otherwise authorized by the Water Superintendent, the meter issued by the Department shall be used at all times when water is drawn from a hydrant.

    2.   A deposit in an amount set by the Water Superintendent must be paid in advance.

    3.   No refund of such deposit shall be made until all sums associated with the use of the meter and the water drawn through the meter have been paid in full. No refund shall be due sooner than thirty (30) days following the contractor’s return of the meter.

    4.   A meter rental fee in an amount determined by the Water Superintendent may be charged.

    5.   The contractor shall pay or reimburse the Department for any and all costs incurred to repair any fire hydrant damaged by the contractor or its employees or agents and with respect to any damage to the meter itself, including replacement costs if the meter is returned in a damaged or broken condition.

    6.   The contractor shall pay at the applicable rate for all water from all hydrants that is drawn through such meter or otherwise used by the contractor.

    7.   No water drawn by any contractor pursuant to this subparagraph shall be resold or be used to supply drinking water to any person.

    8.   Any contractor drawing or attempting to draw water pursuant to this subsection shall immediately report to the Water Superintendent or designee any damage to or malfunction of any fire hydrant encountered by such contractor.

    9.   Each contractor entitled to draw water pursuant to this Subsection 9 shall keep an accurate written log with respect to such contractor’s use or attempts to use fire hydrants pursuant to this Subsection 9. Such log shall identify each such fire hydrant used by location, date and time of usage, and approximate water usage. Copies of such logs shall be delivered to the Department no less often than monthly, and in any event at any time the meter issued by the Department is returned to the Department.

    10. The Water Superintendent may require the contractor to sign a written agreement making reference to the contractor’s obligations under this subsection prior to authorizing such contactor to draw water from any fire hydrant.

    D.  The Water Superintendent may implement and enforce such rules, regulations and policies that are deemed by him or her to be necessary to regulate usage of water drawn by contractors and others pursuant to the provisions of this section. (Ord. 8-2008 § 1)

 

13.04.135 Temporary service.
    A.  Upon request, and at the discretion of the Engineer, temporary water service may be provided—through a temporary tap of a water main—by the Department for the benefit of users who are not otherwise connected to the water system, or for the benefit of existing users for temporary purposes not covered by their existing water tap permit. The duration of temporary water service shall be determined by the Engineer, and may be extended only with the written permission of the Engineer.

    B.   Charges for all water sold pursuant to this section shall be calculated according to the rate for temporary water service provided for in Schedule O to Appendix 13.08, and must be paid by the temporary water purchaser within ten (10) days following the date such charges are billed, unless a later due date is specified on the utility billing statement containing such charges.

    C.   Water purchased pursuant to this section shall be metered through a meter furnished and installed by the Department upon the user’s payment of a meter deposit in an amount which shall not be less than the full replacement value of the meter furnished. All deposits shall be in cash or certified funds delivered to the Department.

    D.  The refund of meter deposits respecting temporary water services shall be governed by the same rules that apply to the refund of meter deposits collected from contractors who temporarily draw water from fire hydrants. Nonrefundable turn on and turn off fee, at the rates stated in Schedule R to Appendix 13.08, also shall be charged to and paid by the user prior to delivery of the meter.

    E.   The recipient of temporary water service pursuant to this subsection shall bear all costs of connecting to, using and disconnecting from the water main from which temporary water service is provided.

    F.   The recipient of temporary water service also shall pay all applicable meter rental fees, in an amount determined by the Water Superintendent.

    G.  The receipt of temporary water service pursuant to this subsection will not create any vested rights to permanent water service for the recipient. If the recipient is receiving temporary water service in anticipation of receiving a water tap permit, there will be no vested or perfected right to permanent water service until such time as a water tap permit has been acquired pursuant to Section 13.04.050 and all applicable requirements of Chapter 13.08 have been fulfilled. (Ord. 8-2008 § 1)

 

13.04.140 Irrigation restrictions.
    The Council may, from time to time, by resolution, impose restrictions on the sprinkling or irrigation of lawns and shrubbery. Failure to comply with irrigation restrictions imposed by the City Council may result in the water service to the premises of the violator being turned off. Once water service has been turned off for reasons set forth in this section, it will not be restored until a fee in the amount set forth in Schedule R of Appendix 13.08 has been paid to the Water Department. (Ord. 8-2008 § 1)

 

13.04.150 Emergency use regulations.
    The City Administrator may make other rules and regulations governing the use of water in case of emergency, and when so made, such rules and regulations shall have the force and effect of an ordinance. Bulk water sales may be discontinued during an emergency. (Ord. 8-2008 § 1)

 

13.04.160 Unlawful acts designated.
    A.  No person shall:

    1.   Re-sell water purchased from the Department and received through a master meter to tenants of a mobile home park, apartment building, commercial building, or other similar facility for an amount greater than the amount charged by the Department for the same quantity of water;

    2.   Sell or re-sell water furnished by the Department to any person or group of persons, other than tenants, as identified in Subsection 1 of this subsection, without first having obtained written authorization to make such sales from City Council;

    3.   Remove any portion of any service line owned by the Department, or the meter, shutoffs and fittings used (or formerly used) in supplying water to any water user without first obtaining the written consent and approval of the Water Superintendent;

    4.   Open or close any valve, shutoff or fire hydrant without first obtaining the written consent and approval of the Water Superintendent or designee;

    5.   Make a connection to a water main without first having obtained a valid water tap permit or temporary water use permit authorizing such connection;

    6.   Receive water from a water main through a connection that was not authorized by a valid water tap permit or temporary water use permit;

    7.   Disconnect any active service line from a water main without first having obtained the permission of the Water Superintendent or designee;

    8.   Throw or cast any filth, trash or deleterious substance into any stream, reservoir, pipe, line, main or drain of the Department’s water system which may fill or obstruct any portion of the water treatment or distribution system or which may pollute the water therein;

    9.   Use water for any purpose other than for a beneficial purpose, or waste water by imprudent or excessive use for any purpose;

    10. Damage, destroy, impair or steal any portion of the Department’s water treatment, transmission, storage, pumping or distribution facilities; provided that any person who accidentally damages or destroys any portion of the Water Department’s water treatment or distribution facilities, when authorized by the Department to operate the facility prior to its being damaged or destroyed or, without such prior authorization, who damaged or destroyed the facility during an emergency which threatened to cause serious damage to a water user’s real or personal property shall not be guilty of an unlawful act under this subparagraph if the Water Department’s costs to repair or replace the damaged or destroyed facility are reimbursed not later than thirty (30) days following such repair or replacement;

 

    11. Draw or use water from a fire hydrant in violation of any of the provisions of Section 13.04.130;

    12. Use or permit the use of water provided by the Department for any purpose other than the purpose for which the water service was initially acquired, as evidenced by a valid water tap permit or other Department records;

    13. Use or permit the use of water provided by the Department at any location other than the location identified in a valid water tap permit;

    14. Use or permit the use of the water provided by the Department to serve more than one dwelling structure, including, but not limited to, mobile homes, garages, accessory dwelling units, and outbuildings used or usable as dwelling places (as determined by the Engineer), through a single service line or water meter without prior written approval from the Department;

    15. Tap or otherwise make any connection into a service line or main ahead of a water meter, by means of faucets, jumpers or other devices that allow for the usage of water that has not flowed through a meter;

    16. Modify in any manner a shutoff, box or lid connected to the City water system in a manner not specified by the rules and regulations of the City pertaining to facilities of the Department.

    B.   No plumber, contractor, water user or other person shall:

    1.   Use his or her key or any other tool or device capable of turning on or shutting off water to turn on or shut off water service from a water main unless such use is first authorized by the Water Superintendent or designee; or

    2.   Permit his or her key to be used by an unauthorized person for any reason. (Ord. 13-2011 § 6; Ord. 8-2008 § 1)

 

13.04.170 Shutoff rights reserved to City.
    The City reserves the right to cause the water to be shut off from the mains when deemed necessary for cleaning or repairing mains or waterworks, making connections or extensions to the same, or for any other similar purpose authorized by the Water Superintendent. (Ord. 8-2008 § 1)

 

13.04.180 Violation—Penalty—Additional remedies.
    A.  Any person, firm, association or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in accordance with the applicable provision of the following schedule:

    1.   For any violation of any provision of Section 13.04.130; or for any violation of any provision of this chapter that involves the receiving of Water Department water through a connection that allows such water to be used without first flowing through and being measured by a water meter issued or otherwise authorized by the Water Department; or for any violation of any provision of this chapter that involves usage of Water Department water received through a connection to a water service line on the customer side of the shutoff or meter by any person who occupies or otherwise uses a separate dwelling unit or structure which is required to be connected to the Water Department system by a separate service line connected to a Water Department water main after the payment of the tap fee provided for in Chapter 13.08 and the installation of a water meter issued by the Water Department as prerequisites to the user’s right to receive water service from the Water Department:

    a.   The fine for a first offense occurring within any seven (7) year period shall be not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00), nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00);

    b.   The fine for a second offense occurring within any seven (7) year period shall be not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00);

    c.   The fine for a third or subsequent offense occurring within any seven (7) year period shall be not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), nor more than the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010.

    2.   For any other violation of any other provisions of this chapter:

    a.   The fine for a first offense occurring within a seven (7) year period shall be not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00);

    b.   The fine for a second offense occurring within a seven (7) year period shall be not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00), nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00);

    c.   The fine for a third or subsequent offense occurring within a seven (7) year period shall be not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00), nor more than the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010.

    B.   The seven (7) year period with respect to the foregoing fine schedule shall be determined with respect to the date of the occurrence of the violation or violations of which the convicted person was convicted, and not with respect to dates of conviction.

    C.   In no case shall the municipal court judge who imposes any fine provided for in Subsection A of this section waive or suspend any portion of the applicable minimum fine.

    D.  In addition to such fine provided for above, the Department may disconnect any water service of any water user who violates any of the provisions of this chapter.

    E.   As to every licensed plumber or contractor convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter, the Water Department shall send to the licensing authority which issued such convicted plumber’s license a report notifying such authority of such conviction.

    F.   If any contractor licensed by the City shall be convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter, proof of such conviction may be considered in proceedings concerning the revocation, suspension or denial of such contractor’s license. The license of any contractor issued a license by the City shall be immediately revoked upon the third conviction of such licensee, within any seven (7) year period, of any violation of this chapter and no new license shall be issued by the City to such licensee for a period of two (2) years from the date of such revocation; provided that such contractor shall be notified in writing of such revocation and shall be entitled to a hearing before the Council of Cañon City, if such hearing is requested in writing no later than thirty (30) days following the date of the notice of revocation. Should any such hearing be requested, the sole issue at such hearing will be whether such contractor was convicted in municipal court of violations of this chapter on three (3) or more occasions within a period of seven (7) years. (Ord. 17-2013 §§ 50, 51; Ord. 8-2008 § 1)

 

13.04.190 Process for voluntary administrative remedy.
    A.  Whenever it shall appear to the City Administrator that a violation of this chapter has occurred, the matter may be referred to the City Attorney’s office with instructions that a determination be made as to whether proceedings should be instigated against the apparent violator or violators in municipal court, and such proceedings may thereafter be instigated, or the City Administrator may attempt to resolve the issue administratively.

    B.   At his or her discretion, the City Administrator is hereby authorized, but not obligated, to cause the apparent violator or violators to be contacted and offered the opportunity to pay an administrative fee and, where applicable those charges referred to in Subsections G and H of this section, to resolve issues created by the apparent violation.

    C.   Any person to whom an offer authorized under Subsection B is made shall have not less than ten (10) or more than twenty (20) days within which to accept or reject the offer, unless this period is extended by the City Administrator. The offer shall be deemed accepted only if the violator signs a form prescribed by the City Administrator which shall contain the violator’s admission to the offense (which shall be described in the form by reference to municipal code section and approximate date of occurrence) and tenders payment of the appropriate administrative fee for the violation admitted and, if applicable, the charges under Subsection G and/or H of this section. At least two (2) counterpart originals of the form shall be executed by the violator and by the City Administrator, or designee, with one counterpart original to be furnished to the violator and a second counterpart original being held in the records of the City for a period of not less than seven (7) years from its execution. Any violator who wishes to attach to the City’s copy of the admission form his, her or its written explanation of the events giving rise to the violation admitted by such person may do so, and such explanation shall be attached to the counterpart original retained by the City.

    D.  No admission, once made, shall be withdrawn, and no administrative fee or other charge payable under this section, once paid, shall be refunded.

    E.   The administrative fee payable under such circumstances shall be an amount equal to the minimum fine that would be imposed by the municipal court upon a conviction of the violator of the offense admitted on the written form, after the City Administrator has determined whether the violation is a first, second, third or subsequent offense. Municipal court fines are as set forth in Section 13.04.180.

    F.   In cases where more than one person appears to have committed the same violation, such as when a plumber makes an illegal connection at the request of a water user, the admission of one such apparent violator shall not be grounds for excusing the apparent violation of the other. In such cases, the offer permitted under Subsection B may be communicated to the several apparent violators and may be accepted by some or all of them. An admission by one such violator shall not preclude the prosecution and possible conviction of the other in municipal court.

    G.  In cases where the property or facilities of the Water Department were damaged or destroyed during the commission, or as a direct result of the commission, of a violation of this chapter, the City Administrator may impose, as an additional condition of the offer, an additional charge in an amount equal to the Water Department’s cost of repairing or replacing the damaged or destroyed property or facilities, including the costs of labor and materials. When such a condition is contained in the offer, no admission will be accepted unless accompanied by the violator’s payment of the administrative fee and the charge imposed under this subsection.

    H.  In cases where Water Department water was received, but not paid for, by the violator or made available to and received by another through the efforts of or due to the acquiescence of the violator (such as when illegal or unauthorized connections are made in front of a violator’s water meter) either because its usage was not metered or because applicable minimum or other usage charges on metered water were not billed, the City Administrator may impose as an additional condition of the offer an additional charge in an amount equal to the City Administrator’s best reasonable estimate of the maximum revenues not paid to or received by the Water Department as a result of the alleged violation of this Chapter. Any alleged violator who wishes to make an admission pursuant to Subsection C, must, upon request by the City Administrator, provide reasonable cooperation by providing dates and other details important to the City Administrator’s estimate under this subparagraph. When such a condition is contained in the offer, no admission will be accepted unless accompanied by the violator’s payment of the administrative fee and the charges imposed under this subsection.

    I.    No alleged violator shall be obligated to accept any offer made pursuant to this section. No person who does make an admission pursuant to this section and pays the administrative fee and other applicable charges referred to in this section shall be prosecuted in municipal court with respect to the admitted violation. No refusal to accept any offer made by the City Administrator shall be offered as evidence in any municipal court proceeding that might be brought against any alleged violator.

    J.    No admission made pursuant to this section shall constitute a conviction for purposes of the penalties that must be imposed by the municipal court for second, third or subsequent convictions of violators under this chapter, but such prior admissions and prior municipal court convictions occurring within the seven (7) year period ending on the date of the violation admitted pursuant to this section shall be considered by the City Administrator in determining the amount of the administrative fee payable under this section.

    K.  The City Administrator, if such referral was not previously made, shall refer to the City Attorney’s office for possible prosecution a report with respect to all apparent violations of this chapter with respect to which the offer authorized under Subsection B was communicated and rejected.

    L.   The City Administrator is hereby authorized to adopt a schedule of administrative fees, rules, regulations and policies consistent with the provisions of this chapter for purposes of implementing this section. (Ord. 8-2008 § 1)

Chapter 13.06 BACKFLOW PREVENTION AND CROSS-CONNECTIONS
13.06.010 Definitions.
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:

    A.  “Approved Backflow Prevention Assembly” means a backflow prevention assembly described in Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research’s (FCCC & HR) most current “list of approved backflow prevention assemblies” or American Society of Sanitary Engineers (ASSE).

    B.   “Backflow” means the undesirable reversal of the direction of flow of water or mixtures of water and other liquids, gases, or other substances into the distribution pipes of the potable water supply from any source(s) caused by backpressure and/or backsiphonage.

    C.   “Backflow Preventer” means a device designed to prevent backflow created by backpressure or backsiphonage.

    D.  “Backpressure” means backflow caused by a pump, elevated tank, boiler or means that could create an elevated pressure within the nonpotable system greater than the supply pressure.

    E.   “Backsiphonage” means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other than its intended source caused by negative or sub-atmospheric pressure in the potable water supply system.

    F.   “Certified Cross-Connection Control Technician” means a person who is certified in accordance with the provisions of Article 12 of the Colorado Primary Drinking Water Regulations.

    G.  “Colorado Cross-Connection Control Manual” means the most recent edition of a manual that has been published by the state addressing cross-connection control practices which will be used as a guidance document for the utility in implementing a cross-connection control program as outlined in Section 13.06.020.

    H.  “Containment” means the installation of an approved backflow prevention device, or method, on the water service line(s), so that water delivered to the service line cannot return to the City potable water distribution system due to any backpressure and/or backsiphonage condition which might arise.

    I.    “Contamination” means an impairment of the quality of the potable water by sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or other materials to a degree which creates an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease.

    J.    “Cross-Connection” means any physical arrangement whereby a public water supply is connected, directly or indirectly, with any other water supply system, sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture or other device which contains, or may contain, contaminated water, sewage or other waste or liquid of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water supply as a result of backflow. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices, four-way valve connections, and other temporary or permanent devices through which, or because of which, backflow could occur are considered to be cross-connections.

    K.  “Director” means the Director of Public Works of the City or, if none, a City Water Department employee designated by the City Administrator in writing.

    L.   Hazard, Degree of. “Degree of Hazard” means an evaluation of the potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable water system.

    M.  “Isolation” means a backflow device installed on a branch of the internal plumbing to protect the customer’s water system.

    N.  “Nonpotable Water” means water that is not safe for human consumption or that is of questionable quality.

    O.  “Pollution” means the presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological or biological) in the water that may degrade the water quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair its usefulness.

    P.   “Potable Water” means water free from impurities in amounts sufficient to cause disease or harmful physiological effects. The bacteriological, chemical and radiological quality shall conform with State of Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment Primary Drinking Water Regulations.

    Q.  “Utility” means the City of Cañon City Water Department, a Water Activity Enterprise of the City of Cañon City.

    R.   “Water Service Connection” means the terminal end of the City’s service connection from the public potable water system; i.e., where the City loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the customer’s stop box or shut-off valve or meter, whichever comes first, from the utility water main. If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the service connection shall mean the downstream end of the meter. There shall be no unprotected takeoffs from the service line ahead of any meter or backflow prevention device located at the point of delivery to the customer’s water system. Service connection shall also include any water service connection from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency water service connections from the public potable water system. (Ord. 6-2006 § 1)

 

13.06.020 Requirements.
    A.  Implementation and Enforcement of a Cross-Connection Control Program. The Director is vested with the authority and responsibility for implementing and enforcing an effective cross-connection control program in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

    B.   Backflow Preventers Required At All Service Connections. An approved backflow preventer shall be required at each and every service connection to a water service customer’s premises for the safety and protection of the City water supply system and water users connected to that system.

    C.   The Director shall have the authority to specify the type of backflow preventer to be installed at each service connection. The Director’s decision with respect to the type of backflow preventer that will be required in any specific situation shall be based upon the degree of hazard posed by the facility connected or to be connected to the City water supply system. The degree of hazard shall be determined on a case-by-case basis, depending upon the circumstances of each particular case. In making determinations as to the degree of hazard and the type of device required, the Director shall rely upon the latest published edition of the Colorado Cross-Connection Control Manual for guidance and may rely upon other generally accepted authorities, including but not limited to the official publications of the American Society of Sanitary Engineering. The Director shall give notice in writing to the customer to install such an approved backflow prevention device at each service connection to the customer’s premises.

    D.  Inspections and Testing Procedures. The Director has the authority to inspect any system owned and maintained by a utility customer to determine the extent and degree of hazard.

    E.   The utility shall notify the utility customer at any premises where containment backflow preventers are installed to have certified inspections and operational tests made upon installation of the containment device and at least once per year thereafter. The Director may require certified tests at more frequent intervals if the Director deems the potential hazard to be great enough. These inspections and tests shall be performed by a certified cross-connection control technician.

    F.   The Director reserves the right to inspect or require the inspection of installed backflow preventers at any time to ensure the devices are in proper working order. The devices shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced whenever they are found to be defective. These inspections, tests and repairs shall be at the owners’ expense. Records of such tests, repairs and overhaul, including materials and parts changed, shall be filed with the Director within ten (10) days of such activities. The utility shall keep and maintain such records in accordance with the requirements of applicable law.

    1.   Containment devices will be tested annually according to the Colorado Revised Statutes and Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment Primary Drinking Water Regulations.

    2.   If such devices are allowed by the Director as an acceptable alternative to total containment, isolation devices used to isolate and lower the overall degree of hazard for a property will be tested on a schedule determined by the Director.

    3.   Isolation devices used on lawn irrigation sprinkler devices will be tested upon installation, repair or relocation, but in any event no less often than once annually.

    G.  Policy.

    1.   No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained unless the water supply is protected as required by Colorado Revised Statutes, the regulations of the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment and by this chapter.

    2.   Water service to any premises shall be denied or discontinued, as the case may be, by the utility if:

    a.   A backflow preventer required by this chapter is not installed within the time period specified by the Director;

    b.   An approved backflow preventer has been removed or bypassed; or

    c.   An unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises;

    d.   An approved backflow preventer is not maintained.

    3.   Whenever service is denied or discontinued, it shall not be provided or restored until the condition or defect identified in subparagraph (C)(2) has been corrected.

    4.   The customer’s system shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the Director to determine whether cross-connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of this chapter, exist.

    5.   When, as a result of an inspection, a condition involving a violation of this chapter resulting in a health or sanitary hazard is determined to exist, or a utility customer fails to properly test, repair, or otherwise maintain a backflow preventer as required by this chapter, the Director shall have the option of immediate discontinuance of water service to the premises until the condition has been corrected, or the Director may specify a date for compliance after which time the Director may discontinue service until the customer has corrected the condition.

    H.  Installations of Backflow Prevention Devices.

    1.   Backflow preventers shall be installed immediately downstream of the water service customer’s water meter, whether the meter is a pit set or an interior set. In all cases, backflow preventers must be installed before the first branch line leading off the service line.

    2.   With the Director’s approval, a backflow preventer may be installed to isolate a hazard and lower the degree of hazard for containment. Such approval shall not be given unless the Director is convinced that the use of the isolation device will pose no threat to the public water supply system.

    3.   All backflow preventers shall be located and installed according to the manufacturer’s specifications and in accordance with this chapter and the City of Cañon City Design Standards and Construction Specifications or the Colorado Cross-Connection Control Manual. The Director shall review and approve all plans as to the type, location and installation of backflow prevention devices.

    4.   Utility customers shall be responsible for the design, installation and maintenance of properly sized and located drains and drain systems whenever the type of backflow preventer specified or approved by the Director requires a drain.

    5.   Plans shall not be modified relative to the type, location or installation of any backflow preventer approved by the Director without the Director’s prior knowledge and written authorization.

    6.   If the location or removal of the backflow preventer results in the meter becoming contaminated, the customer shall bear the cost of decontamination.

    I.    Device Testing Equipment.

    1.   The acceptability of any testing gauge or apparatus shall be determined by the utility.

    2.   Any testing gauge, apparatus or scientific instrument utilized for the testing of backflow prevention devices shall be checked for accuracy at least yearly and be in calibration. The Director may require certificates or other proof of calibration for such items to be filed with the utility.

    3.   At a minimum, all test gauges must meet ASSE-1064 Standards for Gauges.

    4.   All certified cross-connection technicians who perform work in the city shall file copies of their licenses with the utility, upon the Director’s request.

    J.    Listings Identifying Approved Backflow Prevention Devices. Any approved backflow prevention assembly required in this chapter shall be of a model and size approved by the Director and listed in the FCCC & HR’s List of Approved Backflow Prevention Assemblies and/or American Society of Sanitary Engineers (ASSE) Series 5000. (Ord. 6-2006 § 1)

 

13.06.030 Compliance procedures.
    A.  Installation of Required Devices.

    1.   Upon completion of inspection of the premises, or, in the case of new construction, on review of the construction plans, the Director shall notify the owner in writing of the type of device that will be required at each service connection within the owner’s facility.

    2.   The owner shall, at its expense, purchase and install the device and any necessary plumbing or construction. Such plumbing and construction shall meet all provisions of the Colorado Cross-Connection Control Manual and the City of Cañon City Design Standards and Construction Specifications and must be inspected and approved by the utility. The device, including any device installed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall be the property of the owner.

    B.   Compliance Required.

    1.   The utility will take necessary action to ensure compliance with the Colorado Department of Health, Primary Drinking Water Regulations, 5 CCR 1003-1, and more specifically Article 12 thereof, and the Colorado Revised Statues, Section 25-1-114, as amended.

    2.   The owner of the premises is required to permit entry to the premises for inspection, testing and maintenance purposes at reasonable times. Failure to permit entry to the premises will result in the premises being regarded as a high hazard, and a reduced-pressure-principle device will be required to protect the City’s water supply system.

    3.   The owner is required to provide all necessary plumbing and construction needed for the installation of the device. Failure to provide such required plumbing and construction will result in action being taken as provided for in Section 13.06.060. (Ord. 6-2006 § 1)

 

13.06.040 Appeals.
    A.  Any decision of the Director regarding the type of backflow preventer required with respect to any water service connection may be appealed to the City Administrator, provided that a notice of appeal is filed in the office of the City Administrator not later than twenty (20) days following the date upon which the Director’s written notice specifying the type of device is delivered to the property owner or its agent.

    B.   The notice of appeal shall identify the property owner by name, mailing address, telephone number and email address, if any, and include the address of the owner’s facility. Such notice shall:

    1.   Identify the Director’s decision that is being appealed;

    2.   Identify the type of backflow preventer that the owner believes should be installed at the owner’s facility; and

    3.   Include the owner’s reasons for preferring such backflow preventer, instead of the backflow preventer designated by the Director, with or without written documentation supporting the owner’s position.

    C.   Within ten (10) days following the filing of the notice of appeal, the City Administrator, by written notice specifying the date, time and place of the hearing, shall schedule a hearing. Such hearing shall be conducted no later than thirty (30) days following the date upon which the notice of appeal was filed, unless the owner and the City Administrator both agree to a later hearing date. At the hearing, the owner may present testimony, evidence and arguments in support of the owner’s position and the Director may present testimony, evidence and arguments in support of the Director’s decision.

    D.  The Director’s decision shall be affirmed unless the City Administrator finds that the Director’s decision was arbitrary or capricious or that such decision violates applicable federal, state or local law. The City Administrator’s decision shall be rendered in writing no later than ten (10) days following the hearing and shall be final.

    E.   The paramount issue with respect to any appeal will be whether the type of backflow preventer authorized will adequately protect the public water supply system.

    F.   Before deciding any appeal, the City Administrator shall consider:

    1.   Whether the backflow preventer specified by the Director is necessary to adequately protect the City’s water supply system;

    2.   Whether the backflow preventer preferred by the owner would adequately protect the City’s water supply system;

    3.   Whether the use of the backflow preventer preferred by the owner, when compared to the backflow preventer designated by the Director, is likely to result in a material decrease in the level of protection to the public water supply system.

    G.  In cases where an existing structure is being remodeled or reconstructed or where a change in the use of an existing structure will or may create a greater degree of hazard to the public water supply system than previously existed, the City Administrator may consider:

    1.   Differences in the cost of devices and backflow prevention assemblies, when comparing the type of backflow preventer specified by the Director to the type of backflow preventer preferred by the owner;

    2.   Differences in the cost of installing and maintaining the two (2) types of backflow preventers being compared;

    3.   Other significant cost differences or practical difficulties associated with the use, installation and/or maintenance of the backflow preventers being compared;

    4.   Other relevant life, safety or health concerns raised by the Director or the owner. (Ord. 6-2006 § 1)

 

13.06.050 Jurisdictional issues and conflicts.
    In the event the provisions of this chapter are in conflict with the requirements of any plumbing code or regulation applicable in the city, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to the extent necessary to resolve the conflict and shall be binding upon all plumbing officials performing official duties within the city. (Ord. 6-2006 § 1)

 

13.06.060 Violation—Penalties.
    A.  The Director shall notify the owner, or authorized agent of the owner, of the building or premises of a violation of this chapter. The Director shall set a specific time for the owner to have the violation removed or corrected. If the owner fails to correct the violation in the specified time, the Director may, if in his or her judgment an imminent health hazard exists, suspend water service to the building or premises. Additional fines or penalties may also be invoked following suspension of service.

    B.   Violations of this Chapter 13.06 may be prosecuted in municipal court and, upon conviction thereof, a violator may be fined in an amount that does not exceed the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010. (Ord. 17-2013 § 52; Ord. 6-2006 § 1)

Chapter 13.08 WATER RATES AND FEES*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 23-2020. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


13.08.010 Definitions.
    Definitions used in this chapter shall be those set forth in Chapter 13.04. (Ord. 8-2008 § 2)

 

13.08.020 Water tap permits—Perfecting applications for water service.
    A.  Persons seeking new water service connections to the Water Department’s system may apply for a water tap permit on forms provided by the Water Department. No permanent water service connection will be authorized unless the application for the water tap permit has been perfected in accordance with the requirements set forth in this section.

    1.   The applicant must file a complete and accurate application in accordance with the requirements of Section 13.08.030 containing such information as is requested by the City Engineer. Inaccurate and/or incomplete applications will be rejected.

    2.   The applicant must tender payment of the full tap fee as determined with respect to Section 13.08.040 and, if applicable, any impact fee provided for pursuant to Section 13.08.140 and/or any water line rebate required under Section 13.04.127.

    3.   The applicant (or someone on the applicant’s behalf) must complete, according to applicable City standards and specifications and to the reasonable satisfaction of the City Engineer, all infrastructure improvements necessary to make the desired connection and provide water service to the applicant’s property.

    4.   The property to be served generally must be a legally created lot or parcel. The recording of a subdivision plat creating the lot or parcel to be served will be a necessary prerequisite to water service in most instances.

    5.   If the property to be served is outside city boundaries, the owner of such property will be required to execute and perform a Water Service Contract approved by City Council and meeting the requirements of Section 13.04.120. In addition to the requirements set forth in this section, all prerequisites to the provision of water service that are set forth in such Water Service Contract must be performed before water service connections to the owner’s property will be permitted by the Water Department. (Ord. 8-2008 § 2)

 

13.08.030 Applications for water tap permits—Contents and process.
    Applicants requesting water service must file a completed application for water service with the Engineer. The application shall be made on such form as may be furnished or prescribed by the Engineer. Such application, at a minimum, shall contain the applicant’s name, address and telephone number; the legal description and street address, if any, of the real property to be served; a statement describing all structures, if any, existing on the property at the time the application is submitted; a statement advising whether the property is within or outside of the corporate limits of the city at the time the application is submitted; a statement describing all structures, if any, the applicant intends to construct or have constructed on the property described in the application and the estimated completion date of each such structure. Such application also may request other information deemed necessary by the Engineer relative to the operation of the Water Department’s system and the keeping of records with respect to such system. If an incomplete or materially inaccurate application is filed, this requirement will not have been met by the applicant and the applicant shall be so notified by the Engineer. No application shall be deemed filed until it has been determined to be complete and accurate by the Engineer. (Ord. 8-2008 § 2)

 

13.08.040 Tap fees.
    A.  General Provisions. Except for temporary service connections, as provided for in Section 13.04.135, no new water service connection and no new water service will be provided to any property until a tap fee has first been paid. The amount of the tap fee chargeable by and payable to the Water Department shall be determined with respect to: (1) the location of the property to be served; (2) the size of the connection to a Water Department main (as approved by the City Engineer); and (3) in some circumstances, the number of units to be served through such connection.

    B.   Inside Tap Fees—Single Units. Tap fees for single units located within the boundaries of the city or within the boundaries of the former Lincoln Park Water District shall be as set forth in Schedule A-1 to Appendix 13.08.

    C.   Inside Tap Fees—Multi-Unit. Tap fees for multi-unit facilities, structures or complexes located within the boundaries of the city or within the boundaries of the former Lincoln Park Water District that will be served through a single master meter shall be as set forth in Schedule A-2 of Appendix 13.08.

    D.  Outside Tap Fees—Single Units. Tap fees for single units located outside of the boundaries of the city and outside the boundaries of the former Lincoln Park Water District shall be as set forth in Schedule B-1 of Appendix 13.08.

    E.   Outside Tap Fees—Multi-Unit. Tap fees for multi-unit facilities, structures or complexes located outside of the boundaries of the city and outside the boundaries of the former Lincoln Park Water District that will be served through a single master meter shall be as set forth in Schedule B-2 of Appendix 13.08.

    F.   Tap Fees (or Equivalent) Required with Respect to Customers of Group Users. Unless otherwise specifically provided in a fully-executed written contract between the City or Department and the group user, no group user shall be authorized to provide water service to any customer of the group user using water sold to the group user by the Department unless an amount equal to the tap fee that would be payable by such customer to the Department if such customer were connecting directly to the Department’s water system has first been paid to the Department by or on behalf of such customer.

    G.  Inside Tap Fees for Parks and Open Space. Tap fees for approved water taps that will be used as a water source to irrigate a park, open space or other similar area (or as a source of water for any accessory structure within any such park open space or other similar area) located inside the boundaries of the city or inside the boundaries of the former Lincoln Park Water District shall be as set forth in Schedule A-1 of Appendix 13.08.

    H.  Outside Tap Fees for Parks and Open Space. Tap fees for approved water taps that will be used as a water source to irrigate a park, open space or other similar area (or as a source of water for any accessory structure within any such park, open space or other similar area) located outside the boundaries of the city and outside the boundaries of the former Lincoln Park Water District shall be as set forth in Schedule B-1 of Appendix 13.08.

    I.    Negotiated Tap Fees, Reductions and Payment Arrangements for Certain Industrial and Commercial Users.

    1.   It is the City’s policy to encourage industrial and commercial growth within the city and its urban growth boundaries. In aid of such policy, and in cases where a clear public purpose exists or where a clear public benefit will be achieved, the City Council may negotiate with applicants for water taps who request reduced tap fees, or who wish to make arrangements for the deferred payment of portions of their water tap fees.

    2.   The City Council shall, by resolution, specify guidelines and standards which must be followed and met by applicants seeking to negotiate agreements for reduced tap fees or payment arrangements under this subsection.

    3.   Nothing in this subsection will require City Council to agree to reduce the tap fee for any person or project.

    4.   All agreements negotiated pursuant to the provisions of this Subsection I shall be in writing and be signed by the property owner acquiring the subject water tap permit. Any such agreement that obligates or may obligate the property owner (and/or the property owner’s successors in interest) to make future payments shall run with the land and be recorded at the property owner’s expense.

    J.    Fees for Increase in Tap Size. For any increase in the size of an existing tap (accomplished by abandoning or removing an existing tap and installing a new tap in its place), the user who receives the larger tap shall pay to the Water Department the difference between the tap fee for the new tap, as determined by reference to the appropriate schedule of Appendix 13.08, and the tap fee for the abandoned or removed tap, as determined by reference to the same schedule and the size of the abandoned or removed tap. No request for a new tap of increased size will be honored in the absence of such payment. All new meters or fixtures installed pursuant to a request made under this subsection shall be equipped with appropriate back flow prevention devices specified by the Water Department and paid for by the applicant. No refund will be made by the Water Department when an existing tap is removed and replaced with a tap of lesser size. Additionally, when a user applies to increase the size of a tap located outside the corporate limits of the city, the Water Department may require that a new Water Service Contract be executed and performed as a condition to allowing the requested increase in tap size.

    K.  Fire Protection. In the event a water user wishes to tap a City water main for the purpose of conveying or furnishing water to a structure solely for fire protection purposes, and upon the user showing to the satisfaction of the City Engineer that the service line from such additional tap is solely for fire protection purposes, a fire protection water tap permit will be issued, for which the user shall pay no tap fee. The water user will, however, be required to install a double check detector assembly in a vault at the property line, on the fire line or at another location approved by the Water Superintendent. If any service line earmarked for fire protection shall at any time be used to deliver water for any purpose other than fire protection or suppression, the Water Superintendent may order the water user to pay the applicable tap fee for the connection used to deliver water for such other purpose (as determined with respect to the appropriate schedule of Appendix 13.08). If such order is given, the tap fee shall become immediately due and payable by the water user. Non-payment of such tap fee within thirty (30) days of such order shall be grounds for termination of all water service to the property of the water user.

    L.   City Facilities. Unless otherwise ordered by formal action of City Council, no tap fee will be charged with respect to the connection of a new City-owned or controlled park, green space, building, structure or facility to the water system. In addition, no tap fee shall be payable with respect to increasing the number or size of existing water taps serving any City-owned or controlled park, green space, building, structure or facility.

    M.  Correctional Facilities. Tap fees with respect to correctional facilities shall be established by written contract, including, but not necessarily limited to, the Mutual Benefit Water Service Agreement dated March 15, 1993 between the City and the State of Colorado, acting by and through the Colorado Department of Corrections. (Ord. 17-2010 § 1; Ord. 8-2008 § 2)

 

13.08.045 Abandonment of water tap permits and water taps.
    A.  Abandonment of Water Tap Permits—Credit. If a water tap permit is issued with respect to a lot or parcel upon which the applicant proposes to construct a structure, such permit will conclusively be deemed abandoned and become void upon the following occurrences:

    1.   If a building permit for such structure has not been issued within six (6) months following the date the water tap permit was issued; or

    2.   If the structure covered by a building permit issued within the six (6) months after the date the water tap permit was issued is not complete and a certificate of occupancy has not been issued within two (2) years following the date the water tap permit was issued.

    In such event, the applicant shall be entitled to reapply for a new water tap permit for the same lot or parcel and, if such permit is thereafter issued, the applicant shall be granted a credit against the tap fee payable with respect to the new application in an amount equal to ninety percent (90%) of the amount of the tap fee paid at the time the abandoned water tap permit was issued. No tap fee with respect to an abandoned permit shall be refunded if a physical connection to a service meter has been made.

    B.   Voluntary Abandonment of Water Tap Permits. If an owner of a lot or parcel determines to abandon a previously issued water tap permit and if no physical connection to the property’s service meter has been made, upon application by the owner, the City shall refund ninety percent (90%) of the amount of the tap fee originally paid to the owner.

    C.   Abandonment of Previously Valid Taps. Any previously valid connection to the Department water system will be deemed abandoned and null and void for all purposes if the site or structure previously receiving water service or entitled to receive water service has been disconnected or turned off for a period of twelve (12) or more consecutive months, beginning on any date after August 1, 2008 unless, during such period, meter charges and/or account maintenance fees provided for in Section 13.08.050, plus applicable interest and/or other accrued charges, if any, have been paid in full with respect to all months during which the water service was disconnected or turned off. The owner of property where a previously valid water tap was abandoned shall be treated as an applicant for new water service for all purposes under this chapter if such owner seeks to have water service restored to such owner’s property.

    D.  Removal of Abandoned Appurtenances and Facilities. The Department is authorized to remove all appurtenances and facilities associated with abandoned water taps, including, but not limited to, appurtenances and facilities that are not evidenced by any open and active water service account maintained by the Department. Taps shall be physically disconnected from the main by plugging, capping, or sealing in accordance with the Department’s specifications. In such cases, the meter, meter pit, and/or shutoff also shall be removed. The property owner shall be responsible for all costs associated with the disconnection. From time to time, the Department may find and remove abandoned taps, fixtures and appurtenances at its own expense for the benefit of the water system as a whole.

    E.   Removal of Unauthorized Appurtenances and Facilities. The Department is authorized to remove all appurtenances and facilities associated with unauthorized and/or illegal water taps, including, but not limited to, appurtenances and facilities that are not evidenced by any open and active water service account maintained by the Department and a valid water tap permit. (Ord. 4-2018 § 1; Ord. 10-2010 § 2; Ord. 8-2008 § 2)

 

13.08.050 Water service charges based on meter measurement and water.
    A.  Meter Charges. Except as otherwise might be provided in this chapter, every water user whose property or structure is physically connected to the water system shall pay a periodic meter charge for the privilege of being connected to the water system. Such meter charge shall be calculated with respect to the size of the water meter serving such property or structure and shall be billed and payable without regard to whether any water was actually consumed by the water user during the applicable billing period. Meter charges shall be assessed and billed either monthly or quarterly, depending upon the rate classification of the water user, as reflected in the various water rate schedules set forth in Appendix 13.08 to this Chapter 13.08. Meter charges shall be assessed, billed and payable notwithstanding any discontinuation of water service that is requested by a water user or imposed by the Department with respect to the failure of a water service customer who is connected to the water system to pay fees and charges payable pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter 13.08.

    B.   Water Consumption Charges Based Upon Metered Usage. In addition to the applicable meter charge, all water users shall be charged for water delivered to them by the Department according to meter measurement. Charges with respect to such water consumption shall be calculated, billed and payable in accordance with the rates provided for in the various schedules appended to this Chapter 13.08, as the same may be amended from time to time.

    C.   Monthly Account Maintenance Fee.

    1.   A monthly account maintenance fee shall be charged to and payable by any person holding a valid water tap permit for the period beginning with the purchase of the water tap permit and ending when a physical connection of the property identified in such water tap permit to a Department water main has been made or such water tap permit has been abandoned pursuant to Section 13.08.045. Following the making of such connection, periodic meter charges and water consumption rates calculated in accordance with the applicable rate schedule appended to this Chapter 13.08 shall become billable and payable with respect to such water service customer.

    2.   Subject to the provisions of Section 13.08.045, persons holding or claiming to hold a valid water tap permit with respect to a property that was previously connected to the water system but which is no longer connected to the water system shall be billed and shall pay a monthly account maintenance fee in order to retain any rights for such property to be reconnected to the water system.

    3.   Persons holding a valid water tap permit with respect to a property that is connected to the water system shall be charged and pay applicable meter charges, notwithstanding that no water is delivered or consumed through such water service connection. Any such permit holder may voluntarily abandon any rights under the water tap permit and relinquish any and all rights to future water service based upon such abandoned water tap permit by executing and delivering to the Department a notice of intent to abandon on a form prepared or approved by the Department and thereafter be relieved of all future fees and charges associated with the abandoned water service connection. As an alternative to abandonment, such permit holder may disconnect from the water system by causing the removal of the water meter and appurtenances associated with the physical connection of the property of the permit holder to the water system, provided that such disconnection is accomplished in accordance with the requirements of the Department after written permission to make such disconnection has been obtained from the Department. Following any such disconnection, the permit holder shall become obligated to timely pay monthly account maintenance fees in order to retain rights under the water tap permit and shall be subject to the provisions of Section 13.08.045 respecting abandonment.

    D.  Non-payment of meter charges or monthly account maintenance fees, whichever is applicable, together with all accrued fees, charges, late charges and other sums then owing, for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months will be conclusive evidence of a water user’s intention to abandon any rights to continued or future water service based upon a previously-issued water tap permit. (Ord. 10-2010 § 3)

 

13.08.060 Rates—Inside water users.
    A.  Inside Residential Rates. Inside residential water rates shall apply with respect to water sold and delivered to separately-metered dwelling units located within the corporate limits of the city and shall be calculated and billed in accordance with the provisions of Schedule D of Appendix 13.08.

    B.   Inside Non-Residential Rates. Inside non-residential water rates shall apply with respect to all water users who consume water delivered within the corporate limits of the city, except for users identified in Subsections 13.08.060(A) and (C) and in Section 13.08.080. Inside non-residential water rates shall be calculated and billed in accordance with the provisions of Schedule E of Appendix 13.08.

    C.   Inside Multi-Unit Rates. Unless otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, inside multi-unit water rates shall apply with respect to all multi-unit facilities receiving water sold by the Department and delivered through a single meter (sometimes called a “master meter”) at a location within the corporate limits of the City for distribution to two (2) or more dwelling units, two (2) or more non-residential users, or within any mixed-use facility. Inside multi-unit water rates shall be calculated and billed in accordance with the provisions of Schedule F of Appendix 13.08.

    D.  If such facilities are located within the boundaries of the city, the owners of the following types of multi-unit facilities shall pay inside non-residential water rates: duplexes; single-family residences with one accessory dwelling unit; residential properties legally used for business or commercial purposes, including, but not limited to, home occupation businesses; and/or approved mixed-use facilities consisting of only one residential unit and only one business or commercial unit. (Ord. 13-2011 § 7; Ord. 10-2010 § 4; Ord. 8-2008 § 2)

 

13.08.070 Rates—Outside water users.
    A.  Outside Residential Rates. Outside residential water rates shall apply with respect to water sold and delivered to separately-metered dwelling units located outside of the corporate limits of the city and outside of the boundaries of the former Lincoln Park Water District and shall be calculated and billed in accordance with the provisions of Schedule G of Appendix 13.08.

    B.   Outside Non-Residential Rates. Outside non-residential water rates shall apply with respect to all water users who consume water delivered outside of the corporate limits of the city, except for users identified in Subsections 13.08.070(A) and (C) and in Section 13.08.080. Outside non-residential water rates shall be calculated and billed in accordance with the provisions of Schedule H of Appendix 13.08.

    C.   Outside Multi-Unit Rates. Unless otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, outside multi-unit water rates shall apply with respect to all multi-unit facilities receiving water sold by the Department through a single meter (sometimes called a “master meter”) at a location outside the corporate limits of the city and outside of the boundaries of the former Lincoln Park Water District for distribution to two (2) or more dwelling units, two (2) or more non-residential users, or within any mixed-use facility. Outside multi-unit water rates shall be calculated and billed in accordance with the provisions of Schedule I of Appendix 13.08.

    D.  If such facilities are located outside the boundaries of the city, the owners of the following types of multi-unit facilities shall pay outside non-residential water rates: duplexes; single-family residences with one accessory dwelling unit; residential properties legally used for business or commercial purposes, including, but not limited to, home occupation businesses; and/or approved mixed-use facilities consisting of only one residential unit and only one business or commercial unit. (Ord. 13-2011 § 8; Ord. 10-2010 § 5; Ord. 8-2008 § 2)

 

13.08.080 Special rates.
    A.  Group Users. Group user water rates shall apply with respect to water sold and delivered to any municipality (other than the City), special district or other entity regulated by the Colorado Public Utilities Commission that distributes water purchased from the Department to water users within its jurisdiction through a water distribution system operated by such municipality, special district or other entity. Examples of group users include the Town of Brookside and the Orchard Park Water District. Water rates applicable to group users are those provided for in Schedule J of Appendix 13.08.

    B.   Golf Course Rates. Because golf courses within the Department’s water service area have been and will remain open to public play by local inhabitants, offer unique recreational opportunities, enhance quality of life, generate tourism and otherwise foster growth and economic development, the Department has deemed it to be in the public interest for water rates charged to golf courses to have been less than prevailing rates charged to other non-residential water users. It is the Department’s goal to bring water rates for golf courses into parity with those applicable to other non-residential water users and uses, but the Department seeks to achieve such parity over a period of years in order to avoid situations where increased costs of water, coupled with other difficult economic circumstances, could force the closure of one or more golf courses and the community’s loss of those unique public benefits enumerated in this subsection. Accordingly, unless otherwise specified by valid contract, water rates for all water sold by the Department to golf courses shall be as set forth in Schedule K of Appendix 13.08.

    C.   City Rates. City rates shall apply with respect to all water sold and delivered to the City of Cañon City, including its divisions and departments, regardless of location, and shall be calculated and billed in accordance with the provisions of Schedule L of Appendix 13.08.

    D.  Correctional Facilities. Rates charged for water service provided to correctional facilities within the City shall be “inside non-residential rates,” as provided for in Schedule E of Appendix 13.08. Rates charged for water service provided to correctional facilities located outside of the corporate limits of the city shall be “outside non-residential rates,” as provided for in Schedule H of Appendix 13.08.

    E.   Former Lincoln Park Water District. Rates applicable to water users who receive water sold by the Department at locations outside of the boundaries of the city, but within the boundaries of the former Lincoln Park Domestic Water District, as they existed on September 18, 1975 when the district was dissolved, shall be calculated and adjusted as provided for in that certain contract dated June 16, 1975, between the City and the former Lincoln Park Water District. Such rates, if different from those applicable to other outside water users pursuant to Section 13.08.070, will be reflected on Schedule M of Appendix 13.08.

    F.   Transmountain water rates shall apply to sales or leases of transmountain water to any water user that purchases or leases such water pursuant to a Water Court Decree or other lawful order approving the water user’s plan for substitution and exchange or augmentation that may be satisfied by the Department’s delivery of transmountain water at a place designated or authorized in such approved plan. Transmountain water shall mean Fryingpan-Arkansas Project water lawfully allocated to the Department that is available for such use in accordance with the provisions of applicable law, rules, regulations and policies. In addition, transmountain water shall be water that is not physically removed from the Arkansas River and/or storage facilities constructed or maintained as components of the Fryingpan-Arkansas Project. The rate applicable to sales or leases of transmountain water shall be as set forth in Schedule S. (Ord. 3-2012 § 2; Ord. 10-2010 § 6; Ord. 8-2008 § 2)

 

13.08.090 Bulk water sales.
    A.  The Department may operate a bulk water dispensing station and sell water to water purchasers who are not connected to the Department water system and who provide their own transportation containers and vehicles. Such purchasers shall be referred to as “bulk water users.”

    B.   All bulk water users shall be subject to such rules, regulations, policies and procedures governing the operation, hours and use of the bulk water dispensing station which may, from time to time, be imposed by the Water Superintendent. Copies of such rules, regulations, policies and procedures shall be available for inspection at City Hall and at the Public Works building during normal business hours.

    C.   Bulk water users shall pay for all water purchased from the Department at the rate specified in Schedule N of Appendix 13.08.

    D.  There will be no vested or perfected right to water service provided by this section for bulk water users. The Department may discontinue or limit water sales from its bulk water dispensing station at any time, with or without advance notice. (Ord. 8-2008 § 2)

 

13.08.100 Water rates for temporary water service.
    Rates with respect to temporary water service authorized pursuant to Section 13.04.135 shall be calculated and billed in accordance with the provisions of Schedule O of Appendix 13.08. (Ord. 8-2008 § 2)

 

13.08.120 Malfunctioning water meters.
    A.  If, with respect to any billing cycle applicable to any water user, it becomes apparent that the water meter intended to measure such user’s water consumption during such billing cycle became damaged, broken, inoperable or otherwise malfunctioned in a manner clearly suggesting that such water user’s actual consumption during the billing cycle, as measured by such damaged or defective water meter, was understated for the billing cycle, such water user’s charges for that billing cycle shall be estimated by the Department, based upon historic consumption records for the same location.

    B.   The Water Superintendent shall establish the formula or method by which water charges will be estimated under circumstances described in Subsection A of this section. The Director of Finance shall have the discretion to waive or reduce water charges in excess of minimum charges for the applicable billing cycle for good cause shown by any water users whose charges were estimated pursuant to the terms of this section. (Ord. 8-2008 § 2)

 

13.08.130 Water surcharge zone fees.
    A.  There are established certain water surcharge zones within the Department’s water service area. Water surcharge zones are areas within which water users are served with water pumped at the Department’s expense after such water leaves the Department’s water treatment plant. The Department is hereby authorized to charge water surcharge zone fees to its customers within such water surcharge zones. Water surcharge zones shall include the following:

    1.   Zone I(A) shall include territory within which water users receive water that is pumped once at the Department’s expense through the Department’s #1 Booster Pump Station before it is delivered to water users within such territory.

    2.   Zone I(B) shall include territory within which water users receive water that is pumped once at the Department’s expense through the Department’s North 9th Street Pump Station before it is delivered to water users within such territory.

    3.   Zone I(C) shall include territory within which water users receive water that is pumped once at the Department’s expense through the Department’s Four Mile Ranch Pump Station before it is delivered to water users within such territory.

    4.   Zone II. Zone II shall include territory within which water users receive water that is pumped twice at the Department’s expense (through the Department’s #1 and #2 Booster Pump Stations) after such water leaves the water treatment plant and before it is delivered to water users within such territory.

    5.   Zone III. Zone III shall include territory within which water users receive water that is pumped three (3) times at the Department’s expense (through the #1 and #2 Booster Pump Stations and then through the Greenhorn Pump Station) after such water leaves the water treatment plant and before it is delivered to water users within such territory.

    B.   Water Surcharge Zone Maps. The City Engineer shall prepare, maintain and modify, when warranted, a water system map clearly indicating the boundaries of all territory included with each water surcharge zone described and designated in subsection A of this section. Such maps shall be made available for public inspection at City Hall during normal business hours.

    C.   Zone Surcharge Fees. Water users within the various water surcharge zones shall be charged on their periodic water billing statements for zone surcharge fees calculated by multiplying the water user’s actual water consumption for the billing period times the applicable zone surcharge rate. Zone surcharge fees shall be in addition to all other charges payable by such water users.

    D.  Zone Surcharge Rates. Zone surcharge rates shall be based upon costs of electricity and the calculation thereof may also include costs of equipment maintenance, associated labor and depreciation that are specific to the pump station or stations that serve the applicable water surcharge zone. Rates to be used to calculate water zone surcharge fees shall be those set forth in Schedule P of Appendix 13.08. (Ord. 3-2012 § 1)

 

13.08.140 Impact fees.
    A.  The City Council from time to time may establish and the Department may charge impact fees to applicants for water service to properties located within certain areas impacted by development (“impact areas”) that are within the service area of the Water Department in order to recover costs incurred by the Department to pay for improvements made by the Department to ensure the Department’s ability to provide adequate water service to users within such impact areas.

    B.   The territory and rates to be included within each impact area shall be as provided for in Schedule Q of Appendix 13.08.

    C.   The Engineer shall prepare and maintain an impact area map or maps clearly indicating the boundaries of all territory included within each impact area. Territory included within an impact area need not be contiguous with other territory included in the same or in any separate impact area.

    D.  Impact fees provided for in this section, if not previously paid by a prior owner or developer, shall be billed to individual applicants for water service at the time such applicants apply for a water tap permit. No water tap permit shall be issued until both the impact fee and the applicable tap fee have been paid in full. Such impact fees shall be in addition to the applicant’s tap fee.

 

    E.   When impact fees provided for in this section are imposed as a condition of approval for a subdivision or other land development, which shall be the ordinary and preferred way of imposing the impact fees provided for in this section, the developer of such subdivision or other land development shall pay, as a lump sum and prior to the recording of the subdivision plat, all impact fees with respect to all lots within the subdivision. The amount to be paid by such developer shall be determined by multiplying the applicable per-lot impact fee times the anticipated number of water taps to be made available by the Department for use within the subdivision. Impact fees shall be in addition to all other charges payable by the developer and/or water user.

    F.   When City Council permits a planned development, a planned unit development, district, a subdivision or other land development to be developed in phases, the impact fee payable by the developer will be calculated and payable on a phase-by-phase basis, taking into account the number of water taps to be made available in each phase, unless City Council provides otherwise in its ordinance or resolution approving the subdivision or other land development.

    G.  As to each impact area with respect to which impact fees may be collected, the Engineer shall prepare, maintain and make available for public inspection accurate and reliable records with respect to costs incurred by the Department that are recoverable through the imposition and collection of impact fees pursuant to this section. Records reflecting impact fees actually collected also shall be kept and updated periodically by the Engineer.

    H.  Any person who has paid a rebate to the Department pursuant to the provisions of Subsection K of Section 13.04.127 shall be entitled to a credit (equal to the amount of such rebate payment) against an impact fee imposed pursuant to the provisions of this section if such rebate payment pertained to the same water system improvements that gave rise to the Department’s costs that were used to determine the impact fees to be imposed pursuant to this section. The purpose of this subsection is to ensure that no property owner (including successors in interest) pays for the same water system improvements twice. (Ord. 8-2008 § 2)

 

13.08.150 Fees for services.
    A.  The Department may charge fees to water users for any or all of the following services: turn off of water service; turn on of water service; final readings of water meters; rereading water meters; testing water meters; other services requested by water users that require the time and attention of Department service personnel.

    B.   The fees to be charged by the Department for services enumerated at Subsection A of this section shall be those provided for at Schedule R of Appendix 13.08.

    C.   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized, at his discretion, to waive or reduce the amount of any Department fee enumerated in Schedule R of Appendix 13.08 in cases where the Director determines that the charging of such fee would be unjust or inequitable under the circumstances that gave rise to the performance of the services for which the fee was charged. The Director shall consider waiving or reducing fees pursuant to this subsection when Department services associated with the fee were performed in connection with an emergency or as a result of extraordinary climatic or natural conditions. The authority and discretion herein granted to the Director of Finance may be delegated, on a case-by-case basis. All determinations made by the Director of Finance, or his/her designee, regarding requests for the waiver or reduction of fees made pursuant to this subsection shall be final administrative decisions. (Ord. 8-2008 § 2)

 

13.08.160 Owner responsibility for payment and service in owner names.
    A.  The owner of the real property where the water is to be used shall be responsible for the payment of all water rents for water delivered by the Department to such property. When the property receiving water service is owned in common by some or all of the unit owners in a common interest community, condominium or similar group or entity, the association formed by such unit owners may be treated by the Department as the owner of such property for all purposes under this Title 13.

    B.   All billings of charges and fees for water service provided by the Department shall be prepared in the name of, be mailed to and be payable by the owner of the real property where the water service is provided, regardless of whether such owner occupies the real property. Accounts for water service will not be established in the names of tenants. Requests made for turn on or turn off of water service made by tenants will not be honored by the Department, except in cases of extreme emergency, as determined by the Water Superintendent or designee. The Department also will not honor requests that are made by tenants for the rereading or testing of water meters or for any final meter reading. (Ord. 8-2008 § 2)

 

13.08.170 Lien by city—Amounts due.
    The City shall have a lien upon all real estate to which the Department sells and delivers water for the amounts of all water charges, fees and assessments owing to the Department for and with respect to such water and water service. Such lien shall commence when such charges, fees and assessments shall become due, and shall remain a lien until the same are paid in full. All such liens shall run with the land where water service was delivered by the Department. (Ord. 8-2008 § 2)

 

13.08.180 Lien by City—Owner notification.
    All water supplied by the Department shall be deemed to have been supplied at the instance and request of the owner(s) of the property so supplied. Such owner(s) and all persons claiming by, through or under such owner(s), shall be deemed to have notice of such lien, whether the property is occupied by an owner, tenant, or any other person. (Ord. 8-2008 § 2)

 

13.08.190 Late charges and interest.
    A.  In the event any sum due the Department for water sold or as fees, charges or assessments authorized under the provisions of this Title 13 shall not have been paid on or before the “due date” stated in the water bill sent to the water user, such sum shall bear additional charges and/or interest as set forth and determined with respect to Schedule R of Appendix 13.08.

    B.   All unpaid late charges and accrued interest billed pursuant to the authorization contained in this section shall become a part of the lien amount owing with respect to the property of the water user. (Ord. 8-2008 § 2)

 

13.08.200 Remedies for nonpayment.
    A.  The Department’s remedies with respect to any unpaid water bill, charge or assessment billed by the Department shall include any or all of the following:

    1.   Certification of the lien amount for assessment and collection by the treasurer of Fremont County, Colorado in accordance with the process outlined in Section 13.08.210 or any other applicable State or local law; and/or

    2.   Direct legal action in an appropriate court in the name of the City or Department against the property owner, water user and/or other person who is financially obligated to the Department; and/or

    3.   The discontinuance of water service to the premises of the delinquent water user in accordance with the provisions of Section 13.08.220; and/or

    4.   The denial of new water service to any other lot or parcel owned by the delinquent water user; and/or

    5.   An appropriate action in the municipal court for violation of provisions of this Title 13, as shall be specifically identified in a municipal court complaint filed by or on behalf of the City or the Department.

    B.   The remedies provided for in this section shall be cumulative. (Ord. 8-2008 § 2)

 

13.08.210 Late payment—Assessment and certification to County Treasurer.
    A.  No sooner than ninety (90) days subsequent to the delivery of such water service, all unpaid accounts for water charges, fees and/or assessments due to the Department for delivery of water service may be certified by the City Council, by ordinance, to the Treasurer of Fremont County, Colorado for collection by the Treasurer in the same manner as general property taxes are collected.

    B.   The Director of Finance or the City Clerk shall give notice to all property owners whose real property is proposed to be assessed for unpaid water charges, fees and/or assessments by publication of a written notice once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City not sooner than thirty (30) nor later than ten (10) days prior to the Council meeting at which the assessing ordinance shall be considered on first reading. Each such notice shall contain the following information:

    1.   The name of the property owner;

    2.   The legal description of the lots or parcels of real property to be assessed;

    3.   The amount of the proposed assessment and the interest rate to be charged on unpaid assessments;

    4.   The date when the assessing ordinance will be considered by the City Council on first reading; and

    5.   A statement that all objections to any proposed assessment covered by the notice will be heard by the City Council at the meeting at which such ordinance is to be considered on first reading, or at some subsequent meeting of City Council, prior to the adoption of the assessing ordinance.

    C.   At least ten (10) days prior to the date scheduled for the consideration of the ordinance on first reading, the Director of Finance or the City Clerk shall mail, by ordinary mail, postage prepaid, to the owners of all real property that may be assessed, at their last known address, a copy of the notice being published pursuant to Subsection B of this section. Last known addresses may be determined from City records used for water billing purposes. (Ord. 8-2008 § 2)

 

13.08.220 Failure to pay—Service shutoff procedures and costs.
    A.  If any charge billed by the Department to any water user with respect to water service delivered by the Department is not paid on or before thirty (30) days after the billing date for such charges, the Director of Finance shall have the authority, upon notice to the owner or occupant of the premises of such water user, to shut off the water to such premises until all such charges, together with any additional charges, fees, penalties and interest thereon, are paid in full or written payment arrangements, acceptable to the Director of Finance, have been made. Such notice may be posted at the premises where water service is subject to possible shut off.

    B.   If water service to any user is shut off pursuant to the provisions of Subsection A of this section, the turn-off charge provided for in Schedule R of Appendix 13.08 shall be imposed by the Department and be added to such other charges as were owing by the user at the time water service was shut off. Thereafter, if water service is restored, the turn-on fee provided for in Schedule R of Appendix 13.08 also shall be imposed by the Department and be payable by the user prior to the restoration of water service, unless other arrangements for payment are made in writing between the user and the Director of Finance.

    C.   Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsections A and B of this section, the Director of Finance is hereby authorized to establish administrative procedures, including a fee schedule for services performed by Water Department personnel, pursuant to which water service to unoccupied structures connected to the water system may be temporarily restored so that such structures may be inspected, marketed and shown to prospective purchasers by the owners of such structures, their realtors or their other authorized agents. Payment in full of all outstanding charges owing to the Department shall not be required as a prerequisite to the temporary restoration of water service under such procedures. (Ord. 8-2008 § 2)

 

13.08.230 Reread meter fees and meter testing fees.
    Fees chargeable by the City to any water user who requests that the water meter be reread by the City or that the water meter be tested by the City shall be as provided for in Schedule R of Appendix 13.08. (Ord. 8-2008 § 2)

 

13.08.240 Final meter readings.
    A.  The City will charge a fee as provided for in Schedule R of Appendix 13.08 to the user (in whose name the water service is maintained at the time of the request) upon request for a final reading of the user’s water meter made by such user or his or her agent or representative.

 

    B.   For purposes of this section, any realtor, title insurance company representative, attorney or other person requesting a final reading for purposes of obtaining final water charges in connection with a real estate transaction shall conclusively be deemed to be the user’s agent or representative.

    C.   Final readings will only be made during normal business hours of the Water Department on days determined by the Water Superintendent. (Ord. 8-2008 § 2)

 

13.08.250 Modification of Water Department fees, rates and other charges.
    A.  The City Council may, by ordinance, increase or decrease, or otherwise amend and/or modify any water tap fee, any water rate, any impact fee or any other fee, charge, assessment amount or rate included in or authorized by any provision of this chapter or appearing in any schedule of any appendix that is referenced in this chapter.

    B.   If any Water Department fee, rate, assessment or other charge that is amended or otherwise modified by a ordinance authorized at Subsection A of this section is found to be void or otherwise unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, the fee, rate, assessment or other charge that was in effect immediately prior to the adoption of the ordinance containing the void or unenforceable provision shall apply with respect to the water service or product that is the subject matter of such void or unenforceable fee, rate, assessment or other charge. (Ord. 8-2008 § 2)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Appendix 13.08-A RATE AND FEE SCHEDULES
 

Schedules:

 

A-1               Inside Tap Fees – Single Units.

A-2               Inside Tap Fees – Multi-Unit.

B-1                Outside Tap Fees – Single Units.

B-2                Outside Tap Fees – Multi-Unit.

C                  Monthly Account Maintenance Fee.

D                  Inside Residential Rates.

E                   Inside Non-Residential Rates.

F                   Inside Multi-Unit Rates.

G                  Outside Residential Rates.

H                  Outside Non-Residential Rates.

I                    Outside Multi-Unit Rates.

J                   Group Users.

K                  Golf Course Rate.

L                   City Rate.

M                  Former Lincoln Park Water District Outside Water Users.

N                  Bulk Water.

O                  Temporary Service.

P                   Zone Surcharge Rates.

Q                  Impact Fees.

R                  Water Department Service Fees.

S                   Transmountain Water Rates.

 

(Schedules A-1, A-2, B-1, B-2, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q and R—Initially Adopted by Ordinance No. 8, Series of 2008, Effective Date: 08/01/08)

(Schedules D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, N and O—Amended by Ordinance No. 25, Series of 2008, Effective Date: 12/20/08)

(Schedules D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, N, O and P—Amended by Ordinance No. 10, Series of 2010, Effective Date: 05/01/10)

(Schedules D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, N and O—Amended by Ordinance No. 23, Series of 2011, Effective Date: 12/24/11)

(Schedule L—Amended by Ordinance No. 16, Series of 2012, Effective Date: 01/01/12)

(Schedule P—Amended by Ordinance No. 3, Series of 2012, Effective Date: 03/24/12)

(Schedule S—Added by Ordinance No. 3, Series of 2012, Effective Date: 03/24/12)

(Schedules D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, N, O, P and S—Amended by Ordinance No. 23, Series of 2014, Effective Date: 11/22/14)

(Schedules D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, N, O, P and S—Amended by Ordinance No. 29, Series of 2018, Effective Date: 11/26/18)

 

(Schedules D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, N, O, P and S—Amended by Ordinance No. 29, Series of 2018, Effective Date: 11/26/18)

(Schedules D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, N, O, and R—Amended by Ordinance No. 30, Series of 2019, Effective Date: 12/7/19)

 

Schedule A-1: Inside Tap Fees—Single Units

 

    If the right to receive water service from the Water Department is perfected, as provided in Section 13.08.020, on or after January 1, 2008, the applicable tap fee payable under Section 13.08.040 (B) will be determined according to connection size, as follows:

 

Connection Size

Amount

 

 

3/4-inch or under

$5,000.00

1-inch

$8,350.00

1-1/2 inch

$16,651.00

2-inch

$26,651.00

3-inch

$53,354.00

4-inch

$83,356.00

6-inch

$166,664.00

8-inch

$266,673.00

 

Schedule A-2: Inside Tap Fees—Multi-Unit

 

    The tap fee for a multi-unit structure, facility or complex served through a master meter shall be the greater of:

 

•   The tap fee provided for in Schedule A-1 for the connection size used to serve the multi-unit structure, facility or complex; or

 

•   A tap fee that is calculated by multiplying the number of units to be served times the cost of a 3/4-inch tap, as shown in Schedule A-1. (Note: When one or more common areas will be separately metered, such common area(s) will be treated as a separate “unit” for purposes of this calculation.)

 

Schedule B-1: Outside Tap Fees—Single Units

 

    If the right to receive water service from the water department is perfected, as provided in Section 13.08.020, on or after January 1, 2008, the applicable tap fee payable under Section 13.08.040 (D) will be determined according to connection size, as follows:

 

Connection Size

Amount

 

 

3/4-inch or under

$7,125.00

1-inch

$11,929.00

1-1/2 inch

$23,788.00

2-inch

$38,073.00

3-inch

$76,220.00

4-inch

$119,080.00

6-inch

$238,091.00

8-inch

$380,961.00

 

Schedule B-2: Outside Tap Fees—Multi-Unit

 

    The tap fee for a multi-unit structure, facility or complex served through a master meter shall be the greater of:

 

•   The tap fee provided for in Schedule B-1 for the connection size used to serve the multi-unit structure, facility or complex; or

 

•   A tap fee that is calculated by multiplying the number of units to be served times the cost of a 3/4-inch tap, as shown in Schedule B-1. (Note: when one or more common areas will be separately metered, such common area(s) will be treated as a separate “unit” for purposes of this calculation.)

 

Schedule C: Monthly Account Maintenance Fee

 

    Only applies to off accounts (including accounts established upon the purchase of a water tap permit and prior to the delivery of water to the property covered by the permit; accounts turned off at the request of the water user; and accounts where water service was discontinued at the election of the Water Department). Shall apply with respect to each and every month for which minimum periodic (monthly or quarterly) water charges are not accrued and payable in full for water service.

 

    A.  $5.00 per month for all classes of inside water users.

    B.   $8.40 per month for all classes of outside water users.

 

    Note: A minimum periodic charge—as shown on Schedules D through I, whichever is applicable—will be billed by the Department to any water user physically connected to the water system whose water service has not been disconnected (at the request of the water user or at the election of the Department) even if no water is actually consumed during the billing period covered by the minimum charge.

 

Schedule D: Inside Residential Rates

 

    As provided in Section 13.08.050 and Subsection 13.08.060A, on and after January 1, 2020, the owner of each water service connection making water service available to a residential structure (and/or other permitted residential accessory structure or use) shall pay on a monthly basis the Meter Charge as provided for in Part I of this schedule and for water consumption according to the rates set forth in Part II of this schedule.

PART I

 

Meter Charge (Monthly)

Amount

 

 

For a 5/8-inch connection (meter size)

$12.79

 

 

For a 3/4-inch connection

$12.79

 

 

For a 1-inch connection

$19.95

 

 

For a 1-1/2-inch connection

$37.98

 

 

For a 2-inch connection

$58.70

 

PART II

 

Water Consumption (rounded to the nearest 1000)

Rate Per 1000 Gallons

 

 

1,000 – 4,000 gallons

$1.52

 

 

5,000 – 12,000 gallons

$3.03

 

 

13,000 gallons or more

$4.55

 

    This table replaces and supersedes Schedule D to Appendix 13.08, as adopted through Ordinance No. 30, Series of 2019, with respect to water consumed on and after January 1, 2020.

 

Schedule E: Inside Non-Residential Rates

 

    As provided in Section 13.08.050 and Subsection 13.08.060B, on and after January 1, 2020, the owner of each water service connection making water service available to a non-residential unit (and/or other permitted accessory structure or use) shall pay on a monthly basis the Meter Charge as provided for in Part I of this schedule and for water consumption according to the rates set forth in Part II of this schedule.

 

PART I

 

Meter Charge (Monthly)

Amount

 

 

For a 5/8-inch connection (meter size)

$12.79

 

 

For a 3/4-inch connection

$12.79

 

 

For a 1-inch connection

$19.95

 

 

For a 1-1/2-inch connection

$37.98

 

 

For a 2-inch connection

$58.70

 

 

For a 3-inch connection

$109.08

 

 

For a 4-inch connection

$177.10

 

 

For a 6-inch connection

$351.27

 

 

For a 8-inch connection

$559.33

 

 

For a 10-inch connection

$805.74

 

PART II

 

Water Consumption (rounded to the nearest 1000)

Rate Per 1000 Gallons

 

 

1,000 gallons or more

$2.47

 

    This table replaces and supersedes Schedule E to Appendix 13.08, as adopted through Ordinance No. 30, Series of 2019, with respect to water consumed on and after January 1, 2020.

 

Schedule F: Inside Multi-Unit Rates

 

    As provided in Section 13.08.050 and Subsection 13.08.060C, on and after January 1, 2020, the owner of each water service connection making water service available to a multi-unit facility (and/or other permitted accessory structure or use) shall pay on a monthly basis the Meter Charge as provided for in Part I of this schedule and for water consumption according to the rates set forth in Part II of this schedule.

PART I

 

Meter Charge (Monthly)

Amount

 

 

For a 5/8-inch connection (meter size)

$12.79

 

 

For a 3/4-inch connection

$12.79

 

 

For a 1-inch connection

$19.95

 

 

For a 1-1/2-inch connection

$37.98

 

 

For a 2-inch connection

$58.70

 

 

For a 3-inch connection

$109.08

 

 

For a 4-inch connection

$177.10

 

 

For a 6-inch connection

$351.27

 

 

For a 8-inch connection

$559.33

 

 

For a 10-inch connection

$805.74

 

PART II

 

Water Consumption (rounded to the nearest 1000)

Rate Per 1000 Gallons

 

 

1,000 gallons or more

$4.07

 

    This table replaces and supersedes Schedule F to Appendix 13.08, as adopted through Ordinance No. 30, Series of 2019, with respect to water consumed on and after January 1, 2020.

 

Schedule G: Outside Residential Rates

 

    As provided in Section 13.08.050 and Subsection 13.08.070A, on and after January 1, 2020, the owner of each water service connection making water service available to a residential structure (and/or other permitted residential accessory structure or use) shall pay on a monthly basis the Meter Charge as provided for in Part I of this schedule and for water consumption according to the rates set forth in Part II of this schedule.

 

PART I

 

Meter Charge (Monthly)

Amount

 

 

For a 5/8-inch connection (meter size)

$19.18

 

 

For a 3/4-inch connection

$19.18

 

 

For a 1-inch connection

$29.92

 

 

For a 1-1/2-inch connection

$56.96

 

 

For a 2-inch connection

$88.05

 

PART II

 

Water Consumption (rounded to the nearest 1000)

Rate Per 1000 Gallons

 

 

1,000 – 4,000 gallons

$2.28

 

 

5,000 – 12,000 gallons

$4.55

 

 

13,000 gallons or more

$6.82

 

    This table replaces and supersedes Schedule G to Appendix 13.08, as adopted through Ordinance No. 30, Series of 2019, with respect to water consumed on and after January 1, 2020.

 

Schedule H: Outside Non-Residential Rates

 

    As provided in Section 13.08.050 and Subsection 13.08.070B, on and after January 1, 2020, the owner of each water service connection making water service available to a non-residential dwelling unit (and/or other permitted accessory structure or use) shall pay on a monthly basis the Meter Charge as provided for in Part I of this schedule and for water consumption according to the rates set forth in Part II of this schedule.

 

PART I

 

Meter Charge (Monthly)

Amount

 

 

For a 5/8-inch connection (meter size)

$19.18

 

 

For a 3/4-inch connection

$19.18

 

 

For a 1-inch connection

$29.92

 

 

For a 1-1/2-inch connection

$56.96

 

 

For a 2-inch connection

$88.05

 

 

For a 3-inch connection

$163.62

 

 

For a 4-inch connection

$265.65

 

 

For a 6-inch connection

$526.92

 

 

For a 8-inch connection

$839.01

 

 

For a 10-inch connection

$1,208.61

 

PART II

 

Water Consumption (rounded to the nearest 1000)

Rate Per 1000 Gallons

 

 

1,000 gallons or more

$3.72

 

    This table replaces and supersedes Schedule H to Appendix 13.08, as adopted through Ordinance No. 30, Series of 2019, with respect to water consumed on and after January 1, 2020.

 

Schedule I: Outside Multi-Unit Rates

 

    As provided in Section 13.08.050 and Subsection 13.08.070C, on and after January 1, 2020, the owner of each water service connection making water service available to a multi-unit facility (and/or other permitted accessory structure or use) shall pay on a monthly basis the Meter Charge as provided for in Part I of this schedule and for water consumption according to the rates set forth in Part II of this schedule.

 

PART I

 

Meter Charge (Monthly)

Amount

 

 

For a 5/8-inch connection (meter size)

$19.18

 

 

For a 3/4-inch connection

$19.18

 

 

For a 1-inch connection

$29.92

 

 

For a 1-1/2-inch connection

$56.96

 

 

For a 2-inch connection

$88.05

 

 

For a 3-inch connection

$163.62

 

 

For a 4-inch connection

$265.65

 

 

For a 6-inch connection

$526.92

 

 

For a 8-inch connection

$839.01

 

 

For a 10-inch connection

$1,208.61

 

PART II

 

Water Consumption (rounded to the nearest 1000)

Rate Per 1000 Gallons

 

 

1,000 gallons or more

$6.10

 

    This table replaces and supersedes Schedule I to Appendix 13.08, as adopted through Ordinance No. 30, Series of 2019, with respect to water consumed on and after January 1, 2020.

 

Schedule J: Group Users

 

    As provided in Section 13.08.050 and Subsection 13.08.080A, on and after January 1, 2020, each group user, including, but not necessarily limited to, the Brookside and Orchard Park water districts, shall pay on a monthly basis for water service as provided for in Part I of this schedule and for water consumption according to the rates set forth in Part II of this schedule.

 

PART I

 

Meter Charge (Monthly)

Amount

 

 

For a 5/8-inch connection (meter size)

$19.18

 

 

For a 3/4-inch connection

$19.18

 

 

For a 1-inch connection

$29.92

 

 

For a 1-1/2-inch connection

$56.96

 

 

For a 2-inch connection

$88.05

 

 

For a 3-inch connection

$163.62

 

 

For a 4-inch connection

$265.65

 

 

For a 6-inch connection

$526.92

 

 

For a 8-inch connection

$839.01

 

 

For a 10-inch connection

$1,208.61

 

PART II

 

Water Consumption (rounded to the nearest 1000)

Rate Per 1000 Gallons

 

 

Per 1,000 gallons

$3.37

 

    This table replaces and supersedes Schedule J to Appendix 13.08, as adopted through Ordinance No. 30, Series of 2019, with respect to water consumed on and after January 1, 2020.

 

Schedule K: Golf Course Rate

 

    Effective January 1, 2020, unless otherwise agreed in writing or required pursuant to contract, Shadow Hills Golf Club and Four Mile Ranch Golf Course shall pay a monthly Meter Charge as provided for in Part I of this schedule and for water consumption according to the rates set forth in Part II of this schedule.

 

PART I

 

Meter Charge (Monthly)

Amount

 

 

For a 5/8-inch connection (meter size)

$12.79

 

 

For a 3/4-inch connection

$12.79

 

 

For a 1-inch connection

$19.95

 

 

For a 1-1/2-inch connection

$37.98

 

 

For a 2-inch connection

$58.70

 

 

For a 3-inch connection

$109.08

 

 

For a 4-inch connection

$177.10

 

 

For a 6-inch connection

$351.27

 

 

For a 8-inch connection

$559.33

 

 

For a 10-inch connection

$805.74

 

PART II

 

Water Consumption (rounded to the nearest 1000)

Rate Per 1000 Gallons

 

 

1,000 gallons or more

$1.93

 

    Note: In addition to water consumption charges billed and payable in accordance with the foregoing base rate, Four Mile Ranch Golf Course shall be billed for and pay zone surcharges respecting such consumption calculated in accordance with the applicable zone surcharge rate set forth in Schedule P.

 

    This table replaces and supersedes Schedule K to Appendix 13.08, as adopted through Ordinance No. 30, Series of 2019, with respect to water consumed on and after January 1, 2020.

 

Schedule L: City Rate

 

    Effective January 1, 2020 and as contemplated in Section 13.08.080C of the Cañon City Municipal Code, this water rate shall apply to all water delivered by the Water Department to any park, cemetery, green space, public building, public facility or public grounds owned, operated and maintained by the City of Cañon City for the benefit of the inhabitants of the City and surrounding community without regard to its location within or outside the corporate limits of the City. The City shall pay on a monthly basis the Meter Charge as provided for in Part I of this schedule and for water consumption according to the rates set forth in Part II of this schedule.

 

PART I

 

Meter Charge (Monthly)

Amount

 

 

For a 5/8-inch connection (meter size)

$12.79

 

 

For a 3/4-inch connection

$12.79

 

 

For a 1-inch connection

$19.95

 

 

For a 1-1/2-inch connection

$37.98

 

 

For a 2-inch connection

$58.70

 

 

For a 3-inch connection

$109.08

 

 

For a 4-inch connection

$177.10

 

 

For a 6-inch connection

$351.27

 

 

For a 8-inch connection

$559.33

 

 

For a 10-inch connection

$805.74

 

PART II

 

Water Consumption (rounded to the nearest 1000)

Rate Per 1000 Gallons

 

 

1,000 gallons or more

$1.93

 

 

    This table replaces and supersedes Schedule L to Appendix 13.08, as adopted through Ordinance No. 30, Series of 2019, with respect to water consumed on and after January 1, 2020.

 

Schedule M: Former Lincoln Park Water District Outside Water Users

 

    Note: Unless otherwise provided in this schedule, owners of properties that are outside of the city but within the boundaries of the Former Lincoln Park Water District shall pay water rates that are equal to those payable by other “outside water users” for the same class of water use, as set forth in Schedule G, H or I of Appendix 13.08, whichever is applicable.

 

Schedule N: Bulk Water

 

    As provided in Section 13.08.090, on and after January 1, 2020, each bulk water user shall pay the following rate and additional charges, when applicable, for the purchase of water at the City’s bulk water dispensing station.

 

Water Rate:

 

Per 1,000 Gallons                                                                                           $7.85

 

Additional Charges:

 

New User Fee/Application Fee                                                                      $10.00

 

Administration Fee                                                                                         $2.00

 

    This table replaces and supersedes Schedule N to Appendix 13.08, as adopted through Ordinance No. 30, Series of 2019, with respect to water consumed on and after January 1, 2020.

 

Schedule O: Temporary Service

 

    As provided in Section 13.04.100, on and after January 1, 2020, each temporary tap user shall pay the following rate and additional charges, when applicable, for the use of water.

 

Water Rate:

 

Per 1,000 Gallons                                                                                           $7.85

Additional Charges:

 

Meter Rental per day                                                                                      $5.00

 

Set Up Fee                                                                                                   $30.00

 

Deposit may be required

 

    This table replaces and supersedes Schedule O to Appendix 13.08, as adopted through Ordinance No. 30, Series of 2019, with respect to water consumed on and after January 1, 2020.

 

Schedule P: Zone Surcharge Rates

 

    As provided in Section 13.08.130, on or after January 1, 2019, zone surcharge fees for each surcharge zone shall be as follows:

 

Applicable Zone

Rate

 

 

Zone I(A)

$0.82/1,000 gallons

 

 

Zone I(B)

$0.57/1,000 gallons

 

 

Zone I(C)

$0.57/1,000 gallons

 

 

Zone II

$1.16/1,000 gallons

 

 

Zone III

$1.79/1,000 gallons

 

    This table replaces and supersedes Schedule P to Appendix 13.08, as adopted through Ordinance No. 23, Series of 2014, with respect to water consumed on and after January 1, 2019.

 

Schedule Q: Impact Fees

 

    As provided in Section 13.08.140, on or after January 1, 2008, each impact fees shall be as follows:

 

    There is hereby established one water impact zone within the City’s water service area, to be designated as Impact Area I.

 

    Impact Area I -includes territory within which water users receive water that is east of the west line of Rhodes Ave projected north and south to the limits of the service area.

Connection Size

Amount

 

 

3/4-inch or under

$155.00

 

 

1-inch

$259.00

 

 

1-1/2 inch

$513.00

 

 

2-inch

$826.00

 

 

3-inch

$1,654.00

 

 

4-inch

$2,584.00

 

 

6-inch

$5,167.00

 

 

8-inch

$8,267.00

 

Schedule R: Water Department Service Fees

 

    As provided in Section 13.08.150, on or after January 1, 2020, service fees shall be as follows:

 

Service

Amount

 

 

Turn Off of Water Service

$50.00

 

$60.00 After normal business of hours.

 

$60.00 Delinquent accounts.

 

 

Turn On of Water Service

$50.00

 

$60.00 After normal business of hours.

 

 

Final Readings of Water Meters

$15.00

 

 

Rereading of Water Meters

$10.00 first time

 

Additional $10.00 for every subsequent read within the same billing cycle.

 

 

Testing of Water Meters

$135.00

 

 

Shut Off Notice

$10.00

 

 

Late Charge

$5.00/month or a monthly interest charge equal to 1-1/2% of the amount owed as of the due date, whichever is greater.

 

 

Other Services

$50.00/Hour

 

This table replaces and supersedes Schedule R to Appendix 13.08, as adopted through Ordinance No. 30, Series of 2019, with respect to water consumed on and after January 1, 2020.

 

Schedule S: Transmountain Water Rates

 

    As provided in Section 13.08.080, on and after January 1, 2019, each user of transmountain water shall pay the following rate for the purchase of transmountain water from the City.

 

Water Rate:

 

Per 1,000 Gallons                                                                                           $1.19

 

    This table replaces and supersedes Schedule S to Appendix 13.08, as adopted through Ordinance No. 23, Series of 2014, with respect to water consumed on and after January 1, 2019.

Chapter 13.10 STORMWATER UTILITY*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 24-2020 and 4-2021. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


13.10.010 Title.
    This chapter shall be known and cited as the Stormwater Utility Ordinance of Cañon City. (Ord. 22-2004 § 1)

 

13.10.020 Findings, legislative intent and purpose, and authority.
    A.  The City Council finds and determines that:

    1.   Due to its general terrain and geographical location, property within the city is particularly subject to damage from floods and stormwater which, from time to time, overflow existing watercourses and stormwater facilities; and that the City’s existing stormwater facilities are inadequate to control such overflow and other runoff or to prevent flooding in many parts of the city during and following certain storm events.

    2.   The City maintains a system of storm and surface water management facilities including, but not limited to, inlets, conduits, manholes, channels, ditches, drainage easements, retention and detention basins, and other components.

    3.   The stormwater system in the city needs regular maintenance and improvements.

    4.   Water quality is degrading due to erosion and the discharge of nutrients, metals, oil, grease, toxic materials, and other substances into and through the stormwater system.

    5.   The City is currently permitted, through the Colorado Water Quality Control Act, Colorado Stormwater Discharge Permit System, to discharge stormwater to state waters, provided that six (6) minimum measures are implemented within the next few years. The six (6) minimum measures include: (a) public education; (b) public involvement; (c) elimination of illicit discharges; (d) construction site erosion control; (e) post construction monitoring; and (f) municipal operations. There is a cost involved with this unfunded mandate to implement these measures.

    6.   The public health, safety, and welfare is adversely affected by poor ambient water quality and flooding that results from inadequate management of both the quality and quantity of stormwater.

    7.   All real property in the city either uses or benefits from the maintenance of the stormwater system.

    8.   The extent of use of the stormwater system by each property is dependant on factors that influence runoff, including land use and the amount of impervious surface on the property.

    9.   The costs of improving, maintaining, operating, and monitoring the stormwater system should be allocated, to the extent practicable, to all property owners based on the impact of runoff from the impervious areas of their property on the stormwater management system.

    10. Management of the stormwater system to protect the public health, safety, and welfare requires adequate revenues and it is in the interest of the public to finance stormwater management adequately with a user charge system that is reasonable and equitable so that each user of the system pays to the extent to which such user contributes to the need for it.

    B.   It is the intent and purpose of the City Council in enacting this chapter:

    1.   To promote the public health, safety and welfare by permitting the movement of emergency vehicles during storm or flooding periods and by minimizing storm and flood losses and the inconvenience and damage resulting from uncontrolled stormwater runoff in the city;

    2.   To provide for the establishment and implementation of a master drainage plan for effective stormwater and flood management;

    3.   To establish a Stormwater Utility Enterprise to coordinate, design, construct, manage, operate and maintain the stormwater and flood management systems and stormwater projects and facilities;

    4.   To establish reasonable stormwater utility service charges based on the use and availability of stormwater facilities; and

    5.   To encourage and facilitate urban water resources management techniques including without limitation, detention of floods and stormwater runoff, minimizing the need to construct stormwater facilities, reduction of pollution, and enhancement of the environment.

    C.   The City’s authority for the establishment of a Stormwater Utility Enterprise and a Stormwater Utility Fund and for the adoption of a system of charges to fund the City’s Stormwater Utility Enterprise is derived from Section 6 of Article XX of the Colorado Constitution, Sections 3, 4 and 5 of Article I and Subsection 5(F) of Article VII of the Charter of Cañon City and Part 4 of Article 35 of Title 31, C.R.S. (Ord. 22-2004 § 1)

 

13.10.030 Definitions.
    For purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:

    A.  “Base Rate” means the base rate per square foot of impervious surface that is used to calculate stormwater management fee and stormwater impact fee charges for individual properties. The base rates shall be calculated as provided in Sections 13.10.065 and 13.10.068.

    B.   “Base Unit” means one square foot.

    C.   “Combined Utility Statement” means any single billing statement used by the City to periodically bill property owners for: (1) water service charges pursuant to Chapter 13.08; and (2) stormwater management fees pursuant to this chapter.

    D.  “Developed Property” means real property, which has been altered from its natural state by the addition of any improvements such as buildings, structures, parking lots, driveways or other impervious area.

    E.   “Director” means the City Administrator or the City Administrator’s designee.

    F.   “Fiscal Year” means January 1 of a calendar year to December 31 of the same calendar year.

    G.  “Grant” means a cash payment of public funds or contribution of money made directly to the stormwater utility enterprise by a state or local governmental entity, or district, which is not required to be repaid. “Grant” does not include public funds paid or advanced to the stormwater utility enterprise in consideration for the provision of any goods, services, facilities, rights or interest by the stormwater utility enterprise to a state or local governmental entity, or district, nor does “grant” include refunds made in the current or next fiscal year, gifts, any payments directly or indirectly from federal funds or earnings on federal funds whether or not the state or local governmental entity, or district acts as a conduit for such payments, collections for another governmental entity, and any other payments or revenue excluded from the definition of “grant” under the Colorado constitution or law.

    H.  “Impervious Surface Area” means the number of square feet of horizontal surface covered by buildings and other impervious surfaces. All building measurements shall be made between exterior faces of walls, foundations, columns or other means of support or enclosure.

    I.    “Impervious Surface” means a surface area which is compacted or covered with material that is resistant to infiltration by water, including, but not limited to, most conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, patios, driveways, parking lots, and any other oiled, compacted, or other surface which impedes the natural infiltration of surface water.

    J.    “Improvement” means any works of man or manmade change to real property including, but not limited to, buildings or other similar structures, streets, parking lots, driveways, patio areas, roofs, sidewalks, storage areas, paving and compacted surfaces.

    K.  “New Development” means any improvement to property that is associated with and/or requires a City building permit or development approval after April 1, 2018.

    L.   “Property Owner” means the property owner of record of any lot or parcel against which stormwater management fees may be levied, as listed in the records of the Cañon City Water Department, or if not so listed, as listed in the records of the Park Center Water District, if available. If a property owner’s identity is neither listed nor available in such Water Department or District records, the records of the Fremont County Treasurer shall be used to identify the property owner. A property owner includes any individual, corporation, firm, partnership, or group of individuals acting as a unit, and any trustee, receiver, or personal representative.

    M.  “Revenue Bonds” means bonds, notes or other obligations lawfully, issued or otherwise contracted for, payable from the revenues derived or to be derived from the functions, services, benefits, or facilities of the stormwater utility enterprise or from other available funds of the stormwater utility enterprise.

    N.  “Revenue Requirement” means the “Operating Revenue” projected for stormwater management programs of the stormwater utility enterprise, as set forth in the City’s annual budgets for the stormwater utility fund.

    O.  “Runoff” means that part of snowfall, rainfall or other stormwater which is not absorbed, transpirated, evaporated, or left in surface depressions and which then flows controlled or uncontrolled into a watercourse or body of water.

    P.   “Stormwater Facilities” means any one or more of the various devices used in the collection, disposition, or treatment of storm, flood or surface drainage waters, including manmade structures and natural watercourses for the conveyance of runoff, such as: conduits and appurtenant features, canals, ditches, streams, gulches, gullies, flumes, culverts, streets, curbs, gutters, detention areas, pumping stations, pipes and related equipment and appurtenances; all extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions and alterations thereof and any and all rights or interest in such stormwater facilities.

    Q.  “Stormwater Impact Fee” means the one-time charge established under Section 13.10.066 and assessed against new development to recover costs associated with the value of the City stormwater facilities.

    R.   “Stormwater Management” means the planning, design, construction, regulation, improvement, repair, maintenance, and operation of stormwater facilities and the stormwater system, and also includes the establishment and operation of programs relating to water, flood plains, flood control, grading, erosion, tree conservation, and sediment control including, but not necessarily limited to, programs required by federal, state or local law, rule, regulation or permit.

    S.   “Stormwater Management Fee” or “Fee” means the monthly service charge payable by property owners that is established under Section 13.10.050 and assessed against lots, parcels or pieces of developed property to fund stormwater management programs in the city.

    T.   “Stormwater Management Programs” means and includes all programs established, operated, maintained and/or participated in by the City for purposes of stormwater management, including specifically any programs required by federal, state or local law, rule, regulation or permit.

    U.  “Stormwater System” means the system or network of stormwater facilities located in whole or in part within the city, including, but not limited to, inlets, conduits, manholes, channels, ditches, drainage easements, retention and detention basins, infiltration facilities and other components, as well as all natural waterways.

    V.  “Undeveloped Property” means any property which has no impervious surface area and, for purposes of this chapter, shall also mean all public streets owned or maintained by the City or State of Colorado and all City parks.

    W.  “Water” means any stormwater, surface water, snow melt or ground water. (Ord. 6-2018 §§ 2, 3; Ord. 15-2005 § 1: Ord. 22-2004 § 1)

 

13.10.040 Stormwater utility enterprise.
    A.  There is hereby created a stormwater utility in the city.

    B.   The stormwater utility shall constitute an enterprise empowered to coordinate, design, conduct, manage, operate and maintain the stormwater and flood management systems and stormwater facilities of the City, and to implement the provisions of this chapter. The stormwater utility enterprise is authorized to issue its own revenue bonds. The enterprise shall be wholly owned by the City and operated in accordance with the Charter, ordinances and resolutions of the City and other applicable law.

    C.   The City Council shall act ex officio as the governing body of the stormwater utility enterprise.

    D.  The stormwater utility enterprise shall at all times and in all ways conduct its affairs so as to continue to qualify as a “water activity enterprise” within the meaning of Section 37-45.1-102, C.R.S., and as an “enterprise” within the meaning of Section 20 of Article X of the Colorado Constitution. Specifically, but not by way of limitation, the stormwater utility enterprise is not authorized and shall not receive ten percent (10%) or more of its annual revenue in grants. So long as the stormwater utility enterprise continues to qualify as a “water activity enterprise” and as an “enterprise,” the stormwater utility enterprise and all spending and revenue thereof shall not be subject to Section 20 of Article X of the Colorado Constitution. (Ord. 22-2004 § 1)

 

13.10.050 Stormwater management fee.
    Beginning on December 1, 2005, a monthly stormwater management fee shall be imposed upon all lots and parcels of developed property in the city to fund the City’s stormwater management programs. (Ord. 15-2005 § 2)

 

13.10.060 Classification of property for purposes of determination of the stormwater utility fee and calculation of stormwater management fees.
    A.  For purposes of determining the stormwater management fee, all properties in the city are classified into one of the two following classes:

    1.   Developed property; or

    2.   Undeveloped property.

    B.   Developed Property. As to each lot or parcel of developed property, the monthly stormwater management fee will be calculated by multiplying the amount of impervious surface area of such property (expressed in square feet) times the base rate.

    C.   No Fee for Undeveloped Property. Undeveloped property shall not be charged a stormwater management fee. (Ord. 15-2005 § 2)

 

13.10.065 Base rate.
    A.  The City Council, by ordinance, shall establish and from time to time modify the monthly base rate to be used in calculating the stormwater management fee for individual properties. The base rate shall be established at an amount intended to reasonably ensure the availability of funds needed to cover the costs of stormwater management programs in the City in accordance with the operating revenue requirement for these programs, as reflected in the City’s annual budgets for the stormwater utility fund.

    B.   The base rate shall be calculated by: (1) dividing the revenue requirement for stormwater management programs of the City for the applicable fiscal year by the aggregate of impervious surface area on developed property within the city existing at the time the base rate is calculated; and (2) by dividing the quotient thereof by twelve (12).

    C.   City Council shall re-calculate the base rate no less often than once annually. Such re-calculation shall be conducted no later than sixty (60) days following the adoption of each annual budget. (Ord. 15-2005 § 2)

 

13.10.066 Stormwater impact fee.
    Effective April 1, 2018, a Stormwater Impact Fee shall be imposed upon all new development in the city to recover capital costs of the City’s stormwater facilities. (Ord. 6-2018 § 4)

 

13.10.067 Calculation of stormwater impact fees.
    For new development, the Stormwater Impact Fee will be calculated by multiplying the amount of new impervious surface area of such property (expressed in square feet) times base rate. (Ord. 6-2018 § 4)

 

13.10.068 Base rate—Stormwater impact fee.
    A.  The City Council, by ordinance, shall establish, and from time to time modify, the base rate to be used in calculating the Stormwater Impact Fee for new development. The base rate shall be established at an amount intended to recover costs associated with the value of the City’s stormwater facilities, as reflected in the City’s annual budgets for the stormwater utility fund.

    B.   The base rate shall be calculated by dividing the value of the City stormwater facilities by the aggregate of impervious surface area on developed property within the city existing at the time the base rate is calculated. (Ord. 6-2018 § 4)

 

13.10.069 Collection of stormwater impact fees.
    Payment of stormwater impact fees shall be due at time of a building permit application for new development. A building permit will not be issued if the Stormwater Impact Fee is not paid. (Ord. 6-2018 § 4)

 

13.10.070 Stormwater utility fund.
    A.  There is hereby created pursuant to Section 5(F) of Article VII of the Charter a special fund designated as the “stormwater utility fund” which shall be separate and segregated from all other City funds. All stormwater management fees paid and collected pursuant to this chapter shall be credited and deposited into the stormwater utility fund. Monies in the stormwater utility fund shall not be transferred therefrom to any other account of the City or used for any purpose other than as set forth in Subsection B of this section.

    B.   Funds on deposit in the stormwater utility fund and income earned thereon shall be used only for the following purposes:

    1.   The acquisition by gift, purchase or condemnation of real and personal property, and interests therein, necessary to construct, operate, and maintain stormwater facilities;

    2.   All costs of administration and implementation of the City’s stormwater management program, including the establishment of reasonable operating and capital reserves to meet unanticipated or emergency stormwater management requirements;

    3.   Engineering and design, debt service and related financing expenses, construction costs for new facilities, and enlargement or improvement of existing facilities;

    4.   Operation and maintenance of the stormwater system;

    5.   Monitoring, surveillance, and inspection of stormwater control devices;

    6.   Water quality monitoring and water quality programs;

    7.   Retrofitting developed areas for pollution control;

    8.   Inspection and enforcement activities;

    9.   Billing and administrative costs;

    10. Implementation of the six (6) minimum measures required under the Colorado stormwater discharge permit.

    11. Other activities which are either mandated or reasonably required to manage stormwater runoff within the city or to comply with applicable federal and state laws, rules and regulations which regulate the flow, treatment and discharge of runoff into the waters of the United States or the waters of the State of Colorado. (Ord. 22-2004 § 1)

 

13.10.080 Stormwater utility enterprise debt issuance.
    A.  The stormwater utility enterprise is authorized to issue revenue bonds for the payment or other financing of eligible project costs or for the purpose of refunding any revenue bonds issued for such purpose. Such bonds shall be authorized by ordinance adopted by the City Council in the same manner as other ordinances of the City and, when required by the Charter or ordinances of the City, by an approving vote of the registered electors of the City at a general or special election called and conducted in accordance with the requirements of applicable law.

    B.   The terms, conditions, and details of revenue bonds, the procedures related thereto, and the refunding thereof shall be set forth in the ordinance authorizing the revenue bonds. Each bond issued under this section shall recite in substance that said bond, including the interest thereon, is payable from the revenues and other available funds of the stormwater utility enterprise pledged for the payment thereof. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, such revenue bonds may be issued to mature at such times not beyond thirty (30) years from their respective issue dates, shall bear interest at such rates and shall be sold at private or public sale at, above, or below the principal amount thereof, all as shall be determined by the City Council. The powers provided in this section shall be in addition to and shall not modify, limit, or affect the powers conferred by any other law, either directly or indirectly.

    C.   The City may pledge all or any portion of the stormwater utility fund, including revenues anticipated to be collected, to the payment of principal, interest, premiums, if any, and reserves for revenue bonds, issued for the payment or other financing of any of the activities of this chapter, including but not limited to eligible project costs, or for the purpose of refunding any revenue bonds issued for such purposes. (Ord. 22-2004 § 1)

 

13.10.090 Billing and collection of stormwater management fees—Combined utility statement.
    A.  Stormwater management fees shall be determined on a monthly basis as a monthly charge, but shall be billed to the owners of the affected property according to the provisions of this section.

    B.   Combined Utility Statements.

    1.   In all situations where a property within the city is both connected to the City’s water distribution system and assessed stormwater management fees, the City shall bill for water charges and stormwater management fees on a single “combined utility statement” that will show water service charges, if any, and stormwater management fees for the applicable billing period or cycle.

    2.   When billed on a combined utility statement, stormwater management fees will be due and payable on the same date as water service charges for the same property are due and payable. Such due date shall be shown on the combined utility statement.

    3.   In situations where water charges for the same property are billed and payable quarterly, stormwater management fees respecting such property also will be billed and payable quarterly. The amount thereof shall be calculated by multiplying the monthly stormwater management fee times three (3).

    4.   In situations where water charges with respect to a property are billed and payable monthly, the monthly stormwater management fee for the same property shall be billed and payable monthly.

    5.   Payments from owners of properties who receive a combined utility statement (reflecting both stormwater management fees and water service charges) will first be applied to satisfy all outstanding stormwater management fees and then to reduce or satisfy, as the case may be, outstanding charges for water service.

    6.   Delinquencies Regarding Charges on Combined Utility Statements.

    a.   As to any property with respect to which an unpaid stormwater management fee billed on a combined utility statement becomes delinquent, the Director of Finance shall have the authority to order water service to be shut off, provided that notice to the owner or occupant of such property shall first be given in the same manner as is provided for in Section 13.08.150 with respect to unpaid water charges.

    b.   If water service is turned off pursuant to the authority granted in this subparagraph, water service shall not be restored until all past due stormwater management fees, water charges, penalties and interest, including turn off and turn on fees, have been paid in full. This remedy shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other remedy available to the City with respect to the collection of unpaid stormwater management fees and/or water charges.

    c.   Delinquent stormwater management fees shall be added to unpaid water charges, if any, for purposes of calculating late charges and/or penalties associated with any delinquent balance owing with respect to charges on a combined utility statement.

    C.   The procedures set forth in paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 of this subsection shall apply in situations where the City does not provide water service to a developed lot or parcel located within the city.

    1.   Stormwater management fees will be billed to the owner of each such lot or parcel on a quarterly basis.

    2.   Payment of each stormwater management fee billed pursuant to this Subsection C shall be due thirty (30) days following the date of each billing statement.

    3.   The due date for payment of the fee shall be reflected on each billing statement.

    4.   Stormwater management fees shall be considered delinquent if not paid on or before their due date.

    5.   A delinquent charge of five dollars ($5.00), or one and one-half percent (1.5%) of the unpaid fee, per month, whichever is greater, shall be assessed upon fees not paid in full on or before five p.m. on the due date for such payment, as shown on the statement.

    D.  The obligation to pay stormwater management fees shall not be affected by the failure of the owner to receive a bill or statement for such fees, provided that such statements are actually mailed to the property owner at the address of the affected property or at such other mailing address as might be designated by such owner in writing.

    E.   Any stormwater management fee billed by the City shall constitute a lien against the property against which the stormwater management fee was assessed. Such liens shall attach on the due date of the fee and shall remain until the fee and all other charges related to delinquency in the payment of the fee have been paid in full. (Ord. 15-2005 § 2)

 

13.10.095 Corrections or modifications of fees—Grounds and documentation.
    A.  Property owners may request corrections, revisions or modifications of the stormwater management fee assessed against their developed property. Such requests must be made in writing and must be based upon one or more of the following grounds:

    1.   Incorrect classification of the property for purposes of determining the fee;

    2.   Errors in the square footage of the impervious surface area of the property;

    3.   Mathematical errors in calculating the fee to be applied to the property; and

    4.   Errors in the identification of the property owner of a property subject to the fee.

    B.   The Director shall make a determination with respect to any such request within thirty (30) days following his or her receipt of the property owner’s completed written request for correction of the fee.

    C.   A property owner must comply with all rules and procedures adopted by the City when submitting a request for correction of the fee and must provide all information necessary for the Director to make a determination on a request for correction of the fee.

    D.  If a property owner alleges an error under Subsection (A)(2) and requests a hearing pursuant to Section 13.10.100(C), the request for hearing must include a certification by a registered engineer or professional land surveyor of the impervious surface area of the property before a hearing date will be set. Failure to comply with the provisions of this subsection shall be grounds for denial of the request. (Ord. 15-2005 § 2)

 

13.10.100 Administration and review.
    A.  The administration of the provisions of this chapter is vested in and shall be exercised by the Director who may prescribe forms and rules and regulations in conformity with this chapter for the proper administration and enforcement of this chapter. The Director may delegate the administration of this chapter, or any part thereof, to duly qualified persons in the Department of Public Works, the City Engineer’s office and/or the Finance Department.

    B.   Every decision or determination of the Director shall be in writing and notice thereof shall be served upon or mailed by first class mail, postage prepaid to the affected person at his or her address shown on the records of the City. Service by first class mail as provided herein shall be conclusive evidence of service of such decision or determination. The decision or determination of the Director shall be final and conclusive upon the affected person unless he or she timely files a petition for hearing.

    C.   If the Director has delegated administration pursuant to subsection A above, any person aggrieved by any decision or determination of the designee may appeal to the City Administrator for a hearing on revision or modification of such decision or determination no later than thirty (30) days after the date of the decision by the designee pursuant to Section 2.52.010(C) of this Code.

    D.  If the Director has not delegated administration pursuant to subsection A above, any person aggrieved by any decision or determination of the designee may appeal to the City Council for a hearing on revision or modification of such decision or determination no later than ten (10) days after the date of the decision by the designee pursuant to Section 2.52.010(A) of this Code. (Ord. 18-2020 § 7; Ord. 22-2004 § 1)

 

13.10.110 Nonliability of City.
    Runoff may occur which exceeds the capacity of City’s stormwater facilities. This chapter does not imply that real property liable for the charges and fees established herein will be free from runoff or flood damage. Nor shall this chapter create any liability on the part of, or cause of action against, the City or any officer or employee thereof for runoff or flood damage. This chapter does not purport to reduce the need or necessity for obtaining flood insurance. (Ord. 22-2004 § 1)

 

13.10.120 Reserved.
 

13.10.130 Cooperation with the County.
    A.  The City shall cooperate with Fremont County in providing stormwater facilities in stormwater basins, or parts thereof, extending from unincorporated areas of the county into the city and from the city into unincorporated areas of the county, and in general to carryout the drainage plans, if any, developed therefor.

    B.   The City expresses its willingness to enter into an intergovernmental agreement with Fremont County to establish a joint Stormwater Technical Committee to review and recommend joint stormwater facilities, priorities and cost-sharing thereof to City Council and Board of County Commissioners of Fremont County, Colorado and to explore the viability of jointly creating a Stormwater Utility Authority. (Ord. 22-2004 § 1)

 

13.10.140 2008 stormwater base rate fee.
    Effective January 1, 2008, the monthly “base rate” to be used to calculate stormwater management fees for individual developed properties in the City is adjusted to $0.001768 per square foot of impervious surface area. An appendix reflecting this monthly base rate shall be attached to and incorporated into this chapter as “Appendix 13.10-2008” (replacing and superseding Appendix 13.10-A). Such adjusted base rate shall remain effective until the Council of Cañon City, by subsequent ordinance, adopts a different base rate in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 13.10 of the Cañon City Municipal Code. (Ord. 29-2007 § 1)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Appendix 13.10 Stormwater base rate schedules.
 

Schedule A: Base Rate—Stormwater Management Fees

    As provided in Chapter 13.10, on or after April 1, 2020, Stormwater Management Fees shall be as follows:

 

$0.004285/square foot of impervious surface

 

Schedule B: Base Rate—Stormwater Impact Fees

    As provided in Chapter 13.10, on or after April 1, 2018, Stormwater Impact Fees shall be as follows:

 

$0.2469/square foot of impervious surface

 

(Ord. 1-2020 § 1; Ord. 30-2018 § 1; Ord. 6-2018 § 5; Ord. 26-2008 § 1)

Chapter 13.12 CESSPOOLS, SEPTIC TANKS AND GREASE TRAPS
13.12.010 Privy vault, cesspool and septic tank restrictions.
    A.  No person, firm or corporation shall use or maintain any privy vault, cesspool or septic tank for the storage or disposal of human excrement on any premises within the boundaries of any established sanitary sewer district in any case where a public sewer is available and accessible to the property.

    B.   A sewer shall be deemed available to the property for the purposes of this chapter when it is under the control, maintenance and supervision of the City, in working order, may be reached without crossing private property owned or controlled by a person or persons other than the property owner, and when connection thereto from the property can be made in such manner as to adequately carry the sewage from the property.

    C.   A sewer shall be deemed accessible, for the purposes of this chapter, when connection can be made thereto by constructing a sewer line from an available public sewer, or another sewer belonging to the owner connected thereto, a distance of one hundred and fifty (150) feet or less.

    D.  Provided, that all persons, firms or corporations maintaining any such vault, cesspool or septic tank, upon the date when such public sewer shall become available and accessible to the property, shall have six (6) months within which to discontinue the use of such vault, cesspool or septic tank and provide sewer connection to the property. (Prior code § 13.16.010)

 

13.12.020 Grease traps required when.
    Waste pipes from kitchen sinks in any restaurant or cooking establishment shall run separately to a grease trap, as provided in the State Plumbing Code, provided that the Superintendent of the Water and Sewer Department may require any commercial, manufacturing or processing establishment which, in his opinion, is discharging into the sewers any substance likely to obstruct the sewer lines, to install a grease trap as provided in the aforesaid State Plumbing Code; provided, further, that no grease trap shall be required for private residences of any type, or apartment houses where no cooking is done in excess of the ordinary family requirements; but where such premises now employ or continue using grease traps in connection therewith, they shall be subject to all existing or future ordinances pertaining thereto. (Prior code § 13.16.100)

 

13.12.030 Vault cleaners—Permit required.
    No person, firm or corporation shall clean, empty, drain or otherwise remove, carry away or dispose of the contents of any grease trap, privy vault, cesspool or septic tank except a person, firm or corporation holding a vault cleaner’s or scavenger’s permit from the City authorizing such person, firm or corporation so to do. (Prior code § 13.16.040(B))

 

13.12.040 Vault cleaners—Schedule of charges.
    No person, firm or corporation shall make any charge for cleaning or emptying any grease trap, privy vault, cesspool or septic tank in excess of the maximum or less than the minimum rates set forth in this section:

    A.  Grease Traps.

    1.   Grease traps of a size not in excess of three and one-half feet in depth and two feet in diameter and not lying beneath a paved walk or driveway or beneath a building, a maximum charge of.

    a.   Six dollars and fifty cents for grease traps lying not more than eight inches beneath the surface;

    b.   Seven dollars and fifty cents for grease traps lying more than eight inches but less than two feet beneath the surface.

    2.   Grease traps in excess of the size described in subparagraph Ala above, grease traps lying two feet or more beneath the surface, and grease traps lying beneath a paved walk or driveway or beneath a building, a charge not to exceed a sum equal to five dollars for each one-half hour or fraction thereof, of time employed in such work.

    B.   Privy Vaults, Cesspools and Septic Tanks. A charge not to exceed a sum equal to five dollars per ton for water removed and ten dollars per ton of sludge removed; provided, however, a minimum charge of twenty dollars shall be made in any event. (Prior code § 13.16.080)

 

13.12.050 Inspections—Scheduled when.
    A.  All grease traps in sewer outlets used by one family only shall be inspected at intervals of from fifteen to twenty months, and all other grease traps at intervals of from five to seven months, according to the convenience of the inspector.

    B.   All privy vaults and cesspools shall be inspected at intervals of from twenty-four to thirty months, according to the convenience of the inspector. (Prior code § 13.16.020)

 

13.12.060 Inspections—Authority.
    All inspections required shall be made by an inspector appointed by the Council, and whose compensation shall be fixed by the Council. (Prior code § 13.16.040 (A))

 

13.12.070 Inspections—Fee and procedures.
    A.  The owner of any premises on which is maintained a grease trap, privy vault or cesspool, shall pay to the City an inspection fee of fifty cents for each grease trap having a covering of less than eight inches, and one dollar and fifty cents for each inspection of any other grease trap, or any privy vault or cesspool; provided that, if any such grease trap, privy vault or cesspool shall be ordered emptied and cleaned by the owner or person in control of the property at or about the time such inspection is made, no inspection charge shall be made.

    B.   The inspector or vault cleaner, as the case may be, shall restore the apparatus and all soil and sod thereon to its former condition after each inspection or cleaning. (Prior code § 13.16.090)

 

13.12.080 Inspections—Interference unlawful.
    No person, firm or corporation owning or controlling any property shall prevent, in any manner, or impose conditions upon, the inspection of any grease trap, privy vault or cesspool. (Prior code § 13.16.050)

 

13.12.090 Inspections—Report—Nuisance conditions.
    A.  Upon making an inspection provided for in this chapter, the inspector shall make out a statement, on a printed form approved by the City Administrator, in duplicate, upon which shall be written:

    1.   The date of the inspection;

    2.   The name of the owner of the property;

    3.   The street number of the property;

    4.   The apparatus inspected (i.e., whether grease trap, cesspool or privy vault);

    5.   The condition of the apparatus inspected; and

    6.   Whether the same is in need of cleaning, emptying or repair, in the opinion of the inspector.

    C.   The inspector shall sign his name on each duplicate and deliver one duplicate to the owner or person in control of the property and the other to the finance officer.

    D.  If the owner or person controlling the use of the property fails, for a period of ten days after an inspection and the receipt of the inspector’s report as aforesaid, to make arrangements for cleaning, emptying or repair of a grease trap, cesspool or privy vault required to be cleaned, emptied or repaired, such owner or other person controlling the use of the property shall be and be deemed to be guilty of maintaining a nuisance, and guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed to be committed for each forty-eight hours expiring after the expiration of such ten-day period during which such nuisance is maintained. (Prior code § 13.16.060)

 

13.12.100 Nuisance—Conditions designated.
    No person, firm or corporation shall use or maintain, or permit to remain on premises owned or controlled by such person, firm or corporation, any privy vault, cesspool or septic tank for the disposal of human excrement, or any grease trap, within the city which shall be in a foul, leaking or otherwise defective condition and a menace to public health, or which shall be filled to such extent that it has become a menace to the public health, or no longer efficient in serving the purpose for which it was installed or in use. Grease traps, cesspools, septic tanks and privy vaults found to be in any such condition shall be and be deemed to be nuisances. (Prior code § 13.16.030)

 

13.12.110 Nuisance—Abatement costs.
    The city shall have authority to abate any nuisance defined in this chapter by any appropriate means. If such abatement shall consist of cleaning, emptying or repair of any such grease trap, cesspool, septic tank or privy vault, or when such cleaning, emptying or repair is ordered by the owner or person controlling the property, and such owner or person fails to pay the charges direct to the vault cleaner, the cost thereof or charges therefor shall become due and payable with the next installment of water rent for the premises, and the City shall have the same lien and remedies for enforcing payment thereof as is provided by city ordinance for the collection of water rents. (Prior code § 13.16.070)

 

13.12.120 Discontinued facilities to be filled.
    Whenever any grease trap, privy vault or cesspool is discontinued, such grease trap, privy vault or cesspool shall be cleaned to the bottom and filled up with earth or other suitable material; and such work shall be under the supervision of the Superintendent of the Water and Sewer Department. (Prior code § 13.16.120)

 

13.12.130 Burial of wastes prohibited where.
    No night soil or grease trap or cesspool matter shall be deposited or buried in or on any premises within the city limits of this city. (Prior code § 13.16.110)

 

13.12.140 Violation—Report by inspector.
    The inspector shall make report from time to time of all violations of this chapter to the City Administrator. (Prior code § 13.16.130)

 

13.12.150 Violation—Misdemeanor.
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter, or maintaining any nuisance, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 13.16.140)

Chapter 13.16 UTILITY RATE CASES
13.16.010 City intervention in rate cases authorized when.
    The City Council shall cause the City to formally intervene, both for itself and its residents and citizens, with the Public Utilities Commission of the state, or such successor agencies as may be designated, in all rate cases initiated by utility companies holding franchise agreements with the City, for the purpose of determining whether the proposed rates are lawful, just, reasonable, nonprejudicial, nonpreferential and nondiscriminatory. (Prior code § 13.20.010)

 

13.16.020 Attorney’s services authorized when.
    The City Council, if there is substantial doubt as to whether the rate request is lawful, just, reasonable, nonprejudicial, nonpreferential or nondiscriminatory, shall arrange the services of a qualified attorney to represent the interests of local consumers in such rate cases. (Prior code § 13.20.020)

 

13.16.030 Appropriation of funds.
    The City Council shall annually budget a sum equal to five percent of the utility franchise fees collected during the previous fiscal year for the purpose of representing local consumer interests in rate cases regulated by this chapter, with any unexpended portion of this sum being released to the City’s general fund at the end of each fiscal year. (Prior code § 13.20.030)

Chapter 13.18 DUTY OF FRANCHISEES TO REIMBURSE THE CITY FOR COSTS INCURRED BY THE CITY IN INVESTIGATING, NEGOTIATING AND “PROVING FRANCHISES AMENDMENTS THERETO AND PROPOSED TRANSFERS OF FRANCHISES
13.18.010 Notice and application for franchise authority.
    A.  Any entity which proposes to utilize or continue utilizing city streets, alleys, easements, rights-of-way and other public ways or places, through the construction, use, operation or placement of facilities, pipes, wires, poles or other objects and apparatus of a fixed or permanent nature, and any entity which proposes to transfer or sell its franchise, plant or system to or merge with another, or to transfer, lease or permit the use of any rights under a franchise to another (herein referred to as “transfer or sale of a franchise”), shall be required to give notice in writing to the City Administrator of the City of Cañon City of its intention and request to seek an initial award of a franchise, or the renewal of an existing franchise, or the transfer or sale of a franchise. (Said notice shall herein be referred to as an “application for franchise authority” and the entity giving the notice shall be referred to as the “applicant”.)

    B.   The application for franchise authority shall set forth the applicant’s request and the date by which the applicant desires the franchise or the transfer or sale of a franchise to become effective and shall be delivered to the City Administrator not less than four months prior to the date the applicant desires the franchise or renewal of franchise or the transfer or sale of a franchise to become effective. (Ord. 1-1991 § 1)

 

13.18.020 Duty to reimburse—Security bond.
    A.  There is hereby imposed upon an applicant the duty to reimburse and each applicant shall reimburse the City for all costs and expenses incurred by the City in negotiating and approving an initial grant or any renewal of a franchise, in investigating the reasonableness of any transfer or sale of a franchise, and in the process of approving or disapproving a franchise or a transfer or sale of a franchise, including but not limited to, city staff time and expenses, expert and consulting fees and studies, legal fees, public hearings and elections, if any (the “city’s costs”).

    B.   Each applicant shall, at the time of filing an application for franchise authority, post with the City a cash bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or other form of security acceptable to the Director of Finance as security for the payment of city’s costs (the “security bond”).

    C.   The amount of the security bond shall be determined by the Director of Finance based upon nature and purpose of the request made in the application for franchise authority and an estimate of city’s costs. The security bond shall not be less than twenty-five thousand and no/100 dollars if an election is not required, and not less than thirty-five thousand and no/100 dollars if an election is required. The City Council may waive the requirements of a security bond, in whole or in part, in its sole discretion. Failure to post the required security bond may result in a denial of the request made in the application for franchise authority. (Ord. 1-1991 § 1)

 

13.18.030 City’s accounting for expenses.
    During franchise negotiations and during the investigation and approval or disapproval process for a franchise or authority to sell or transfer a franchise, the City shall maintain an account of all expenses incurred, including, but not limited to, staff time and expenses, consulting fees, legal fees and administrative and other expenses. (Ord. 1-1991 § 1)

 

13.18.040 City’s billing statements.
    The city shall mail to the applicant periodic billing statements for all city’s costs. Said statements shall be billed to the address designated by the applicant in its application for franchise authority. Said billing statements may be mailed to the applicant at thirty-day intervals and will itemize city’s costs to date of billing. Failure of the City to mail to applicant a billing statement at any thirty-day interval shall not be deemed a waiver by the City of its right to reimbursement of all or any portion of the City’s costs. (Ord. 1-1991 § 1)

 

13.18.050 Applicant’s payments.
    Applicant shall pay all of city’s costs within thirty days of the date the City mails the billing statement. Failure to pay the City’s costs set forth in any billing statement within thirty days of mailing shall constitute a denial of applicant’s request made in the application for franchise authority and forfeiture of that amount of applicant’s security bond equal to the City’s costs set forth in the billing statement. Applicant shall remain responsible for and shall reimburse all city’s costs that exceed the amount of the security bond. (Ord. 1-1991 § 1)

 

13.18.060 Disputes—Procedure for resolution.
    A.  If the applicant disputes the reasonableness of city’s costs, it may pay under protest and seek review of the billing statement by filing a protest with the City Council within thirty days of the mailing of the billing statement. If such a protest is filed, the City Administrator or his designee and the applicant shall appear before the Director of Finance to hear the matter at a date specified. The applicant shall be notified of the hearing date by certified mail. At the hearing, the applicant may present evidence regarding the reasonableness of the charges. The applicant shall bear the burden of proof at the hearing. The City Administrator or his designee may respond to any allegations of unreasonableness.

    B.   The hearing shall be held for the sole purpose of determining the reasonableness of city’s costs. The Director of Finance is not authorized to consider any evidence challenging the City’s decision to incur the costs charged.

    C.   At the hearing, evidence may be received in the form of documents, exhibits and witness testimony. The Director of Finance shall have all powers necessary to ensure the fair and efficient conduct of the hearing, but shall not be bound by the Colorado Rules of Evidence. The hearing shall be open to the public.

    D.  The Director of Finance may recommend approval of the charges or make alterations based upon the evidence presented. The City Council, at its next regularly scheduled meeting after the Director of Finance’s recommendation, shall either approve, reject or modify the recommendation. Any action of the City Council is final. Payment by the applicant or reimbursement by the City, as the case may be, based upon the City Council’s decision must be made within seven days of the City Council’s decision. (Ord. 1-1991 § 1)

 

13.18.070 Refund of unused portion of security bond.
    Within thirty (30) days after full payment by the applicant of all of the City’s costs, the City shall return the remaining portion, if any, of applicant’s security bond. (Ord. 1-1991 § 1)

 

13.18.080 Surcharge prohibited.
    Neither the applicant’s nor the City’s costs shall be surcharged against or otherwise charged solely to the City or residents of the City. (Ord. 1-1991 § 1)

 

13.18.090 Challenges as to validity, legality or constitutionality—Expert witness and attorney fees.
    Any applicant or entity challenging the validity, legality or constitutionality of this ordinance, if unsuccessful, shall reimburse the City for all costs incurred in such litigation, including reasonable expert witness and attorney fees. (Ord. 1-1991 § 1)

 

13.18.100 Severability.
    If any section, portion or provision of this chapter is held to be invalid for any reason, the remaining sections, portions and provisions will be severable and enforceable. (Ord. 1-1991 § 1)

Title 14 (RESERVED)

Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 20-2020. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 15.04 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 15.06 INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 15.07 BUILDING PERMIT FEES
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 15.08 UNIFORM HOUSING CODE
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 15.12 INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 15.14 INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 15.20 INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 15.24 FACTORY-BUILT MANUFACTURED AND MODULAR HOMES OR STRUCTURES
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 15.40 FLOODLIGHTS
Chapter 15.42 FIRE PROTECTION AND EMS IMPACT FEE

Chapter 15.04 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 20-2020. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.04.010 Document adopted by reference—Contents.
    A.  Pursuant to Section 9 of Article XII of the Charter of the City and applicable provisions of Part 2 of Article 16 of Title 31 of the Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended, there is adopted as the building code of the City of Cañon City, by reference thereto, the International Building Code, 2006 Edition, published by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6th Floor, Washington, DC 20001 including the Chapters of the Appendix to said Code, and together with the errata sheet accompanying said International Building Code (all of which is hereinafter referred to as the “International Building Code”), all to have the same force and effect as if set forth herein in every particular.

    B.   The subject matter of the adopted Code includes comprehensive provisions and standards regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of buildings and structures, except for those certain detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings that are covered by the International Residential Code. (Ord. 11-2008 § 1)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.04.020 Copies for public use.
    At least one copy of the International Building Code, 2006 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, certified by the Mayor and the City Clerk to be a true copy, has been and is now on file in the office of the City Clerk and may be inspected by any interested person between the hours of eight a.m. and five p.m., Monday through Friday, holidays excepted. (Ord. 11-2008 § 1)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.04.030 Additions, amendments and deletions to 2006 International Building Code.
    A.  Section 101.1 is revised to read as follows:

 

      Section 101.1. Title. These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of the City of Cañon City, hereafter referred to as “this Code.”

 

    B.   Section 101.4.1 is hereby deleted in its entirety and the following section is substituted therefor:

 

      Section 101.4.1. International Existing Building Code. The provisions of these guidelines shall constitute the minimum standards for change of occupancy, alteration and repair of existing buildings and structures. These guidelines shall only be used when all other requirements as set forth in the International Building Code and other referenced codes have been exhausted.

 

      Nothing in the International Existing Building Code, as referenced in this section, shall be construed to defeat or limit the exercise of the right to elect to opt out with respect to accessibility standards set forth in Chapter 11 or Section 3409 of this Code (or both Chapter 11 and Section 3409) by any permit applicant or permit holder. (See IBC code Section 1101.4, 1101.5, 3409.1.5 and 3409.1.6).

 

    C.   Section 101.4.4 is hereby deleted in its entirety. The State of Colorado has jurisdiction over the Plumbing Code.

    D.  Section 101.4. 5 is hereby deleted in its entirety.

    E.   Section 101.4.6 is hereby deleted in its entirety. The Cañon City Area Fire Protection District has adopted and enforces within the City of Cañon City the International Fire Code.

    F.   Section 101.4.8 is added to the International Building Code to read as follows:

 

      Section 101.4.8. Conflict. In the event there shall be a conflict between the provisions of the International Building Code and the provisions of Title 17 (Zoning Ordinance) of the Cañon City Municipal Code, the provisions of Title 17 shall prevail and supersede any conflicting provisions of the International Building Code, but only to the extent necessary to resolve the conflict.

 

    G.  Section 102.4 is hereby amended by the addition of the following sentence:

      All references to the International Plumbing Code, International Private Sewage Disposal Code and the International Property Maintenance Code are hereby deleted.

 

    H.  Section 103 of the International Building Code is deleted in its entirety and the following section is substituted therefor:

 

      Section 103.       Organization and Enforcement.

 

      103.1 Creation of Enforcement Agency. There is hereby established in this jurisdiction a code enforcement agency which shall be under the administrative and operational control of the building official.

 

      103.2 Appointment. The building official shall be appointed by the City Administrator of the jurisdiction.

 

      103.3 Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the City Administrator, the building official shall have the authority to appoint technical officers, inspectors, plans examiners and other employees. Such employees shall have powers as delegated by the building official.

 

    I.    Section 105.2 of the International Building Code is deleted and the following section is substituted therefor:

 

      Section 105.2 Work Exempt from permit. A building permit shall not be required for the following:

 

      1.        One story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet;

 

      2.        Retaining walls which are not over 4 feet in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or III-A liquids;

 

      3.        Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons and the ratio of the height to diameter or width does not exceed 2 to 1;

 

      4.        Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches above adjacent grade and not over any basement or story below and are not part of an accessible route. (located entirely with property lines);

 

      5.        Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work;

 

      6.        Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery;

 

      7.        Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R, Division 3 Occupancy, in which the pool walls are entirely above grade and if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons;

 

      8.        Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural purposes and not including service systems;

 

      9.        Swings and other playground equipment accessory to detached one- and two-family dwellings.

 

      10.      Window awnings supported by an exterior wall that do not project more than 54″ from the exterior wall and do not require additional support of Group R-3 and Group U occupancies;

 

      11.      Nonfixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and partitions not over 5′9″ in height.

 

      Unless otherwise exempted, separate plumbing, electrical and mechanical permits shall be required for the above exempted items. The State of Colorado has jurisdiction over the Electrical and Plumbing Code and the gas piping section of the International Fuel Gas Code.

 

      Exemption from the permit requirements in this Code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in violation of the provisions of this Code or any other law or ordinance of this jurisdiction.

 

    J.    Section 110.2 of the International Building Code shall be amended to read as follows:

 

110.2 Certificate issued. After the building official inspects the building or structure and finds no violations of the provisions of this code or other laws that are enforced by the department of building safety, that all conditions imposed on the building permit have been satisfied and all applicable requirements of Chapters 16 and 17 of the Cañon City Municipal Code have been met, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy that contains the following:

 

    K.  Section 107.3 is hereby deleted in its entirety.

    L.   Section 108.6 of the International Building Code is hereby deleted in its entirety and the following substituted therefor:

 

      Section 108.6 Fee Refunds. The code official shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows:

 

      1.        The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected.

 

      2.        Not more than 50% of the fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this Code.

 

      3.        Not more than 50% of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan review effort has been expended.

 

      The code official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid, except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment.

 

    M.  Section 108 of the International Building Code is hereby amended by the addition of the following:

 

      Section 108.7 Fee Schedule. The building permit fee schedule shall be that as set forth in Chapter 15.07 of the Cañon City Municipal Code.

 

    N.  Section 109.3.1 of the International Building Code is deleted in its entirety and the following section is substituted therefor:

 

      Section 109.3.1. Footing and Foundation Inspection. Footing, foundation and concrete slab and underfloor inspections shall be made at the option of the permit holder by either the City of Cañon City Building Department or by the registered design professional of record responsible for the design of the foundation. Inspections performed by the engineer or architect of record shall be recorded in the format as set forth on the Cañon City Foundation Signoff Letter. If in the opinion of the Building Official it is determined that the foundation system or any of its components are complex in nature the Building Official shall require said foundation system or its components be inspected by the registered design professional of record and said inspections shall be recorded in the format as set forth above. Setbacks must be verified by the Cañon City Building Department prior to pouring of concrete.

 

      Exception: Certain residential garages and storage buildings and commercial storage buildings are not required to be designed by a registered design professional as set forth in Section 1805.1.

 

    O.  The exception to Section 109.3.5 of the International Building Code is hereby deleted.

 

    P.   Section 113.4 of the International Building Code is hereby amended to add the following notation:

 

      “See Section 15.04.040 of the Cañon City Municipal Code, Penalties.”

 

    Q.  Section 1101 International Building Code is hereby amended by the addition of the following subsection:

 

    Section 1101.3. State and Federal Requirements Which Supersede International Building Code. In addition, any State or Federal requirements which are specifically required to be enforced by the local jurisdiction shall supersede conflicting provisions of the International Building Code. These may include: The Federal Fair Housing Act, The Americans with Disabilities Act, The 1973 Rehabilitation Act and Article 5 of Title 9, Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended (containing standards for accessible housing). The Council of Cañon City shall function as the board of appeals to hear and resolve appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the Building Official regarding the application and interpretation of Article 5 of Title 9, C.R.S. See Chapter 2.52 of the Cañon City Municipal Code.

 

      Section 1101.4. Opt Out Right—Accessibility Standards.

 

      A.       Any owner required to obtain a permit under this Code, shall have the right to elect to opt out with respect to accessibility standards set forth in Chapter 11 of this Code for any project covered or to be covered by a permit.

      B.        An election to opt out may be made at or after the time the construction documents are submitted for review by delivering to the Building Official a notice of election to opt out (“Notice”) on a form provided by the Building Official.

      C.        Such Notice shall be dated and signed by the owner (or the owner’s authorized agent).

      D.       Such Notice shall contain:

      1.        A statement that the signatory on the Notice elects to opt out from the requirements of Chapter 11 of this Code;

      2.        A statement that said signatory understands and acknowledges that the project will be subject to applicable requirements of the Americans With Disabilities Act (and rules and regulations pertaining thereto, collectively “ADA”) notwithstanding the election to opt out;

      3.        A statement that the said signatory agrees to hold harmless, defend and indemnify the City of Cañon City and its officers and employees from and with respect to any claim based upon the City’s failure to enforce Chapter 11 of this Code in response to the Notice;

      4.        A statement that the signatory has provided (or will provide) a copy of the Notice to any general contractor or builder responsible for the project and to any other party considered by the owner to have a significant interest in the project;

      5.        A statement that the signatory understands, expects and agrees that the Building Official, in response to the Notice:

      i.         Will not enforce Chapter 11 with respect to the project;

      ii.        Will not inspect the work of the project for compliance with accessibility requirements set forth in Chapter 11;

      iii.       Will not withhold a certificate of occupancy for the project if it complies with all applicable code requirements other than those in Chapter 11.

      E.        A true and correct copy of any signed Notice shall be attached to the certificate of occupancy issued for the project. The original of such Notice shall be retained in the official records of the City.

      F.        All contractors, builders and owners, including those owners who elect to opt out, are encouraged by the City to adhere to the goals, intent and provisions of Chapter 11, the technical standards set forth in ANSI A117.1 and the accessibility standards provided for in the ADA.

      G.       The right to opt out provided for in this Section 1101.4 shall not be available with respect to new construction on raw ground and shall not apply with respect to the construction or installation of required infrastructure improvements, if any, that are associated with the project.

 

      Section 1101.5 Opting Out as a Means of Dispute Resolution.

 

      A.       An owner may elect to opt out with respect to Chapter 11 of this Code during the progress of the project if opting out will resolve a dispute between the owner and the Building Official (or the Building Official’s designee) regarding an accessibility requirement specified in Chapter 11. In such event, the Notice to be submitted to the Building Official shall be the same Notice as is provided for in Section 1101.4, except that the owner shall have the right to describe the disputed issue using an addendum to the form of Notice provided by the City. The right to opt out pursuant to this provision shall apply only to disputes concerning accessibility requirements set forth in Chapter 11 of this Code.

      B.        The right to opt out provided for in this Section 1101.5 shall not be available with respect to new construction on raw ground and shall not apply with respect to the construction or installation of required infrastructure improvements, if any, that are associated with the project.

 

    Q.  Section 1802.1 is hereby amended to add the following:

 

      The registered design professional shall be a geotechnical engineer or other individual with documented significant experience in this field. Such documentation shall be provided in the appropriate format from the State Board of Licensure for Architects, Engineers and Professional Land Surveyors when requested by the Cañon City Building Department.

 

    R.   Section 1802.2 of the International Building Code is hereby amended to add the following sentence:

 

      All foundation and soils investigations submitted shall be individual building site specific.

 

    S.   The exception to Section 1802.2 of the International Building Code is hereby deleted.

 

    T.   Section 1805.1 of the International Building Code is hereby amended to add the following after the first sentence of the first paragraph:

 

      The footings, foundations, floor slabs etc., shall be designed by a registered design professional and the plans depicting such professional design shall be signed, sealed and delivered to the Building Official along with the soils investigation and lab analysis required by Section 1802.1 of the International Building Code. This requirement shall not apply to one story detached residential garages and storage buildings not exceeding 800 square feet of floor area or to one story detached commercial storage buildings not exceeding 400 square feet of floor area.

 

    U.  Section 3001.2 of the International Building Code is hereby amended by the addition of the following:

 

      In the event there shall be a conflict between the International Building Code and the provisions of the Colorado Elevator and Escalator Certification Act, Article 5.5 of Title 9, C.R.S., the provisions of the Act shall prevail. In those instances the “Administrator” designated in said Act, or his or her designee, shall be solely responsible for all aspects of compliance with the Act. The City of Cañon City is not an “approved local jurisdiction” under the Act and will take no responsibility for enforcement of the Act.

 

    V.  Appendices B, D, E and F of the International Building Code are hereby deleted in their entirety.

    W.  Appendix G of the International Building Code shall read as follows:

 

      Appendix G. Requirements for flood-resistant construction shall be as set forth in the “Floodplain Regulations” as adopted by the City of Cañon City.

 

    X.  Section 3409 of the International Building Code is amended to add the following:

 

      Section 3409.1.5. Opt Out Right—Accessibility Standards for Existing Buildings.

 

      A.       Any owner required to obtain a permit under this Code, shall have the right to elect to opt out with respect to accessibility standards set forth in Section 3409 of this Code for any project within an existing building covered or to be covered by a permit.

      B.        An election to opt out may be made at or after the time the construction documents are submitted for review by delivering to the Building Official a notice of election to opt out (“Notice”) on a form provided by the Building Official.

      C.        Such Notice shall be dated and signed by the owner (or the owner’s authorized agent).

      D.       Such Notice shall contain:

      1.        A statement that the signatory on the Notice elects to opt out from the requirements of Section 3409 of this Code;

      2.        A statement that said signatory understands and acknowledges that the project will be subject to applicable requirements of the Americans With Disabilities Act (and rules and regulations pertaining thereto, collectively “ADA”) notwithstanding the election to opt out;

      3.        A statement that the said signatory agrees to hold harmless, defend and indemnify the City of Cañon City and its officers and employees from and with respect to any claim based upon the City’s failure to enforce Section 3409 of this Code in response to the Notice;

      4.        A statement that the signatory has provided (or will provide) a copy of the Notice to any general contractor or builder responsible for the project and to any other party considered by the owner to have a significant interest in the project;

      5.        A statement that the signatory understands, expects and agrees that the Building Official, in response to the Notice:

      i.         Will not enforce Section 3409 with respect to the project;

      ii.        Will not inspect the work of the project for compliance with accessibility requirements set forth in Section 3409;

      iii.       Will not withhold a certificate of occupancy for the project if it complies with all applicable code requirements other than those in Section 3409.

      E.        A true and correct copy of any signed Notice shall be attached to the certificate of occupancy issued for the project. The original of such Notice shall be retained in the official records of the City.

      F.        All contractors, builders and owners, including those owners who elect to opt out, are encouraged by the City to adhere to the goals, intent and provisions of Chapter 11 and Section 3409 of this Code, the technical standards set forth in ANSI A117.1 and the accessibility standards provided for in the ADA.

      G.       An election to opt out with respect to Section 3409 of this Code shall not relieve any permit holder and/or property owner of the obligation to construct or install required infrastructure improvements, if any, that are associated with the project.

 

      Section 3409.1.6. Opting Out as a Means of Dispute Resolution for Existing Buildings.

 

      A.       An owner may elect to opt out with respect to Section 3409 of this Code during the progress of the project if opting out will resolve a dispute between the owner and the Building Official (or the Building Official’s designee) regarding an accessibility requirement specified in Section 3409. In such event, the Notice to be submitted to the Building Official shall be the same Notice as is provided for in Section 3409.1.5 of this Code, except that the owner shall have the right to describe the disputed issue using an addendum to the form of Notice provided by the City. The right to opt out pursuant to this provision shall apply only to disputes concerning accessibility requirements set forth in Section 3409 of this Code and shall not apply with respect to the construction or installation of required infrastructure improvements, if any, that are associated with the project.

(Ord. 7-2019 § 1; Ord. 13-2012 §§ 1—5; Ord. 14-2009 § 1; Ord. 11-2008 § 1)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.04.035 Forms.
    The Building Official, with the assistance of the City Attorney, is hereby authorized to create, use, modify and/or replace any form contemplated or authorized in this Chapter 15.04, including, but not limited to, forms authorizing owners to “opt out” with respect to accessibility standards set forth in Chapter 11 and/or Section 3409 of the 2006 International Building Code, as adopted by the City. (Ord. 13-2012 § 6)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.04.040 Penalties.
    Any person who violates any provision of the International Building Code, as adopted and amended in this Chapter 15.04, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in an amount that does not exceed the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010. (Ord. 17-2013 § 53; Ord. 11-2008 § 1)

Chapter 15.06 INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 20-2020. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.06.010 Document adopted by reference—Contents.
    A.  Pursuant to Section 9 of Article XII of the Charter of the City and applicable provisions of Part 2 of Article 16 of Title 31 of the Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended, there is adopted as the one- and two-family residential building code of the City of Cañon City, by reference thereto, the International Residential Code, 2006 Edition, published by the International Code Council, 5203 Leesburg Pike, Suite 708, Falls Church, Virginia, 22041-3401, including the Chapters of the Appendix to said Code, and together with the errata sheet accompanying said International Residential Code (all of which is hereinafter referred to as the “International Residential Code”), all to have the same force and effect as if set forth herein in every particular.

    B.   The subject matter of the adopted Code includes comprehensive provisions and standards that shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, removal and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three (3) stories in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures. (Ord. 11-2008 § 2)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.06.020 Copies for public use.
    At least one copy of the International Residential Code, 2006 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, certified by the Mayor and the City Clerk to be a true copy, has been and is now on file in the office of the City Clerk and may be inspected by any interested person between the hours of eight a.m. and five p.m., Monday through Friday, holidays excepted. (Ord. 11-2008 § 2)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.06.030 Additions, amendments and deletions to 2006 International Residential Code.
    A.  Section R101.1 is revised to read as follows:

 

      R101.1. Title. These provisions shall be known as the Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings of the City of Cañon City and shall be cited as such and will be referred to herein as “this Code.”

 

    B.   Section R102.4 is hereby amended by the addition of the following two paragraphs:

 

      All references to the International Plumbing Code, International Private Sewage Disposal Code and the International Property Maintenance Code are hereby deleted.

 

      In the event there shall be a conflict between the provisions of the International Residential Code and the provisions of Title 17 (Zoning Ordinance) of the Cañon City Municipal Code, the provisions of Title 17 shall prevail and supersede any conflicting provisions of the International Residential Code but only to the extent necessary to resolve the conflict.

 

    C.   Section R103 of the International Residential Code is deleted in its entirety and the following section is substituted therefor:

 

      Section R103. Organization and Enforcement.

      R103.1 Creation of Enforcement Agency. There is hereby established in this jurisdiction a code enforcement agency which shall be under the administrative and operational control of the building official.

      R103.2 Appointment. The building official shall be appointed by the City Administrator of the jurisdiction. In the absence of the building official, the City Administrator may appoint building inspectors to perform the duties and obligations of the building official under this Code.

      R103.3 Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the City Administrator, the building official shall have the authority to appoint technical officers, inspectors, plans examiners and other employees. Such employees shall have powers as delegated by the building official.

 

    D.  Section R105.2 of the International Residential Code is deleted and the following section is substituted therefor:

 

      Section R105.2 Work Exempt From Permit. A building permit shall not be required for the following:

 

      1.        One story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet;

 

      2.        Moveable cases, counters and partitions not over 5 feet high;

 

      3.        Retaining walls which are not over 4 feet in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or III-A liquids;

 

      4.        Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons and the ratio of the height to diameter or width does not exceed 2 to 1;

 

      5.        Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches above grade and not over any basement or story below (located entirely with property lines);

 

      6.        Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work;

 

      7.        Window awnings supported by an exterior wall of Group R-3, as applicable in Section 101.2 and Group U occupancies;

 

      8.        Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R, Division 3 Occupancy, in which the pool walls are entirely above grade and if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons;

 

      9.        Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery;

 

      10.      Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural purposes and not including service systems;

 

      11.      Swings and other playground equipment accessory to one- and two-family dwellings.

 

      Unless otherwise exempted, separate plumbing, electrical and mechanical permits shall be required for the above exempted items.

 

      Exemption from the permit requirements in this Code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in violation of the provisions of this Code or any other law or ordinances of this jurisdiction.

 

    E.   Section R107.3 is hereby deleted in its entirety.

    F.   Section R108.6 of the International Residential Code is hereby deleted in its entirety and the following substituted therefor:

 

      Section R108.6 Fee Refunds. The code official shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows:

 

      1.        The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected.

 

      2.        Not more than 50% of the fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this Code.

 

      3.        Not more than 50% of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan review effort has been expended.

 

      The code official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid, except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment.

 

    G.  Section R108 of the International Residential Code is hereby amended by the addition of the following:

 

      Section R108.7 Fee Schedule. The building permit fee schedule shall be that as set forth in Chapter 15.07 of the Cañon City Municipal Code.

 

    H.  Section 109.1.1 of the International Residential Code is deleted in its entirety and the following section is substituted therefor:

 

      Section 109.1.1. Footing and Foundation Inspection. Footing, foundation and concrete slab and underfloor inspections shall be made at the option of the permit holder by either the City of Cañon City Building Department or by the registered design professional of record responsible for the design of the foundation. Inspections performed by the engineer or architect of record shall be recorded in the format as set forth on the Cañon City Foundation Signoff Letter. If in the opinion of the Building Official it is determined that the foundation system or any of its components are complex in nature the Building Official shall require said foundation system or its components be inspected by the registered design professional of record and said inspections shall be recorded in the format as set forth above. Setbacks must be verified by the Cañon City Building Department prior to pouring of concrete.

 

      Exception: Residential garage and storage buildings are not required to be designed by a registered design profession as set forth in Section R401.5.

 

    I.    Section R109.1.3 of the International Residential Code is deleted in its entirety.

    J.    Section R110.3 of the International Residential Code shall be amended to read as follows:

 

R110.3 Certificate issued. After the building official inspects the building or structure and finds no violations of the provisions of this code or other laws that are enforced by the department of building safety, that all conditions impose on the building permit have been satisfied and all applicable requirements of Chapters 16 and 17 of the Municipal Code have been met, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy that contains the following:

 

    K.  Section R112 of the International Residential Code is deleted in its entirety. (See Chapter 2.52 of the Cañon City Municipal Code for appeals of administrative decisions.)

    L.   Section R113.4 of the International Residential Code is hereby amended to add the following notation:

 

      “See Section 15.06.040 of the Cañon City Municipal Code, Penalties.”

 

    M.  Table R301.2(1). The following information is to be inserted into the appropriate columns:

 

Roof Live Load

30 Pounds Per Square Foot (non-reducible)

Basic Wind Speed

85 mph (Fastest Mile)

100 mph (3 Second Gust)

Seismic Design Criteria

B

Weathering

Severe

Frost Line Depth

27″

Termite Infestation Probability

Slight to Moderate

Winter Design Temperature

0 Degrees F.

Ice Barrier Underlayment

Not Required

Flood Hazard

See FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Maps

Air Freezing Index

315

Mean Annual Temp

54.2 Degrees F.

 

    N.  Section R327 of the International Residential Code is deleted in its entirety and the following is substituted therefor:

 

      Section R327. Flood-Resistant Requirements. Requirements for flood-resistant construction shall be as set forth in the “Floodplain Regulations” as adopted by the City of Cañon City.

 

    O.  Section R401 of the International Residential Code is hereby amended by the addition of the following:

 

      Section 401.5. Footing, Foundation, Floor Slab, etc. Design. The footings, foundations and floor slabs etc. shall be designed by a registered design professional, and the plans depicting such professional design shall be signed, sealed, and delivered to the Building Official along with a full soils investigation and lab analysis. The registered design professional responsible for the soils investigation and lab analysis shall be a geotechnical engineer or other individual with documented experience in this field. Such documentation shall be provided in the appropriate format from the State Board of Licensure for Architects, Engineers and Professional Land Surveyors. This requirement shall not apply to one story detached residential garages or to one story detached residential storage buildings not exceeding 800 square feet in floor area.

 

    P.   Chapter 11 is deleted in its entirety. Compliance with Chapter 11 “Energy Efficiency” shall be demonstrated by compliance with the applicable requirements set forth in the 2006 International Energy Conservation Code (as adopted in Chapter 15.20 of the Cañon City Municipal Code).

    Q.  Chapters 12 through 42 and Appendix Chapters A, B, C, D, E, F, I, L, N, O, P and Q of the International Residential Code are hereby deleted in their entirety.

    R.   Section R907.3 item 4 is hereby amended by adding the following exception:

 

      4.        One additional layer of asphalt shingles shall be allowed over an existing asphalt shingle roof when the following has been determined:

      a.        Sufficient information shall be provided to ensure that the weight of the additional layer of roofing on the roof system will not exceed the code allowable loads. In cases where this information is not readily visible or available as determined by the Building Official a registered professional engineer may be required to inspect the roof system and provide a stamped and signed engineering analysis stating that the Code allowed loads on the roof structure will not be exceeded. Roofs must be installed in strict accordance with the manufacturer’s installation criteria.

(Ord. 7-2019 § 2; Ord. 15-2017 § 1; Ord. 14-2009 §§ 2—4; Ord. 11-2008 § 2)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.06.040 Penalties.
    Any person who violates any provision of the International Residential Code, as adopted and amended in this Chapter 15.06, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in an amount that does not exceed the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010. (Ord. 17-2013 § 54; Ord. 11-2008 § 2)

Chapter 15.07 BUILDING PERMIT FEES*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 20-2020. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.07.010 Statement of intent.
    It is the intent and goal of the City to establish and collect building permit fees and charges that will generate sufficient revenue to cover the City’s direct and indirect costs of maintaining and operating its Building Department. (Ord. 1-2009 § 1)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.07.020 Basic formula.
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, building permit fees for construction of buildings within the City shall be calculated on a case-by-case basis using the following formula:

 

    Permit Fee = Gross Area x Square Foot Construction Cost x Permit Fee Multiplier

 

(Ord. 1-2009 § 1)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.07.025 Alternative method for calculating permit fees.
    A.  As an alternative to using the basic formula set forth in Section 15.07.020, an applicant for a building permit may elect to have the building permit fee calculated using the “permit value” for the building, structure or other improvement to be constructed, altered or repaired, as reasonably estimated in good faith by the applicant at the time of application.

    B.   If this alternative method of calculating the permit fee is elected by the applicant, such estimated permit value shall be multiplied times the Permit Fee Multiplier to determine the amount of the permit fee.

    C.   In order to document the estimate of permit value, the applicant, at the time of application, shall deliver to the Building Official a true and correct copy of a fully-executed construction contract or contracts, as the case may be, covering all work to be covered by the permit.

    D.  Should any such contract be amended or otherwise modified following the issuance of the building permit with a resulting change in the contract price, the applicant shall notify the Building Official in writing of such amendment or modification within ten (10) days following such amendment or modification and the permit fee shall be recalculated by multiplying the permit value indicated by the changed contract price times the Permit Fee Multiplier used in the original calculation of the permit fee.

    E.   Unless otherwise agreed in writing, any increase or decrease in the permit fee shall be paid or refunded, as the case may be, within thirty (30) days following the recalculation of the permit fee. Should subsequent amendments or modifications be made that increase or decrease the contract price, the same process will be followed with respect to each such amendment or modification until the project has been completed. The Building Official shall require: a final copy of each contract, as modified and/or amended; copies of all change orders; and other evidences of actual cost prior to issuing a certificate of occupancy. Final building permit value shall be set by the Building Official using the materials provided by the applicant as a guide. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued in the absence of full payment of the applicable permit fee, including any increases due to recalculation of the permit fee.

    F.   Permit valuations for purposes of the election that may be made pursuant to Subsection A of this section shall include the total value of all work, including labor and materials, for which the permit is to be issued, and shall include profit, design and construction activity, as well as all equipment and systems to be covered by the permit. All estimated permit valuations shall be verified by copies of one or more fully-executed construction contracts and/or other similar documentation deemed appropriate by the Building Official. All copies of such materials shall be retained by the Building Official in accordance with the City’s written records retention policy.

    G.  If the applicant fails to cooperate with the Building Official by failing to provide true and correct copies of contracts and/or copies of amendments and/or change orders affecting the cost of a project, the building permit fee shall be calculated or recalculated, as the case may be, using the basic formula set forth in Section 15.07.020. (Ord. 7-2013 § 1)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.07.030 Definitions.
    Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, for purposes of this Chapter 15.07, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

    A.  “Net Cost Recovery Factor” means the annual proposed budget for the Building Department (representing the direct costs of operating and maintaining the Building Department) plus estimated indirect costs of the Building Department as certified by the Director of Finance on or before December 1st for use in calculating the Permit Fee Multiplier that will be used to calculate building permit fees during the following calendar year. All estimated indirect costs shall be based upon historical data and reasonable projections of indirect costs of operating and maintaining the Building Department during the calendar year with respect to which the annual proposed budget will apply.

    B.   “Gross Area” means the gross area of the building with respect to which the building permit fee is to be assessed, expressed in square feet.

    C.   “Permit Fee Multiplier” means the multiplier used in calculating building permit fees. For the period beginning February 1, 2009 and ending December 31, 2009, the permit fee multiplier shall be 0.00998. Thereafter, the permit fee multiplier will be recalculated annually as provided in Section 15.07.070, according to the following formula:

 

Permit Fee Multiplier = Net Cost Recovery Factor / Total Projected Construction Value

    D.  “Square Foot Construction Cost” means the average construction cost per square foot, taking into account the classification/occupancy group of any proposed building and the type of construction to be used, as determined with respect to the most recent Building Valuation Data table (“BVD table”) published by the International Code Council (“ICC”). (Note: BVD tables are currently published in the ICC’s Building Safety Journal during February and August of each year and may be accessed on the ICC’s website at www.iccsafe.com.)

    E.   “Total Projected Construction Value” means a reasonable projection of the value of all anticipated new construction in the City for the following calendar year. Total Projected Construction Value shall be determined by the Director of Finance (or designee) and approved by the City Administrator on or before December 1st of each year. (Ord. 1-2009 § 1)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.07.040 Other projects requiring permits.
    When a building permit is required under the International Building Code adopted by the City for which no average construction costs are shown on the BVD table published by the ICC, the building permit fee shall be calculated based upon good faith estimates of actual construction costs made by the permit applicant and approved by the Building Official. In such cases, the building permit fee will be determined by multiplying the approved estimated construction cost of the project times the then applicable permit fee multiplier. Examples of projects to which this provision may apply include: the construction of fences; installation of siding; and re-roofing of existing structures. (Note: See Section 105.1 of the IBC, 2006 Edition.) (Ord. 1-2009 § 1)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.07.050 Discontinuation of BVD table.
    If the ICC should discontinue publishing the BVD table, the last published BVD table shall be used to calculate and determine building permit fees until City Council has selected a suitable alternative by amending this chapter. (Ord. 1-2009 § 1)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.07.060 Other inspections and fees.
    In addition to building permit fees, the Building Department is authorized to bill and collect additional charges for certain services, as follows:

 

Service

Charge

A.

Inspections outside of normal business hours (minimum charge—two hours)

$50.00 per hour

B.

Reinspection fees assessed under provisions of Section 108.8

$50.00 per hour

C.

Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated (minimum charge—one-half hour)

$50.00 per hour

D.

Additional plan review required by changes, additions or revisions to plans

$50.00 per hour

E.

For use of outside consultants for plan checking and inspections, or both

Actual Costs

(Ord. 1-2009 § 1)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.07.070 Annual revisions to permit fee multiplier.
    The permit fee multiplier shall be revised once annually, on or about December 1st, beginning December 1, 2009, for use in calculating building permit fees in the following calendar year. (Ord. 1-2009 § 1)

Chapter 15.08 UNIFORM HOUSING CODE*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 20-2020. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.08.010 Document adopted by reference—Copies on file.
    A.  Pursuant to Section 9 of Article XII of the Charter of the City, there is adopted as the housing code of the City, by reference thereto, the Uniform Housing Code, 1994 Edition, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, 5360 South Workman Mill Road, Whittier, California, all to have the same force and effect as if set forth herein in every particular, except for the deletions, amendments and additions hereinafter in this chapter set forth.

    B.   At least one copy of the Uniform Housing Code have been or are now filed with the office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 5-1996 § 2)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.08.020 Subject matter of the code.
    The subject matter of the Uniform Housing Code is to establish and provide minimum standards and requirements for the protection of life, limb, health, property and the general welfare of the public and the owners and occupants of residential buildings within the City of Cañon City. (Ord. 5-1996 § 2)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.08.030 Additions, amendments and deletions.
    A.  Wherever the term “Building Official” is used in the Uniform Housing Code, the same shall mean the Building Official of the City and the designees of such Building Official.

    B.   Section 203 of the Uniform Housing Code is deleted and the following Section 203 is substituted therefor:

 

      Section 203. The City Council is hereby designated as the board to finally interpret the provisions of this Code and to hear appeals provided for hereunder in accordance with Chapter 2.52 of this Municipal Code. Copies of all rules, regulations and decisions of the City Council shall be reduced to writing and made available to the general public and the appellant.

 

    C.   Wherever the term “Housing Advisory and Appeals Board” or “Board of Appeals” is used in said Uniform Housing Code, the same shall mean the City Council.

    D.  All references to “Uniform Mechanical Code” or “Mechanical Code” contained on the Uniform Housing Code are deleted.

    E.   All references made to the “Uniform Building Code” shall mean the 1994 Edition which is currently in effect.

    F.   Section 501 of the Uniform Housing Code is deleted and the following Section 501 is substituted therefor:

 

Section 501. All buildings shall be located with respect to property lines and to other buildings on the same property as required by Section 503 and Chapter 6 of the Uniform Building Code, 1994 Edition.

    G.  Section 502.2 of the Uniform Housing Code is deleted and the following of Section 502.2 is substituted therefor:

 

      (b)       Yards. Each yard shall be in compliance with the requirements set forth in Title 17 of the Code of the City of Cañon City, Colorado, as currently adopted.

 

    H.  Chapters 12 and 13 of the Uniform Housing Code are deleted in their entirety.

    I.    Item 3 of Subsection (c) of Section 1401 of the Uniform Housing Code is deleted in its entirety.

    J.    Chapters 15 and 16 of the Uniform Housing Code are deleted in their entirety.

    K.  Subsection 1001.11 of Chapter 10 hereby repealed and re-enacted to read as follows:

 

      1001.11 Hazardous or unsanitary premises. Those premises on which an accumulation of weeds, vegetation, junk, unsightly or inoperable vehicles, unsightly vehicle parts, dead organic matter, debris, garbage, offal, rat harborage, stagnant water, combustible materials, and similar materials or condition constitute fire, health or safety hazards.

 

    L.   Section 401 of Chapter 4 is hereby amended by the addition thereto of definitions for “unsightly or inoperable vehicles” and “unsightly vehicle parts,” as follows:

 

      Unsightly or Inoperable Vehicle means any motor vehicle originally manufactured for operation on public streets and highways which; has:

      1.        More than two windows broken, shattered, or missing; or

      2.        One or more portions of the body missing or noticeably or strikingly damaged, such as hood, fender, trunk door, door, roof or panel; or

      3.        One or more of the wheels or tires missing and the vehicle is not supported by a jack or block; or

      4.        Had its power plant, drivetrain, axles, or other similar necessary parts removed.

      Unsightly Vehicles does not include a motor vehicle which:

      1.        Is within a fully enclosed building; or

      2.        Is completely encased or covered by a tarpaulin, canvas, cloth or plastic (not transparent) cover and made secure by attaching same to the vehicle or part or to the ground or hidden from sight by a 6-foot high privacy fence; or

      3.        Is exempt from registration under the provisions of Section 42-3-103, Colorado Revised Statutes.

 

      Unsightly Vehicle Part means a major body or mechanical part originally manufactured as part of a motor vehicle for replacement or repair of any motor vehicle, such as engine, differential, transmission, transfer case, axle housing, driveshaft, hood, fender, trunk, door, roof or panel.

 

      Unsightly Vehicle part does not include any motor vehicle part which is within a fully enclosed building.

(Ord. 5-1996 § 2)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.08.040 Inconsistencies.
    If there should be any inconsistency between the provision of the chapter and the provisions of Chapter 15.04 of this Municipal Code, the provisions of Chapter 15.04 shall prevail. (Ord. 5-1996 § 2)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.08.050 Unlawful acts designated—Misdemeanor.
    A.  The following penalty clause contained in the Uniform Housing Code is herewith set forth and adopted:

 

      Section 204. No person firm or corporation, whether as owner, lessee, sublessee or occupant, shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or premises, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or nay order issued by the Building Official hereunder. Any person violating the provisions of this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for each day such violation continues.

 

    B.   Any person who violates any provision of the Uniform Housing Code, as adopted and amended in this Chapter 15.08, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in an amount that does not exceed the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010. (Ord. 17-2013 § 55; Ord. 5-1996 § 2)

Chapter 15.12 INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 20-2020. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.12.010 Document adopted by reference—Contents.
    A.  Pursuant to Section 9 of Article XII of the Charter of the City and applicable provisions of Part 2 of Article 16 of Title 31 of the Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended, there is adopted as the mechanical code of the City of Cañon City, by reference thereto, the International Mechanical Code, 2006 Edition, published by the International Code Council, 5203 Leesburg Pike, Falls Church, Virginia, 22041-3401, including the Chapters of the Appendix to said Code, and together with the errata sheet accompanying said International Mechanical Code (all of which is hereinafter referred to as the “International Mechanical Code”), all to have the same force and effect as if set forth herein in every particular.

    B.   The subject matter of the adopted Code includes comprehensive provisions and standards regulating the design, installation, maintenance, alteration and inspection of mechanical systems that are permanently installed and utilized to provide control of environmental conditions and related processes within buildings. The adopted Code shall also regulate those mechanical systems, system components, equipment and appliances specifically addressed therein. (Ord. 11-2008 § 3)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.12.020 Copies for public use.
    At least one copy of the International Mechanical Code, 2006 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, certified by the Mayor and the City Clerk to be a true copy, has been and is now on file in the office of the City Clerk and may be inspected by any interested person between the hours of eight a.m. and five p.m., Monday through Friday, holidays excepted. (Ord. 11-2008 § 3)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.12.030 Additions, amendments and deletions.
    A.  Section 101.1 is revised to read as follows:

 

      Section 101.1. Title. These regulations shall be known as the Mechanical Code of the City of Cañon City, hereafter referred to as “this Code.”

 

    B.   Section 102.8 is hereby amended by the addition of the following two paragraphs:

 

      All references to the International Plumbing Code, International Private Sewage Waste Disposal Code and the International Property Maintenance Code are hereby deleted.

 

      In the event there shall be a conflict between the provisions of the International Mechanical Code and the provisions of Title 17 (Zoning Ordinance) of the Cañon City Municipal Code, the provisions of Title 17 shall prevail and supersede any conflicting provisions of the International Mechanical Code, but only to the extent necessary to resolve the conflict.

 

    C.   Section 103 of the International Mechanical Code is deleted in its entirety and the following section is substituted therefor:

 

      Section 103. Organization and Enforcement.

 

      103.1 Creation of Enforcement Agency. There is hereby established a code enforcement agency which shall be under the administrational and operational control of the building official.

 

      103.2 Appointment. The building official shall be appointed by the City Administrator of the jurisdiction.

 

      103.3 Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the City Administrator, the building official shall have the authority to appoint technical officers, inspectors, plans examiners and other employees. Such employees shall have powers as delegated by the building official.

 

    D.  Section 106.5.2 is hereby amended by addition of the following:

 

      Section 106.5.2. Fee Schedule. The fees for work shall be as set forth in Table 1-A of the 1994 Uniform Mechanical Code.

 

    E.   Items 2 and 3 of Section 106.5.3 are hereby deleted and the following substituted therefor:

 

      Item 2. Not more than 50% of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this Code.

 

      Item 3. Not more than 50% of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan review effort has been expended.

 

    F.   Section 108.4 of the International Mechanical Code is hereby amended to add the following notation:

 

      “See Section 15.12.040 of the Cañon City Municipal Code, Penalties.”

 

    G.  Section 109 of the International Mechanical Code is hereby deleted in its entirety. (See Chapter 2.52 of the Cañon City Municipal Code for appeals of administrative decisions.)

    H.  Section 301.2 is hereby deleted in its entirety.

    I.    Section 301.6 is hereby deleted and the following substituted therefor:

 

Section 301.6. Plumbing Connections. Potable water supply and building drainage system connections to appliances regulated by this Code shall be in accordance with the Plumbing Code currently adopted by the State of Colorado.

 

    J.    The exception to Section 306.2 is hereby amended by the addition of a second paragraph to read as follows:

 

      Access openings to the passageway shall be of sufficient height, width and length to permit removal of the furnace, but in no case less than 30 inches wide, 30 inches high and 48 inches long if on the exterior, or if through a trap door located on the inside of the building, an opening 30 inches by 30 inches and a depth equal to the longest dimension of the appliance measured from the bottom of the floor joist.

(Ord. 11-2008 § 3)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.12.040 Penalties.
    Any person who violates any provision of the International Mechanical Code, as adopted and amended in this Chapter 15.12, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in an amount that does not exceed the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010. (Ord. 17-2013 § 56; Ord. 11-2008 § 3)

Chapter 15.14 INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 20-2020. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.14.010 Document adopted by reference—Contents.
    A.  Pursuant to Section 9 of Article XII of the Charter of the City and applicable provisions of Part 2 of Article 16 of Title 31 of the Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended, there is adopted as the fuel gas code of the City of Cañon City, by reference thereto, the International Fuel Gas Code, 2006 Edition, published by the International Code Council, 5203 Leesburg Pike, Falls Church, Virginia, 22041-3401, including the Chapters of the Appendix to said Code, and together with the errata sheet accompanying said International Fuel Gas Code (all of which is hereinafter referred to as the “International Fuel Gas Code”), all to have the same force and effect as if set forth herein in every particular.

    B.   The subject matter of the adopted Code includes comprehensive provisions and standards regulating the installation of fuel gas piping systems, fuel gas utilization equipment, and related accessories. (Ord. 11-2008 § 4)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.14.020 Copies for public use.
    At least one copy of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2006 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, certified by the Mayor and City Clerk to be a true copy, has been and is now on file in the office of the City Clerk and may be inspected by any interested person between the hours of eight a.m. and five p.m., Monday through Friday, holidays excepted. (Ord. 11-2008 § 4)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.14.030 Additions, amendments and deletions.
    A.  Section 101.1 is revised to read as follows:

 

      Section 101.1. Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fuel Gas Code of the City of Cañon City, hereafter referred to as “this Code.”

 

    B.   Section 102.8 is hereby amended by the addition of the following two paragraphs:

 

      All references to the International Plumbing Code, International Private Sewage Waste Disposal Code and the International Property Maintenance Code are hereby deleted.

 

      In the event there shall be a conflict between the provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code and the provisions of Title 17 (Zoning Ordinance) of the Cañon City Municipal Code, the provisions of Title 17 shall prevail and supersede any conflicting provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, but only to the extent necessary to resolve the conflict.

 

    C.   Section 103 of the International Fuel Gas Code is deleted in its entirety and the following section is substituted therefor:

 

      Section 103. Organization and Enforcement.

 

      103.1   Creation of Enforcement Agency. There is hereby established a code enforcement agency which shall be under the administrational and operational control of the building official.

 

      103.2   Appointment. The building official shall be appointed by the chief appointing authority of the jurisdiction.

 

      103.3 Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the building official shall have the authority to appoint technical officers, inspectors, plans examiners and other employees. Such employees shall have powers as delegated by the building official.

 

      The code official, officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this Code, while acting for the jurisdiction, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act required or permitted in the discharge of official duties.

 

    D.  Section 106.5.2 is hereby amended by addition of the following:

 

      Section 106.5.2. Fee Schedule. The fees for work shall be as set forth in Table 1-A of the 1994 Uniform Mechanical Code.

 

    E.   Items 2 and 3 of Section 106.5.3 are hereby deleted and the following substituted therefor:

 

      Item 2. Not more than 50% of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this Code.

 

      Item 3. Not more than 50% of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan review effort has been expended.

 

    F.   Section 108.4 of the International Fuel Gas Code is hereby amended to add the following notation:

 

      “See Section 15.14.040 of the Cañon City Municipal Code, Penalties.”

 

    G.  Section 109 of the International Fuel Gas Code is hereby deleted in its entirety. (See Chapter 2.52 of the Cañon City Municipal Code for appeals of administrative decisions.)

    H.  Section 301.2 is hereby deleted in its entirety.

    I.    Section 301.6 is hereby deleted and the following substituted therefor:

 

      Section 301.6. Plumbing Connections. Potable water supply and building drainage system connections to appliances regulated by this Code shall be in accordance with the Plumbing Code currently adopted by the State of Colorado.

 

    J.    The exception to Section 306.2 is hereby amended by the addition of a second paragraph to read as follows:

 

      Access openings to the passageway shall be of sufficient height, width and length to permit removal of the furnace, but in no case less than 30 inches wide, 30 inches high and 48 inches long if on the exterior, or if through a trap door located on the inside of the building, an opening 30 inches by 30 inches and a depth equal to the longest dimension of the appliance measured from the bottom of the floor joist.

 

    K.  Sections 401.4 through Section 410.3 are hereby deleted in their entirety. (Ord. 11-2008 § 4)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.14.040 Penalties.
    Any person who violates any provision of the International Fuel Gas Code, as adopted and amended in this Chapter 15.14, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in an amount that does not exceed the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010. (Ord. 17-2013 § 57; Ord. 11-2008 § 4)

Chapter 15.20 INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 20-2020. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.20.010 Document adopted by reference—Contents.
    A.  Pursuant to Section 9 of Article XII of the Charter of the City and applicable provisions of Part 2 of Article 16 of Title 31 of the Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended, there is adopted as the energy code of the City of Cañon City, by reference thereto, the International Energy Conservation Code, 2006 Edition, published by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6th Floor, Washington, DC 2001 including the Chapters of the Appendix to said Code, and together with the errata sheet accompanying said International Energy Conservation Code (all of which is hereinafter referred to as the “International Energy Conservation Code”), all to have the same force and effect as if set forth herein in every particular.

    B.   The adopted code regulates the design and construction of residential and commercial buildings for the effective use of energy and is intended to provide flexibility to permit the use of innovative approaches and techniques to achieve the effective use of energy. (Ord. 11-2008 § 5)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.20.020 Copies for public use.
    At least one copy of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2006 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, certified by the Mayor and City Clerk to be a true copy, has been and is now on file in the office of the City Clerk and may be inspected by any interested person between the hours of eight a.m. and five p.m., Monday through Friday, holidays excepted. (Ord. 11-2008 § 5)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.20.030 Penalties.
    Any person who violates any provision of the International Energy Conservation Code, as adopted and amended in this Chapter 15.20, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in an amount that does not exceed the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010. (Ord. 17-2013 § 58; Ord. 11-2008 § 5)

Chapter 15.24 FACTORY-BUILT MANUFACTURED AND MODULAR HOMES OR STRUCTURES*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 20-2020. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.24.010 Requirements and specifications.
    No factory-built manufactured or modular home or structure, except an accessory building, whether or not designated as manufactured or modular, shall be erected, built, installed or placed in any part of the City unless the following requirements have been complied with:

    A.  The building or structure shall have been certified as a factory-built home by the Colorado Division of Housing, and the factory-authorized drawings of such home or structure, or the approved equivalent thereof, have been submitted to the City Building Official and approved prior to the issuance of a building permit;

    B.   The building or structure shall be erected on a permanent engineered foundation;

    C.   Nothing in this section shall permit the placement of a mobile home contrary to the provisions of the ordinances of Cañon City, nor shall it permit the placement of a factory-built home or structure within the City contrary to any provisions governing the placement of such structures found within Title 17, Zoning, of the Cañon City Municipal Code. (Ord. 17-1998 § 1: prior code § 15.40.010)

Chapter 15.40 FLOODLIGHTS*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 20-2020. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.40.010 Installation limitations.
    No floodlights shall be set up, or shall be allowed to remain over, across or upon any street, avenue, alley, sidewalk, crosswalk or other public way of the City, except that the same is set up, placed, and installed under the regulations as set forth in this chapter. (Prior code § 15.20.010)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.40.020 Minimum height.
    No floodlight shall be set up or installed, the lowest portion of which is elevated less than seven feet above the sidewalk, or if there is no sidewalk, above the lot line of the lot where the floodlight is to be located. (Prior code § 15.20.020)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.40.030 Main Street or Fifth Street—Coordination with streetlights.
    Floodlights, if placed upon Main Street or on Fifth Street in the city, shall be put in line with the streetlights, and shall be at least as high as the streetlights. (Prior code § 15.20.030)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.40.040 Other streets—Location in parking strip.
    Floodlights placed on other streets, except on Main Street and Fifth Street as provided in Section 15.40.030, shall be placed in the parking, between the curbing and the sidewalk, as directed by the City Administrator. (Prior code § 15.20.040)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.40.050 Maintenance.
    All floodlights erected under the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained by the person, firm, or corporation so erecting the same in good repair and order at all times. (Prior code § 15.20.060)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.40.060 Advertising prohibited.
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, in the installation of any floodlight, to use any sign or other advertising device in connection with the floodlight. (Prior code § 15.20.050)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.40.070 Nonconforming floodlights.
    If any person, firm or corporation fails to keep the floodlight in good repair, or erects or maintains the same contrary to the provisions of this chapter, and if after being notified by the Chief of Police, who is designated as the proper person to serve the notice, to either repair or to remove the floodlight within five days from the date of the giving of the notice, he or she shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 15.20.070)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.40.080 Violation—Misdemeanor.
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 15.20.080)

Chapter 15.42 FIRE PROTECTION AND EMS IMPACT FEE
15.42.010 Short title, authority, and applicability.
    A.  Specific authority to impose impact fees for the benefit of the Fire District was granted to the Council of Cañon City by the qualified electors of the City during the City’s general election on November 1, 2005. Additional general authority is identified in Ordinance No. 9, Series of 2005, through which the question decided by the voters was referred to them.

    B.   Prior to the distribution of any impact fees collected pursuant to this chapter, the Fire District must enter into an intergovernmental agreement with the City covering the collection, distribution and use of impact fees.

    C.   This chapter shall apply to all portions of the City, which is entirely within the boundaries of the Cañon City Area Fire Protection District. (Ord. 12-2019 § 9)

 

15.42.020 Intent and purpose.
    A.  The provisions of this chapter are consistent with City plans and policies, as identified in Ordinance 9, Series of 2005 and elsewhere, and also are intended to implement and be consistent with the Local Government Land Use Control Enabling Act, Section 29-20-101, C.R.S., et seq.

    B.   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use and development of land so as to ensure that new development bears a proportionate share of the cost of capital expenditures necessary to provide fire protection and emergency medical services in the city, as contemplated by Colorado state statutes and City plans and policies. (Ord. 12-2019 § 9)

 

15.42.030 Rules of construction.
    A.  The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed so as to effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of the public health, safety, and welfare.

    B.   The phrase used for includes arranged for, designed for, maintained for, or occupied for.

    C.   The word person includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity.

    D.  The land use types listed in Section 15.42.060 shall have the same meaning as listed under the City’s Zoning Ordinance and subdivision regulations. (Ord. 12-2019 § 9)

 

15.42.040 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter:

    A.  “Building Permit” means an official document or certification which is issued by the City Building Department and which authorizes the construction, alteration, enlargement, conversion, reconstruction, remodeling, rehabilitation, erection, demolition, moving, or repair of a building or structure. In the case of a change in use or occupancy of an existing building or structure, the term shall specifically include certificate of occupancy and occupancy permits, as those permits are defined or required by City regulations, including, but not limited to, uniform codes adopted by the City.

    B.   “Capital Facility” includes planning, site improvements, off-site improvements associated with new or expanded facilities, buildings and equipment, including communications equipment, with an average useful life of at least five (5) years, but excludes maintenance and operations.

    C.   “City Official” means the City’s Zoning Administrator and/or any other City officer or official that the Council of Cañon City may designate to administer the various provisions of this chapter.

    D.  “Emergency Medical Services” commonly referred to as EMS, means the provision of advanced life support services, as defined and discussed in Title 25, Article 3.5, C.R.S.

    E.   “Fee Payer” is a person who applies to the City of Cañon City for the issuance of a building permit or manufactured home permit for a type of land development activity specified in Subsection 15.42.060(A) of this chapter.

    F.   “Fire District” means the Cañon City Area Fire Protection District, a Colorado special district (providing services within a geographic area that includes all land within the City of Cañon City) which is authorized to provide fire protection and/or emergency medical and rescue services and such other similar services as may be authorized by Colorado law.

    G.  “Fire Protection” means the prevention and extinguishment of fires; the protection of life and property from fire; and the enforcement of properly adopted fire prevention codes.

    H.  “Living Unit” is any temporary or permanent unit utilized for or designed or intended to be utilized for human habitation.

    I.    “Manufactured Home Permit” shall mean any certification of a permanent foundation for a manufactured home established upon a permanent foundation on any lot or parcel within the city. When no certification of a permanent foundation is required, “manufactured home permit” shall mean the required approval as to location (relative to applicable setback requirements) with respect to any manufactured home established within a mobile home park, mobile home subdivision or elsewhere within the city, provided that the manufactured home so located is the first living unit established on the space, lot or parcel in question. When no approval as to location is required, an application for City water service shall trigger the obligation for the owner of the land upon which a manufactured home is established, as the first living unit thereon, to pay the impact fee. It is City Council’s intention that this definition be broad enough to ensure that Fire Protection and EMS Impact Fees will be imposed and payable with respect to all new living units established in the city by reason of the installation of manufactured housing on lots, parcels or spaces where no living unit previously existed. When a manufactured home is established for the first time on a newly created lot or space within a mobile home park, the Fire Protection and EMS Impact Fee shall be paid by the owner of the mobile home park, but may be subject to reimbursement by the owner of the manufactured home pursuant to a written agreement between the owner of the mobile home park and the owner of the manufactured home.

    J.    “Rescue” means what commonly is called rescue, a service, which generally includes the provision of basic life support, and the extrication of accident victims from entrapment. (Ord. 12-2019 § 9)

 

15.42.050 Imposition of Fire Protection and EMS Impact Fee.
    A.  There is hereby imposed upon new development within the City a Fire Protection and EMS Impact Fee. Any person who, after the effective date of the ordinance adopting this chapter, seeks to develop land located within the City, by applying for the issuance of a building permit or manufactured home permit for one of the land use types specified in Section 15.42.060 of this chapter, shall be required to pay a Fire Protection and EMS Impact Fee in the manner and amount set forth in this chapter.

    B.   No building permit or manufactured home permit for any land use types specified in Section 15.42.060 of this chapter shall be issued by the City unless and until the impact fee hereby required has been paid. (Ord. 12-2019 § 9)

 

15.42.060 Computation of the amount of Fire Protection and EMS Impact Fee.
    A.  At the option of the fee payer, the amount of the fee may be determined by the schedules set forth below:

    1.   Single-family residence: three hundred four dollars ($304.00).

    2.   Multifamily residence: three hundred four dollars ($304.00) for each unit of family residence and/or for each apartment, town home, condominium or similar living unit (e.g., six hundred eight dollars ($608.00) for duplex; nine hundred twelve dollars ($912.00) for triplex, etc.).

    3.   Non-residential building not including hotel/motel: Total square footage of the building divided by two thousand (2000*) and multiplied by three hundred four dollars ($304.00) (e.g., nine thousand (9000) square foot nonresidential structure would be divided by two thousand (2000). The dividend of 4.5 would then be multiplied by three hundred four dollars ($304.00) for a total impact fee of one thousand three hundred sixty-eight dollars ($1368.00)).

 

*      2000 square feet is the average residential unit size for Fire District as projected by historic and current development and shall serve as one “residential equivalent unit” to be used in calculating a proportionate fee for commercial development.

 

    4.   Hotel/motel: Total square footage divided by two thousand (2000) and then multiplied by three hundred four dollars ($304.00) and additionally multiplied by 2.5**

**    It is apparent from examining Fire Department and EMS responses of different land use types that land uses with higher densities have more incidents requiring Fire Department responses than land uses with lower population densities. Hotels and motels demand the highest per square foot response. Conservatively, this factor is 2.5 times the residential equivalency.

 

    B.   When a change of use, redevelopment or modification of an existing use requires the issuance of a building permit or manufactured home permit, the impact fee shall be based upon the net increase in the impact for the new use, as compared to the impact of the previous use.

    C.   The person applying for the issuance of a building permit or manufactured home permit may, at such person’s option, submit evidence to the entity (i.e., Fire District or City) which provides fire protection and/or emergency medical services for the land in question indicating that the fees set out in subsection A of this Section 15.42.060 are not applicable to the particular development. Based upon convincing and competent evidence, said entity may adjust the fee accordingly and shall inform the City official of this adjustment. (Ord. 12-2019 § 9)

 

15.42.070 Payment of fee.
    A.  The fee payer shall pay the Fire Protection and EMS Impact Fee to the City, through its Building Department, prior to the issuance of a building permit or manufactured home permit which may be required for development listed in the schedule in Subsection 15.42.060(A). No building permit or manufactured home permit may be issued for any development listed in Subsection 15.42.060(A) until such fee has been paid.

    B.   No impact fee is required for the issuance of any building permit for residential use or manufactured home installation, which does not result in an additional living unit.

    C.   All monies collected pursuant to this chapter shall be properly identified as Fire Protection and EMS Impact Fees and earmarked and handled as provided in Section 15.42.080 of this chapter. (Ord. 12-2019 § 9)

 

15.42.080 Earmarking and handling of Fire Protection and EMS Impact Fees.
    A.  All monies collected and paid as Fire Protection and EMS Impact Fees pursuant to Sections 15.42.060 and 15.42.070, respectively, shall be earmarked as Fire Protection and EMS Impact Fees in a dedicated ledger account within the General Fund.

    B.   Monies so earmarked shall be transferred to the Fire District in the manner established by any relevant agreement, but at least once per fiscal period. All monies collected pursuant to this chapter must be used only in accordance with the provisions of Section 15.42.090.

    C.   The Director of Finance shall do all things necessary to ensure that all monies collected and handled by the City pursuant to this chapter shall be accounted for in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. (Ord. 12-2019 § 9)

 

15.42.090 Use of funds.
    A.  Monies collected from Fire Protection and EMS Impact Fees shall be used for the purpose of contributing toward and defraying the cost of capital facilities of the Fire District that are used to provide fire protection and emergency medical services. Except as provided in Subsection C of this Section 15.42.090, impact fee collections shall be used exclusively for the acquisition and/or expansion of capital facilities of the Fire District needed to provide the fire protection and EMS services that are or will be made necessary by development within the city. Funds shall be expended in the order in which they are collected.

    B.   The City shall enter into one or more intergovernmental agreements, as authorized by the statutes of the State of Colorado, concerning the use of monies collected as the Fire Protection and EMS Impact Fees pursuant to this chapter. Such agreement shall provide for the collection, investment, transmission and expenditure of such impact fees and provide for full and accurate accounting with respect to said monies.

    C.   The City shall be entitled to retain up to four percent (4%) of all impact fees it collects as an administrative fee to offset the costs of administering this chapter. (Ord. 12-2019 § 9)

 

15.42.100 Refund of fee paid.
    A.  If a building permit or manufactured home permit expires and no construction has been commenced, then the fee payer shall be entitled to a refund of the Fire Protection and EMS Impact Fee paid as a condition for its issuance, minus the amount of the fee retained by the City as an administrative fee pursuant to Subsection 15.42.090(C), which amount shall be non-refundable. If the amount retained by the City was four percent (4%) of the impact fee collected, the fee payer shall be entitled to a refund equal to ninety-six percent (96%) of the impact fee paid. No interest will be paid to the fee payer on refunds due to the failure to commence construction.

    B.   Any funds not expended or encumbered by the end of the calendar quarter immediately following eight (8) years from the date the impact fee was paid shall, upon application of the fee payer within one hundred eighty (180) days of that date, be returned to the fee payer by the Fire District with interest at the rate of three percent (3%) per annum. Any intergovernmental agreement between the City and the Fire District shall so provide. (Ord. 12-2019 § 9)

 

15.42.110 Exemptions and credits.
    A.  The following shall be exempted from payment of the impact fee:

    1.   Alteration or expansion of an existing building or use of land where no additional living units are created, where the use is not changed, and where no additional demand for fire protection and EMS/rescue services will be produced over and above that produced by the existing use;

    2.   The construction of accessory buildings or structures which will not produce additional living units over and above those in the principal building or use of the land;

    3.   The replacement of a building, manufactured home, or structure that was in place on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or the replacement of a building, manufactured home, or structure that was constructed subsequent thereto and for which the correct impact fee had been paid or otherwise provided for, with a new building, manufactured home, or structure of the same use, provided that no additional trips will be produced over and above those produced by the original use of the land;

    4.   By mutual agreement between the Fire District and the City, on the development of low- or moderate-income housing or affordable employee housing as defined by the City or state statutes; and

    5.   The construction or change in use of any building or structure owned or occupied by the City for purposes of conducting City business or performing City services, as determined solely by the Council of Cañon City.

    B.   Credits.

    1.   All improvements to and/or land dedications for fire protection and EMS required under a City development approval shall be credited against impact fees up to the total of the impact fees due. When the fee payer proposes credit for construction, he or she shall present cost estimates prepared by qualified professionals to be used in determining the amount of credit. When the fee payer proposes credit for land dedication, he or she shall present property appraisals prepared by qualified professionals and a certified copy of the most recent assessment of the property for tax purposes to be used in determining the amount of the credit. However, the Council of Cañon City and Fire District Board retain the right to determine the amount to be credited by preparing engineering and construction cost estimates and/or property appraisals, at the sole cost of the Fire District, for those improvements and/or land dedications. Such credits shall be calculated so as to be consistent with Section 29-10-104.5, C.R.S.

    2.   Fee payers claiming credits for construction and/or land dedication shall submit documentation sufficient to permit the City and/or Fire District to determine whether such credits claimed are due and, if so, the amount of such credits.

    C.   Exemptions or credits must be claimed by the fee payer at the time of the application for a building permit or manufactured home permit. Any exemptions or credits not so claimed shall be deemed waived by the fee payer. (Ord. 12-2019 § 9)

 

15.42.120 Appeal.
    Any decision made by the City official, his or her designee, or the Building Official in the course of administering this chapter may be appealed in accordance with those procedures set forth in Colorado statutes and court rules. Every intergovernmental agreement made pursuant to this chapter shall specifically incorporate this appeal procedure. (Ord. 12-2019 § 9)

 

15.42.130 Penalty and enforcement provision.
    A.  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in an amount that does not exceed the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010.

    B.   In addition to, or in lieu of, any criminal prosecution provided for in subsection A of this Section 15.42.130, the City of Cañon City or any fee payer shall have the power to sue for relief in civil court to enforce the provisions of this chapter; provided that all costs incurred by the City in bringing or defending any such suit shall be paid or reimbursed by the Fire District. The City will not file any suit permitted under this subsection unless asked to do so in writing by the Fire District Board. The City will promptly notify the Fire District if the City is sued (served with process naming it as a defendant) pursuant to this subsection.

 

    C.   Knowingly furnishing false information to the City and/or Fire District on any matter relating to the administration of this chapter shall constitute a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 12-2019 § 9)

 

15.42.140 Severability.
    If any section, phrase, sentence, or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. (Ord. 12-2019 § 9)

Title 16 SUBDIVISIONS
Chapter 16.04 ANNEXATION POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
Chapter 16.08 GENERAL PROVISIONS PERTAINING TO THE SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT OF LAND AND ASSOCIATED FEES
Appendix A—Subdivision and Development Regulations
Appendix B—Fee Schedule for Subdivision and Development Applications

Chapter 16.04 ANNEXATION POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
16.04.010 Annexation procedure.
    A.  Compliance. All annexation of unincorporated territory to the City shall comply with the requirements and procedures set forth in the Municipal Annexation Act, Colorado Revised Statutes, Part 1 (Section 31-12-101, et seq.), as amended and the City’s Comprehensive Land Use Plan and applicable provisions of the Cañon City Municipal Code.

    B.   Conditions. No annexation of land in the City shall create an unreasonable burden on the physical, social, economic, or environmental resources of the City. The City may condition the annexation of land upon such terms and conditions as are reasonably necessary to ensure that this requirement is met.

    C.   Annexation Agreement. Applicants petitioning the City for annexation of their property shall enter into an annexation agreement with the City stating any terms and conditions imposed on the property, prior to the first reading of the annexation ordinance. Upon annexation, the annexation agreement shall be recorded to provide notice to future purchases of the property. (Ord. 35-2019 § 1)

 

16.04.020 Petitions.
    All petitions for annexation to the City shall comply with the applicable provisions of the Municipal Annexation Act, and in particular, C.R.S. Section 31-12-107. In addition to these requirements, any petition shall include a draft annexation agreement and the following, at the request of the City:

    A.  Information concerning the characteristics of the area, including, but not limited to, information concerning geologic, floodplain or wildlife hazards; mineral resources; wildlife resources; historical and archaeological resources; wetlands; and the environmental condition of the area;

    B.   Information addressing the short-term and long-term costs and benefits to the area proposed for annexation;

    C.   A description of necessary utility services; or

    D.  Such other information or studies as may be requested by the City Administrator, City Planner or the City Engineer. (Ord. 35-2019 § 1)

 

16.04.030 Fees and costs.
    A.  A non-refundable base fee of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) will be payable upon the submission for consideration by City Council of any annexation petition (or group of petitions, when a serial annexation is proposed). In situations where there are multiple voluntary petitioners, the petitioner’s themselves, and not the City, shall determine how the fees and costs provided for in this section are to be divided among them. The base fee is subject to the following:

    1.   If an annexation impact report is required by either City Council or the Board of Fremont County Commissioners, or both, the base fee shall be increased by one hundred dollars ($100.00), which amount must be paid before any significant work is performed by City staff on the annexation impact report.

    B.   Unless otherwise agreed in writing with the City, no fees or costs shall be charged to or collected from any property owner who joins in a petition for annexation at the request of the City in an annexation initiated by the City, including, but not limited to, property owners who became contractually bound to join in such petitions as a precondition to City water service being provided to their property, and no fees or costs shall be charged to or collected from any property owner whose property is included in the area covered by a petition for annexation if such property owner has not joined in such petition. Property owners described and referred to in this subsection shall not be considered to be voluntary petitioners by the City or any other petitioner and shall not be treated as such for purposes of prorating and collecting fees and costs payable pursuant to the requirements of this section.

    C.   In all cases where multiple landowners are jointly petitioning for the annexation of their property (in a single annexation petition or in a serial annexation through multiple petitions), such landowners shall designate in a written statement (by name, address and telephone number) a single person or entity from among their group who shall be responsible for the tender of payment to the City of all deposits, fees and costs reimbursable or otherwise payable pursuant to this section. The City’s notices and invoices with respect to this section shall be submitted to such designated person or entity. (Ord. 35-2019 § 1)

Chapter 16.08 GENERAL PROVISIONS PERTAINING TO THE SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT OF LAND AND ASSOCIATED FEES
16.08.010 Divisions of land—Approval and recordation.
    All divisions of lots, tracts or parcels of land into two (2) or more lots or parcels, or the plat of any subdivision of land within the City, shall be filed and recorded in the office of the County Clerk and Recorder of Fremont County only after having been approved in accordance with the Subdivision and Development Regulations of the City pertaining to the subdivision and development of land within the jurisdiction of the City. The most recent version of such Subdivision and Development Regulations, which from time to time may be amended by resolution of the City of Cañon City Planning Commission, shall be attached to this Chapter 16.08 as Appendix A and shall be applicable and enforceable within the jurisdiction of the City from and after the March 1, 2007 effective date of such regulations. (Ord. 2-2007 § 1)

 

16.08.020 Activities prohibited prior to approval.
    No building shall be erected on any lot or parcel or real estate, nor shall a building permit or a water tap be issued for any such building, unless the owner of the land upon which such building will be erected complies with the applicable provisions of the Subdivision and Development Regulations of the City. (Ord. 2-2007 § 1)

 

16.08.030 Vesting of property rights.
    No vested property right, as defined in Article 68 of Title 24, Colorado Revised Statutes, shall occur in the subdividing process until such time as the City Council has given approval of the final plat presented by the subdivider, after notice and public hearing, and such plat has been filed for recording with the Fremont County Clerk and Recorder, unless the subdivider and the City have reached a written agreement providing for the vesting of real property rights at a different time. When a plan is required as a part of the approval process required by the Subdivision and Development Regulations or by any ordinance of the City, no plat shall be recorded until the required plan has been approved. If required by the Subdivision and Development Regulations or by an ordinance of the City, such plan also shall be recorded. (Ord. 2-2007 § 1)

 

16.08.040 Land use and development fees.
    Fees pertaining to the subdivision and   development of land in the City (including the processes provided for in the Subdivision and Development Regulations) shall be established and from time to time amended by ordinance of City Council. Schedules reflecting the City’s subdivision and development fees, as set forth in such ordinances, shall be attached to this Chapter 16.08 as Appendix B. Appendix B shall be amended from time to time as ordinances modifying the fee schedule are adopted by City Council. (Ord. 2-2007 § 1)

 

16.08.050 Applicability of state law to the subdivision process.
    The provisions of Part 2 of Article 23 of Title 31, Colorado Revised Statutes, when not in conflict with the specific provisions of this Chapter 16.08 or the Subdivision and Development Regulations appended to this chapter as Appendix A, shall apply as to the subdivision and development of land within the jurisdiction of the City. (Ord. 2-2007 § 1)

Appendix A—Subdivision and Development Regulations
Note:
    The Subdivision and Development Regulations, which from time to time may be amended by resolution of the City of Cañon City Planning Commission (and/or by resolution or ordinance of the City Council), is adopted by reference and attached to this Chapter 16.08 as if fully set out herein, and shall be applicable and enforceable within the jurisdiction of the City from and after the March 1, 2007 effective date of such regulations. A current copy of the regulations is available here:

http://cms4.revize.com/revize/canoncity/Departments/CommunityDevelopment/Zoning/180703.Sub_Dev_Regulations.FullDocument.pdf

 

and is also on file in the Office of the City Clerk. (Adopted via Ordinance No. 2, Series of 2007—2/24/2007; Amended via Resolution No. 10, Series of 2007—5/21/2007; Amended via Resolution No. 29, Series of 2008—10/20/2008)

Appendix B—Fee Schedule for Subdivision and Development Applications
Fee schedule.
    As of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter 16.08, the City’s fees relative to the processing, review and consideration of applications for the subdivision and other development of land and properties in the City, shall be as follows:

 

Land Use Application

Fee

Major Subdivision

Preliminary Plat

$1,000.00 plus $10.00 per lot

Final Plat

$1,500.00

Minor Subdivision

$1,000.00 plus $10.00 per lot

Sketch Plan

$400.00

Site Plan

$350.00

Appeal of Site Plan to Board of Adjustment

$100.00

Lot Line Adjustment

$250.00

Vacation Right-of-Way or Easement

$500.00

Subdivision Exemption

$250.00

 

(Ord. 18-2020 § 8; Ord. 11-2012 § 2; Ord. 2-2007 § 2)

Title 17 ZONING
Chapter 17.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS AND ZONING MAP
Chapter 17.08 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 17.12 DISTRICTS AND GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter 17.13 ADMINISTRATIVE EXCEPTIONS
Chapter 17.14 TRANSITIONAL MIXED-USE OVERLAY ZONE
Chapter 17.15 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS (ADUs)
Chapter 17.16 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
Chapter 17.17 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONE DISTRICT AND PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT PLAN
Chapter 17.18 RIVERFRONT ZONE DISTRICTS
Chapter 17.20 SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS AND DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 17.23 CONDITIONAL USES
Chapter 17.24 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL REVIEW
Chapter 17.28 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
Chapter 17.30 SIGNS
Chapter 17.32 NONCONFORMING LOTS AND STRUCTURES
Chapter 17.34 MARIJUANA CULTIVATION FOR PERSONAL USE
Chapter 17.36 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
Chapter 17.40 AMENDMENTS TO ZONING PROVISIONS
Chapter 17.44 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 17.45 WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES

Chapter 17.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS AND ZONING MAP
17.04.010 Title for citation.
    This Title 17 shall be cited as the “Zoning Ordinance” of the City of Cañon City, Colorado. (Ord. 25-1991 § 1)

 

17.04.020 Statutory authority—Purpose of provisions.
    A.  In pursuance of the authority conferred by Section 14 of Article XV of the Charter of the City of Cañon City and Article 23 of Title 31, Colorado Revised Statutes, 1973 as amended, the ordinance codified in this title is enacted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, convenience, order, prosperity and general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the city by lessening of congestion in the streets and roads, securing safety from fire and other dangers, providing adequate light and air; the classification of land uses, and the distribution of land development and utilization, avoiding undue congestion of population, facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, water, schools, parks, sewerage and other public requirements; and by other means in accordance with the Cañon City comprehensive plan (master plan) and the zoning map adopted herewith.

    B.   The City Council and the Planning Commission of the City declare that this title is additionally adopted for the following specific purposes:

    1.   To promote coordinated and sound development;

    2.   To provide for higher quality site and land planning, to conserve open space, and to promote more efficient and attractive use of open space;

    3.   To establish, regulate, restrict and limit uses; provide for the gradual elimination of nonconforming uses, buildings and structures, and to eliminate uses to which such structures are devoted when the use is discontinued or the structure is destroyed or damaged in major part. To eliminate structures or uses on or along any storm or floodwater runoff channel or basin as by law provided. (Ord. 25-1991 § 1)

 

17.04.030 Interpretation and application.
    The provisions of this title may be regarded as minimum requirements for the promotion of public health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity and general welfare. This title is not intended to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or agreements between parties; provided, however, that wherever this title proposes a greater restriction upon use of buildings or land, upon the location or height of buildings or structures, or requires larger open spaces about the structures than are imposed or required by other laws, ordinances, or easements, covenants or agreements between parties, the provisions of this title shall govern. (Ord. 25-1991 § 1)

 

17.04.040 Jurisdictional area—Annexed areas.
    This title shall apply to all land and buildings within the corporate limits of the city, as presently exists, or as hereafter established by any annexation proceedings. Any area annexed shall be brought under the jurisdiction of this title and map within ninety (90) days from the effective date of the annexation ordinance. (Ord. 25-1991 § 1)

 

17.04.050 Conformity with Title 17 regulations.
    A.  No structure or premises shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no structure or portion thereof shall be moved, constructed, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or altered contrary to provisions of this title.

    B.   No building shall be erected, enlarged or moved, nor shall any open spaces surrounding any building be encroached upon or reduced except in conformity with the use, area, height and yard requirements established in this title for the district in which such building is located. No yard or other open space provided for the purpose of complying with this title shall be considered as providing a yard or other open space for more than one principal building or use. (Ord. 25-1991 § 1)

 

17.04.060 Conformity with comprehensive plan.
    This title shall be for the purpose of implementing the comprehensive plan (master plan) of the City. Specifically those policies relating to land use and minimum development quality are strengthened by implementation via this title. (Ord. 25-1991 § 1)

 

17.04.070 Vesting of property rights.
    No property rights, as defined in Section 24-68-101, Colorado Revised Statutes, et seq., shall occur in the zoning process until such time as the City Council has given approval to the final Planned Unit Development plan and plat after notice and public hearing, unless the developer and the City have reached a written agreement providing for the vesting of real property rights at a different time. (Ord. 25-1991 § 1)

 

17.04.080 Zoning map and district boundaries.
    A.  The location and boundaries of the districts designated in Chapter 17.12 are established as shown on the official Zoning District Map.

    B.   The zoning map and all the notations thereon are made a part of this title. The signed copy of the zoning map containing the zoning districts designated at the time of the adoption of this title shall be maintained without change on file in the offices of the City Engineer, or in such office as the City Administrator may designate, as well as the office of the City Clerk.

    C.   Changes made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the zoning map shall be made in accordance with the provisions of this title, the Charter of the City and statutes of the state. Changes shall be entered on the zoning map by the Zoning Administrator promptly after the amendment involving matter portrayed on the zoning map has been approved by the City Council, with an entry on both the official reproducible zoning map and a color-coded copy thereof posted in the municipal building. (Ord. 25-1991 § 1)

 

17.04.090 Process vesting.
    Once a complete application pursuant to any approval process set forth in this title has been submitted to the office of the City Planner, it shall be reviewed according to the process, procedures, standards and fees contained in the zoning ordinance at the time of submittal, provided that such application has not been abandoned. Any application that remains pending for a period longer than twelve (12) months following the submittal of a complete application shall be presumed abandoned unless the City and the applicant agree in writing that such application has not been abandoned or a hearing on such application has been scheduled prior to the expiration of such twelve (12) month period. Any subsequent amendment to the process or requirements of the zoning ordinance adopted by the City that become effective after the date of the submittal shall not apply to any applications pending approval at the time of the adoption of the amendment, unless the City and the applicant agree in writing to follow the revised process or the application has been abandoned. (Ord. 10-2012 § 1)

Chapter 17.08 DEFINITIONS
17.08.005 Interpretation of language.
    The words and terms used, defined, interpreted or further described in this title may be construed as follows:

    A.  The particular controls the general.

    B.   The word “shall” is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word “may” is permissive.

    C.   Words used in the present tense include the future unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.

    D.  Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. (Ord. 15-2016 § 1; Ord. 25-1991 § 1)

 

17.08.010 Words and terms.
    A.  The following list of specific words and terms are defined as set out in this chapter.

    B.   Further clarification of words and terms can be obtained by referring to the topic in which they are explained within the context of this title.

    C.   Definitions Designated.

    “Accessory structure or use” means a structure or use located on the same lot or on a contiguous lot in the same ownership and in the same zone district as the principal structure or use, which is incidental and subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the principal use of the property. Accessory structures include garages, sheds, barns, private greenhouses, decks, and fences, but do not include mobile or modular storage units used for storage in any zone district. Rented mobile or modular storage units (e.g., POD-style storage containers) are permitted in all zone districts for short-term storage not to exceed forty-five (45) days. Mobile homes, trailers or recreational vehicles shall not be used as accessory structures in any zone district.

    “Agriculture” means the business of cultivating the land or employing it for the purpose of raising all livestock and poultry, as well as the caring for and harvesting of crops.

    “Alley” means a minor or secondary right-of-way, either public or private, which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street and which may be used for public utility purposes.

    “Amusement and entertainment facility” means that which occupies the attention with a pleasurable pursuit or diversion including, but not limited to, theater, library, game room, dance hall, assembly room, museum, gallery, and studio.

    “Animal” means any living thing that is not a plant; generally capable of voluntary motion and sensation; a living organism. Animals include, but are not limited to: snakes, fish, birds, fowl, small mammals, hoofed animals, etc.

 

    “Animal boarding” means the operation of an establishment in which domesticated animals other than household pets are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained or sold. This term shall not include the operation of a kennel.

    “Animal hospital” means a veterinary hospital where animals are brought for medical treatment and may be housed during the time of such treatment.

    “Apartment” means a part of a building consisting of a room or suite of rooms intended, designed or used as a residence by an individual or a single family and located in a multiple-family dwelling or located in a building devoted primarily to nonresidential use.

    “Apiary” means the place where one or more bee colonies are kept.

    Appliance, Major. “Major appliance” means a large machine or device which accomplishes some routine household or housekeeping task or purpose, such as cooking, food preservation, or cleaning, whether in a residential, institutional, commercial or industrial setting. Major appliances include, but are not necessarily limited to, refrigerators, freezers, stoves and ovens, washers and dryers, dishwashers, air conditioners, water heaters and trash compactors. Whirlpool tubs and spas also are major appliances for purposes of this title.

    “Applicant” means the owner or duly designated representative of land for which a special review, amendment, variance, PUD, building permit or certificate of occupancy has been requested.

    Area. See “Lot area.”

    “Assisted living residence” means a residential facility that makes available to three (3) or more adults not related to the owner of such facility, either directly or indirectly through an agreement with the resident, room and board and at least the following services: personal services; protective oversight; social care due to impaired capacity to live independently; and regular supervision that shall be available on a twenty-four (24) hour basis, but not to the extent that regular twenty-four (24) hour medical or nursing care is required. The term “assisted living residence” does not include any facility licensed in the State of Colorado as a residential care facility for individuals with developmental disabilities, or any individual residential support services that are excluded from licensure requirements pursuant to rules adopted by the department of public health and environment.

    “Automated fueling center” means an unattended establishment exclusively for the fueling of commercial vehicles.

    “Backyard chickens” means up to eight (8) members of the species Gallus gallus domesticus kept for personal use in the backyard of residential properties as an accessory use in the R-1 or R-2 zone districts or pursuant to a valid conditional use permit for properties used for residential purposes in the C or I zone districts.

    “Bed and breakfast” means a residential building where, for compensation, lodging and meals (typically limited to breakfast) are provided in a “family” atmosphere for other than the occupant and family, for a short period of time, usually less than a week.

    “Bee” means any stage of the common domestic honey bee, Apis mellifera species.

    “Beehive” means a structure intended for the housing of a bee colony.

    “Beekeeper” means any person who owns or maintains a bee colony.

 

    “Beekeeping” means the owning and breeding of bees.

    “Boarding or rooming house” means a building or portion thereof other than a hotel or restaurant where, for compensation, lodging and meals are provided for five (5) or more persons, not including members of the occupant’s immediate family who might occupy such building, usually for an extended period of time. The word compensation shall include compensation in money, services or other items of value.

    “Brew pub” means a restaurant that prepares handcrafted natural beer as an accessory use intended primarily for consumption on the premises. Production capacity shall be limited to not more than five thousand (5,000) barrels per year. Such accessory use may occupy up to thirty percent (30%) of the gross floor area of the restaurant.

    “Building” means any roofed structure built for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.

    Building Coverage. See “Lot coverage.”

    “Building height” means the vertical distance measured from the lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground within the area between the building and a point five (5) feet from the exterior wall of the building to the uppermost point of the roof.

    Building, Principal. “Principal building” means a building in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which said building is situated.

    “Bulk fuel dealer” means an establishment that sell fuels which, by their nature, are flammable, explosive, or toxic, to businesses and households for transportation, heating, and business purposes which include, but may not be limited to, propane gas sales, heating oil dealers, liquefied petroleum gas dealers, coal, wood, or other fuel dealers. This definition does not apply to propane refill services typically located at retail businesses.

    Bulk, Nonconforming. “Nonconforming bulk” means that part of a building, structure or nonbuilding use which does not conform to one or more of the applicable bulk regulations in this title.

    “Bulk regulations” means regulations controlling the size of structures and the relationships of structures and uses to each other and to open areas and lot lines. Bulk regulations include regulations controlling:

    1.   Maximum height;

    2.   Maximum lot coverage;

    3.   Minimum size yard and setback.

    “Bus” means a motor vehicle with a long body that is equipped with seats or benches for passengers and which is used (or was manufactured to be used) to transport passengers from place to place over public highways.

    “Bush” means a shrub or low woody plant with branches near ground level.

    “Cemetery” means land which is used for the interment of the dead, including earth interments, a mausoleum for crypt interments, a columbarium for cinerary interments or a combination of more than one thereof.

    “Child care center” means a state-licensed facility maintained for the care of children and as further defined by the Colorado Revised Statutes, including, but not limited to, day camps, nursery schools, day care, preschools and playschools.

    “Child care, family” or “Family child care” means a state-licensed facility for child care in a place of residence for the purpose of providing family care and training for children as further defined by the Colorado Revised Statutes who are not related to the head of the home.

    “Children’s group home” or “Foster care home” means a state-licensed structure used for the housing of minor children in a family-type setting and as further defined by the Colorado Revised Statutes.

    “Children’s home” or “Residential child care facility” means a state-licensed institution for the care of large numbers of minor children in a non-family setting and as further defined by the Colorado Revised Statutes.

    “Church,” for purposes of this title, shall mean synagogue, temple, chapel, mosque, tabernacle and other such structures designed for religious instruction and worship and other accessory non-profit activities and uses.

    “Church parking lot” means a parking lot used primarily for the parking or standing, but not the storage, of motor vehicles used by persons attending the functions of a church. Church parking lots may be located on, contiguous to or within three hundred (300) feet of the nearest property line of a lot or parcel upon which one of the church’s principal buildings is located. Except as otherwise might be provided in this title, all church parking lots must be constructed, surfaced, configured and maintained in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.28 of this Code. A church may own, control and use more than one church parking lot.

    “Clinic” means an establishment where human patients who are not lodged overnight are admitted for examination and treatment by a group of physicians, dentists, or other health care professionals. A clinic does not include any facility where medical marijuana is dispensed.

    “College or university” means an educational institution authorized by the State of Colorado to award associate or higher degrees.

    “Colony” means a hive and its equipment and appurtenances, including bees, comb, honey, pollen and brood.

    Colorado Revised Statutes (CRS). “CRS” shall mean the Colorado Revised Statutes as amended.

    “Commercial” means the activities and transactions of business, industry and trade; the purchase and sale of goods and merchandise as well as providing professional and personal services to the general public.

    “Commercial vehicle” means any vehicle having a rated capacity of one and one-half tons or more that is used or designed to be used for business or commercial purposes that infringes on the residential character of a residential zone district or other property used for residential purposes, and includes, but is not necessarily limited to: a bus, cement truck, commercial tree-trimming equipment, construction equipment, dump truck, garbage truck, panel truck, semi-tractor, semi-trailer, commercial utility trailer, stock trailer, stake bed truck, step van, tank truck, tar truck, or other commercial type vehicle licensed by the State of Colorado as a commercial vehicle or truck.

    “Common elements” mean:

    1.   In a condominium or cooperative, all portions of the condominium or cooperative other than the units; and

    2.   In a planned community, any real estate within a planned community owned or leased by the association, other than a unit. (See Section 38-33.3-103(5), C.R.S.)

    Common Elements, Limited. “Limited common elements” mean common elements, as defined above, but reserved for the exclusive use of fewer than all owners. (See Section 38-33.3-103(1a), C.R.S.)

    “Common interest community” means real estate described in a declaration with respect to which a person, by virtue of such person’s ownership of a unit, is obligated to pay for real estate taxes, insurance premiums, maintenance, or improvement of other real estate described in a declaration. Ownership of a unit does not include holding a leasehold interest in a unit of less than forty (40) years, including renewal options. The period of the leasehold interest, including renewal options, is measured from the date the initial term commences. (See Section 38-33.3-103(8), C.R.S.)

    “Community marijuana cultivation facility” means a premises licensed to provide designated restricted access areas for the cultivation of marijuana for personal use and provide limited assistance to those individuals cultivating marijuana within the facility.

    “Comprehensive plan” means the master plan for the City which has been officially adopted to provide long-range development policies for the City and which includes, among other things, the plan for land use, public facilities and transportation.

    “Condominium” means a common interest community in which portions of the real estate are designated for separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of the separate ownership portions. A common interest community is not a condominium unless the undivided interests in the common elements are vested in the unit owners. (See Section 38-33.3-103(9), C.R.S.)

    “Convenience store” means a small retail store selling diversified goods most commonly used daily or while traveling; sometimes in combination with the sale of motor vehicle fuel.

    “Density” means the overall average number of dwelling units located on the gross or net residential acreage (as applicable) contained within the development and calculated on a per-acre basis. Gross density is calculated by dividing the total number of units by the total acreage. Net density is calculated by dividing the total number of units by the total acreage minus all streets.

    “Disposition” means a contract of sale resulting in the transfer of equitable title to an interest in subdivided land; an option to purchase an interest in subdivided land; or a lease or an assignment of an interest in subdivided land which is not made pursuant to one of the foregoing.

    “District” means an area or areas within the limits of the city for which the regulations and requirements governing use, lot and bulk of building and premises are uniform.

    “Drive-in establishment” means an establishment which is designed to provide, wholly or in part, service to customers while they remain in or on their vehicles parked upon the premises.

    Duplex. See “Dwelling, two-family.”

    Dwelling, Multi-Family. “Multi-family dwelling” means a building used by three (3) or more families living independently of each other in separate dwelling units, including townhouses, apartments and condominiums, but not including hotels, motels, resorts or group accommodations.

    Dwelling, Single-Family. “Single-family dwelling” means a detached principal building designed and used as a dwelling exclusively by one family as an independent living unit.

    Dwelling, Two-Family. “Two-family dwelling” means a residential building containing two (2) attached dwelling units, each of which has direct access to the outside. A two-family dwelling is commonly called a duplex.

    “Dwelling unit” means one or more rooms and a single kitchen and at least one bathroom, designed, occupied or intended for occupancy as separate quarters for the exclusive use of a single family for living, cooking and sanitary purposes, located in a single-family, duplex or multi-family dwelling or mixed-use building. The term “dwelling unit” does not include: living quarters furnished in a hotel or motel for which a daily rental rate is charged; motor homes, trailers, or other recreational vehicles using the facilities of a recreational vehicle park; or hospital rooms or living quarters in a nursing home certified as such by the State of Colorado.

    “Easement” means an interest in real property that establishes the right to use the property for certain purposes, such as utilities installation, access, drainage, and maintenance. Ownership of the underlying land remains with the property owner, not the easement holder.

    “Elementary school” means any school, whether public or private, which meets the State of Colorado requirements for formal education in grades kindergarten through eighth.

    “Employees” means all persons, including proprietors, working on the premises, the number of which shall be calculated upon the largest shift at peak season.

    “Exotic animal” means any animal that is not commonly domesticated or that is not common to North America or that, irrespective of geographic origin, is of a wild or predatory nature.

    “Factory-built home” means any structure, or component thereof, designed primarily for residential occupancy, either permanent or temporary, including a mobile home which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation, or assembly and installation, on the building site. Factory-built homes include mobile homes, manufactured homes and modular homes (see Section 17.20.130, Mobile homes—Storage and temporary uses).

    “Family” means either:

    1.   An individual or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit;

    2.   A group of not more than eight (8) adult persons who need not be related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit; plus in either case, domestic help or caregiver.

    A “family” may include any number of gratuitous guests or minor children not related by blood, marriage or adoption.

    “Farmers’ market” means a seasonal, open-air market where groups of individual sellers offer for sale to the public such items as fresh produce, seasonal fruits, fresh flowers, arts and crafts items, and food and beverages from open, enclosed or semi-enclosed temporary structures.

    “Farm stand” means a small, open-air, temporary structure that is not permanently affixed to the ground and that is readily removable in its entirety, from which agricultural products produced on the premises are sold.

    “Feedlots” means the confined feeding of food, for commercial purposes, of dairy, fur or pleasure animals in buildings, lots, pens, pools or ponds which normally are not used for raising crops or for grazing animals.

    “Fence” means a freestanding structure of metal, masonry, composition or wood, or any combination thereof, resting on or partially buried in the ground and rising above ground level, used for confinement, screening or partition purposes.

    “Field” means open land where grass and herbage is grown which is periodically cut and gathered as feed for livestock.

    “Final planned development plan (FPDP)” means a revised approved planned development district plan, and any portions thereof, and shall include a revised development guide, a finalized set of graphic documents, and any additional information reasonably required by the Zoning Administrator as necessary for approval of the FPDP.

    “Flea market” means a seasonal, open-air market where groups of individual sellers offer for sale to the public primarily secondhand goods from open, enclosed or semi-enclosed temporary structures.

    “Floor area” means the area included within the outside walls of a building or portion thereof, including habitable tenant houses and attic space, but not including vent shafts, courts or uninhabitable areas below ground level or in attics.

    “Flyway barrier” means a solid hedge, wall or other structure designed and placed so as to direct the bees’ flight from the beehive upward and away from people.

    “Food cart or truck” means a readily movable wheeled structure, a motorized vehicle, a towed wheeled vehicle, or a pushcart that is equipped and operated for the purpose of vending food and/or drink, and accessory advertising of food.

    Foundation, Permanent. “Permanent foundation” means reinforced piers, posts, piles, poured concrete walls, reinforced block walls, or compacted fill in use as a permanent foundation for a manufactured home, modular home or mobile building. Stacked concrete blocks shall not be considered to constitute a permanent foundation.

    “Frontage” means that portion of a lot, parcel, tract or block abutting upon a street.

    Garage, Private. “Private garage” means an accessory building or accessory portion of the main building designed for the shelter or storage of motor vehicles or personal property owned or operated by occupants of the main building.

    Garage, Public. “Public garage” means a garage other than a private garage, used for the housing or care of motor vehicles or where such vehicles are equipped for operation, repair, or kept for remuneration, hire or sale.

    “Gasoline station” means a building or premises on or in which the principal use is the dispensing of gasoline, oil or other fuel for motor vehicles by self serve or assisted service means which may include, as incidental use only, facilities used for polishing, greasing, washing or otherwise cleaning or light servicing of motor vehicles, but may not include liquefied petroleum gas distribution facilities, facilities for major repairs of motor vehicles or rental operation.

    “Grade” means:

    1.   The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving, or sidewalk within the area between the building and the property line, or, where the property line is more than five (5) feet from the building, between the building and a line five (5) feet from the building; or

    2.   The degree of rise or descent of a sloping surface.

    “Grazing land” means a fenced field where livestock are kept to feed on growing grass and plants.

    “Greenhouse” means a structure used to cultivate flowers, shrubs, trees and plants (other than marijuana plants) for non-commercial purposes.

    Greenhouse, Commercial. “Commercial greenhouse” means a structure used to cultivate flowers, shrubs, trees and plants (other than marijuana plants) for sale at wholesale or retail or for transplanting.

    “Gross floor area” or “GFA” means the total enclosed floor area of all floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls and from the center line of walls separating buildings, including basements, lobbies, common area, storage areas, stairwells, equipment room sand other fully enclosed spaces of the building. GFA does not include non-enclosed areas like plazas, loading docks, covered parking areas, balconies and the like.

    “Group home for the aged” means a residential structure, which may include a single-family dwelling, where persons sixty (60) years of age or older who do not need nursing facilities elect to live in normal residential surroundings and as further defined and limited by the Colorado Revised Statutes.

    “Group home for the developmentally disabled” means a state-licensed group living situation where services and support are provided to persons with developmental disabilities and as further defined by the Colorado Revised Statutes.

    “Group home for the mentally ill” means a state-licensed group living situation for persons with mental illness as further defined by the Colorado Revised Statutes.

    “Hedge” means a boundary formed by a dense row of shrubs or low trees.

    “Home occupation” means an occupation carried on in the dwelling or accessory building by members of the family occupying the dwelling, with no servant, employee or other person being engaged, provided the residential character of the building is maintained and the occupation is conducted in such a manner as not to give an outward appearance nor manifest any characteristic of a business in the ordinary meaning of the term, nor infringe upon the right of neighboring residents to enjoy a peaceful occupancy of their homes. See Chapter 17.20.

    “Homeowners association,” when used with respect to a common interest community that is subject to some or all of the provisions of Article 33.3 of Title 38, C.R.S., shall mean a unit owner’s association organized under Section 38-33.3-301, C.R.S., and when used with respect to a planned unit development that is not a common interest community, shall mean an association formed by or for the benefit of landowners in the planned unit development for the ownership and maintenance of common open space.

    “Hospital” means any building or portion thereof used for diagnosis, treatment and care of human ailments but not including medical clinics, rest homes, convalescent homes, nursing and retirement homes.

    “Hospital heliport” means an area located in close proximity to a hospital emergency room or a medical facility that is designed to be used for the landing and taking off of helicopters for the limited purpose of transporting patients in need of medical services and for such training as is permitted or required by law.

    “Hotel” means an establishment that provides temporary lodging in guest rooms, and in which meals, entertainment and various personal services for the public may or may not be provided.

    “Household pets” means animals, birds, reptiles or fish which are permitted in the house as a custom of the community and kept for companionship or pleasure.

    “Intermodal shipping container” means a pre-fabricated, standardized, reusable, metal container designed and intended for transporting cargo on ocean-going ships, trains, or tractor trailers, also commonly called cargo containers, transport containers or marine cargo containers. Includes Conex and railroad car containers, but does not include mobile or modular storage units.

    “Junkyard” means an area of land within any zone district, with or without buildings, used for or occupied for a period of time in excess of two (2) weeks, by an accumulation, collection, deposit or storage, outside a completely enclosed building, of used, second hand or discarded goods and materials which are no longer in use or cannot be put to immediate use for the purpose originally intended, including, but not limited to, paper, rags, rubbish, household trash, bottles, tires, home furnishings, machinery, scrap metal, appliances, building materials, vehicle parts and unsheltered inoperable motor vehicles.

    “Kennel” means a commercial facility licensed by the Colorado Department of Agriculture to house dogs, cats or other household pets, and where selling, transferring, adopting, breeding, boarding, training, sheltering and/or rescuing of animals may be conducted.

    “Landing” means a platform at the top of stairs that allows entry into a structure.

    “Licensed medical marijuana facility” shall have the same meaning that is given to such term in Section 5.56.020 of the Cañon City Municipal Code.

    “Light Industry” means the assembly, processing, fabrication and manufacturing of goods that uses only moderate amounts of materials in production and/or has few, if any, environmental impacts.

    “Livestock” means horses, cattle, goats, sheep, donkeys, chickens, ducks, rabbits and any similar animal commonly kept on a farm or ranch. Animals such as llamas, alpacas, yaks, ostriches, emus, pot-bellied pigs and other less commonly kept animals are considered to be livestock for purposes of this Code. Up to eight (8) chickens kept in the backyard of a residential property pursuant to Section 17.20.029 of this Code are not considered livestock.

    “Lot” means a parcel of land shown as a lot on a recorded plat, a parcel of land described by metes and bounds on a recorded deed or a tract of land made up of two (2) or more such parcels which are contiguous and under common ownership and which alone do not meet the minimum designated lot area requirements of this title.

    “Lot area” means the area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side and rear lot lines.

    Lot, Corner. “Corner lot” means a lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection or upon two (2) parts of the same street and where in either case, the interior angle formed by the intersection does not exceed one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. Corner lots do not have two (2) front yards. See also “Lot Line, Front.”

    “Lot coverage” means that percentage of lot area which, when viewed from directly above, would be covered by a structure or structures, or any part thereof, excluding projecting roof eaves.

    “Lot depth” means the distance between the midpoints of the front lot line and the midpoint of the rear lot line.

    Lot, Double-Frontage. “Double-frontage lot” means a lot which runs through a block between two (2) streets and has two (2) nonintersecting sides abutting two (2) or more streets.

    Lot, Interior. “Interior lot” means a lot other than a corner lot.

    Lot Line, Front. “Front lot line” means the property line abutting a point of public access, off of which access the principal structure occupying the lot is addressed.

    Lot Line, Interior Side. “Interior side lot line” means a property line other than a front or rear property line which does not abut a public right-of-way, but is a common property line between adjoining lots.

    Lot Line, Rear. “Rear lot line” means, except on a double-frontage lot, the property line opposite the front lot line.

    Lot Line, Street Side. “Street side lot line” means the secondary property line of a corner lot which is abutting public right-of-way but is not the right-of-way off which the principal structure occupying the lot is addressed.

    “Lot width” means the distance on a horizontal plane between the side property lines of a lot, measured at right angles to the line establishing the lot depth at the building setback line.

    “Manufactured home” means a single-family dwelling which is partially or entirely manufactured in a factory, is not less than twenty-four (24) feet in width and thirty-six (36) feet in length, is installed on an engineered permanent foundation, has brick, wood or cosmetically equivalent exterior siding and a pitched roof and is certified pursuant to the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. 5401, et seq., as amended, and is built for the Colorado climate and snow loads according to the Department of Housing and Urban Development standards established under the provisions of 42 U.S.C. 5401, et seq.

    “Marijuana” means all parts of the plant of the genus cannabis whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or its resin, including marijuana concentrate. Marijuana does include medical marijuana but does not include industrial hemp, nor does it include fiber produced from the stalks, oil, or cake made from the seeds of the plant, sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination, or the weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or other product.

    “Materials recovery facility” also known as “recyclables processing” means a specialized plant that receives, separates and prepares recyclable materials for marketing to an end-use manufacturer.

    “Mineral extraction” means the excavation or extraction of any earth products of natural mineral deposit, except where such excavation is for the purposes of grading for a building lot or roadway or where materials are excavated from a lot for use on that same lot by the owner of the property.

    “Minor-operated business” means a business solely operated by persons under the age of eighteen (18) for no more than one hundred eighty (180) days in any calendar year.

    “Mixed land use development” allows commercial, office, employment center, residential development, and, in some cases, industrial uses to occur independently on separate parcels or to coexist jointly under a unified business development plan on multiple parcels.

    “Mobile home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is eight (8) body feet or more in width and is thirty-two (32) body feet or more in length and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling or temporary office, without permanent foundation when connected to required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems contained therein.

    “Mobile home park” means a residential development, licensed by the City of Cañon City, which is located on property under single parcel ownership, and which is designed and intended primarily for two (2) or more mobile homes, each placed upon a mobile home rental pad within a mobile home rental space with utility hookups provided, and which is arranged for operation by on-site management as defined in CRS 38-12-201.5(1.5).

    “Mobile home rental pad” means that area within a mobile home rental space in a mobile home park or recreational vehicle park, surfaced with gravel, asphalt or concrete, upon which a single-wide or double-wide mobile home or recreational vehicle is or may be placed, but does not include off-street parking spaces or any other area occupied by accessory structures or extensions or additions to the mobile home or recreational vehicle, such as sheds, walkways, porches, decks, patios, awnings, carports and garages, or room additions.

    “Mobile home rental space” means a parcel of land within a mobile home park for which rent is paid, and includes the area covered by the rental pad, additions or extensions to the mobile home, porches, decks, patios, awnings, carports and garages, accessory structures, off-street parking spaces and private yard.

    “Mobile home subdivision” means a residential development primarily for manufactured homes, modular homes and mobile homes, wherein individual lots are under separate ownership and any common areas are owned by a homeowners association or other entity, or by the individual lot owners in undivided interests.

    “Mobile machinery” or “self-propelled construction equipment” means those vehicles, self-propelled or otherwise, which are not designed primarily for the transportation of persons or cargo over the public highways, and those motor vehicles which originally may have been designed for the transportation of persons or cargo over public highways, but which have been redesigned or modified by the mounting thereon of special equipment or machinery, and which may be operated or moved only incidentally over the public highways. This definition includes, but is not limited to, wheeled vehicles commonly used in the construction, maintenance, and repair of roadways, the drilling of wells, and the digging of ditches.

    “Model Traffic Code” means the version of the “Model Traffic Code for Colorado Municipalities” promulgated and published as such by the Colorado Department of Transportation, as adopted by reference and amended in Chapter 10.04 of this Code. Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, whenever a word or term that is used in this title is not specifically defined in this title, but is specifically defined in the Model Traffic Code definition of such word or term shall apply.

    “Modular home” means a structure designed to be transported after fabrication, and located as a permanent addition to and becoming a part of the real property. Such a structure must meet the minimum construction requirements of the International Residential Code, the Plumbing and Electrical Code as enforced by the State of Colorado, and shall be certified by the Colorado Division of Housing. Such structure must be set on a permanent foundation and is subject to all local building, zoning and housing regulations. Any such modular home meeting the requirements herein defined is not considered a mobile home.

    “Motel” means a building or group of buildings on the same lot containing guest units consisting of individual sleeping quarters, detached or in connecting rows, with or without cooking facilities, for short-term rental.

    “Nonconforming structure” means a structure which does not comply with the lot size requirements or bulk regulations applicable to new structures in the zoning district in which it is located.

    Nonconforming Use. See “Use, nonconforming.”

    “Nursery” means a place where young trees, shrubs and plants (other than marijuana plants) are cultivated for sale or other commercial use.

    “Nursing home” means a facility licensed by the State of Colorado for the aged or chronically or incurably ill persons in which five (5) or more such persons not of the immediate family are provided with food and shelter or care for compensation, but not including hospitals, clinics, or similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of the sick or injured.

    Open Space, Common. “Common open space” means a parcel of land, an area of water, or a combination of land and water within the site designated for a planned unit development (PUD) or subdivision, designed and intended primarily for the use or enjoyment of residents, occupants and owners of the PUD or subdivision. (See Section 24-67-103(1), C.R.S.)

    Open Space, Functional. “Functional open space,” also called “usable open space,” means any land or water area with its surface open to the sky, which serves specific uses of: providing park and recreational opportunities; conserving natural areas and environmental resources; structuring urban development form; and protecting areas of agricultural, archeological, or historical significance. Functional open space shall not be considered synonymous with vacant or unused land but serves important urban functions. Functional open space shall exclude areas used for off-street parking, off-street loading, service driveways and setbacks from oil and gas wells and their appurtenances, or other hazards to the public.

    “Outdoor retail sales” mean the outdoor sales of small and portable items of personal property such as books, fireworks (when otherwise permitted by law), craftwork, food, produce, flowers, clothing, Christmas trees, toys, hand tools, and similar items. “Outdoor retail sales” does not include the sales of new and/or used motor vehicles, boats, furniture or major appliances at places other than permanent locations used solely for the sale of such items that are owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the person offering such items for sale on a year-round basis.

    “Outlot” means a measured piece of land contained within a subdivision that is not a building lot. An outlot may be conveyed to a public entity for use as open space or other public purposes, be retained by the developer for later subdivision, or be conveyed to an owners association. An outlot is not necessarily required to front on a public street, but in the case where it does not, it must be accessible by way of an adequate easement.

    “Overlay zone” means a separate zoning district that superimposes additional regulations or specific development criteria on a parcel of land in a particular zone district pursuant to Article II of Chapter 17.12.

    Owner, Property. “Property owner” means the owner or titleholder of any fee, leasehold, or possessory interest in property subject to the requirements of this title, and shall include any agent, representative, person, or entity duly authorized by the owner to act on the owner’s behalf.

    “Parcel” means a tract or plot of land of any size that may or may not be subdivided or improved.

    “Park” or “parking” means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than very briefly for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or passengers.

    Parking, Off-Street. “Off-street parking” means parking of motor vehicles off the public right-of-way.

    “Parking space” means the required area for parking of motorized vehicles off the public right-of-way in compliance with Chapter 17.28 of this title.

    “Patient” means a person with a debilitating medical condition (as described in Section 14(1) of Article XVIII of the State Constitution).

    “Person” means every natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.

    “Personal services” means services which supply some accommodation required by the public and does not produce or transfer a tangible commodity, including, but not limited to: beauty shop, self-service laundry, dry cleaning outlet, travel agency, answering service and similar shops.

    “Pet crematory” means an establishment containing a furnace or incinerator used for the cremation of animal remains. A pet crematory may also include, as accessory uses, the pick-up of pet remains, the sale of urns to hold ashes, and other related products and services.

    “Planned Development District (PDD)” means a zoning district area which is defined by the general development plan, and has been designated various uses to be further specified in the planning area, and which is in conformance with the comprehensive plan.

    “Planned Development District Plan (PDDP)” or “(PDD Plan)” means the application which consists of the development guide, the general development plan, the graphic documents and any additional information required by the Zoning Administrator for a proposed PDD zone designation.

    “Planned Unit Development” or “PUD” means a specialized type of subdivision approval that provides greater design flexibility by allowing deviations from the typical development standards required by the Zoning Code, including setbacks, lot area, lot width, lot coverage, and off-street parking requirements, with the intention of encouraging better designed projects than can sometimes be accomplished through compliance with all development requirements, in exchange for providing greater benefits to the community.

    “Planning area” means an area within a planned development district, as shown on the approved general development plan, which has designated specific uses and which may be subject to restrictions and limitations in the approved planned development district plan applicable to such planned development district.

    “Plat” means a subdivision map prepared in accordance with the requirements of the subdivision regulations of the City and C.R.S. Section 38-51-106 which establishes blocks, lots, streets, easements and other necessary parcels of land, and/or individual air space boundaries and building locations where applicable, in order to easily identify ownership and restrict development to a specific approved plan, and is an instrument for recording of real estate interests with the Fremont County Clerk and Recorder.

    “Porch” means a structure attached to the entrance of a dwelling unit that has a roof, is open at the front and one or both sides, and does not add habitable space to the dwelling unit.

    “Primary residence” means the place that a person or family member, by custom and practice, makes his or her principal domicile and address and to which the person or family member intends to return, following any temporary absence, such as a vacation. Residence is evidenced by actual daily physical presence, use, and occupancy of the primary residence and the use of the residential address for domestic purposes, such as, but not limited to, slumber, preparation of and partaking of meals, regular mail delivery, vehicle and voter registration, or credit, water and utility billing. A person or family member shall have only one primary residence.

    Principal Structure. See “Structure, principal.”

    Principal Use. See “Use, principal.”

    “Private” means confined to or belonging only to the person(s) immediately concerned; not of an official, public or commercial nature and not accessible to the general public.

    “Professional offices” mean the office of an engineer, dentist, doctor, attorney, real estate or insurance broker, architect or other similar professional person, and any office used primarily for research, editing, accounting, correspondence, or administration.

    “Property line” means the boundary of any lot, parcel or tract as the same is platted or described in the conveyance of such property to the owner; and does not include the streets or alleys upon which the said lot, parcel or tract abuts.

    “Public hearing” means a meeting called by a public body for which public notice has been given and which is held in a place in which the general public may attend to hear issues and express their opinions.

    “Rail services and facilities” mean services and facilities in areas which may include railroad rights-of-way and adjacent lands that provide railroad related service for persons, goods or materials, and may include, but shall not be limited to: a depot structure, housing a ticket sales counter, gift shop, restrooms and other concessions; offices; off-street parking areas; repair, maintenance and storage areas and structures for rail cars and locomotives; and loading and unloading areas.

    “Rafting takeout facility” means and includes a facility, which may or may not involve structures, for embarkation and disembarkation into and from river rafts and other vessels operated for profit by river outfitters on real property owned or controlled by the river outfitter who operates and uses the facility; provided that any special review approval of any such facility shall be in accordance with the process, procedures, requirements and limitations set forth in Section 17.24.060.

    “Recreational equipment” means any detached trailer, whether commercially manufactured or homemade, either loaded or empty, that is used for transporting equipment or animals used for recreational purposes, including boat trailers, snowmobile and motorcycle trailers, horse trailers, and similarly used vehicles.

    “Recreational facility” means a place designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, leisure time activities and other customary and usual recreational activities, and includes, but is not limited to: parks and playgrounds, tennis courts, golf courses, racquetball clubs, skating rinks, bowling alleys, fitness centers, health spas, swimming pools and miniature golf courses, and may include incidental retail sales and food and beverage service.

    “Recreational vehicle” or “RV” means any vehicle used for recreational occupancy, including motorhomes and pickup campers, travel trailers, tent trailers, converted buses, horse trailers with attached living quarters, and similar vehicles that are designed and constructed, or have been modified since their construction, to permit sleeping or housekeeping, or both, and that do not require for their use a hookup to permanent utility services, and are mobile or can be transported on public rights-of-way. Standard passenger or cargo vans that have been customized with various features to accommodate their use for camping or road trips, also commonly called “conversion vans,” “camper vans” or “leisure vans,” are not recreational vehicles for purposes of this chapter.

    “Recreational vehicle (RV) park” means a developed area which contains rental sites for the temporary location and occupancy of assorted recreational vehicles, service buildings for restrooms, showers and laundry facilities, dumping stations for the removal and disposal of waste from holding tanks, and which may contain incidental retail sales and services for the convenience of park occupants.

    “Recyclables and donations collection station” means a building or land area used for the collection of recyclable materials, including, but not limited to, metals, glass, plastic and paper, or for the collection of donated items such as clothing, shoes, household items, toys, or food, where those items collected are removed from the site for further processing or distribution elsewhere. A recyclables and donations collection station may consist of bins placed for drop-off of items, a parked truck or semi-trailer, or a building used for such purpose.

    “Retail” means sale to the ultimate consumer for direct consumption and use and not for resale.

    “Right-of-way” or “ROW” means an area of land not on a lot that is dedicated for public or private use to accommodate a transportation system and necessary public utility infrastructure (including, but not limited to, water lines, sewer lines, power lines, and gas lines). In no case shall a right-of-way be construed to mean an easement.

    “Robbing” means the pilfering of honey from a weak colony by other honeybees or insects.

    “Rooming unit” means a room providing minimal housing accommodations for a boarder, arranged primarily for sleeping and study, in which may be included a private bath but which shall not include any kitchen equipment such as refrigerator, sink or cooking device.

    “Salvage yard” means a lot or parcel located in the Industrial zone district on which used or secondhand materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, processed or handled. Materials include but are not limited to: scrap iron and other metals, appliances, furniture, paper, rags, rubber tires, bottles, discarded goods, machinery, motor vehicle parts or two (2) or more inoperable motor vehicles.

    “School” means a building(s) or part thereof which is designed, constructed or used primarily for education or instruction in any branch of knowledge. A residential dwelling or accessory building, or portion thereof, wherein training is provided, on an individual basis, such as piano or art lessons or home-schooling, is not considered a school for purposes of this Code.

    “Screening” means fencing, evergreen hedges, other dense vegetation or earth berms maintained and effective for the purpose of concealing from view the area behind such screening and the items of personal property situated thereon, except when provided otherwise in this Code.

    “Secondary school” means any school, whether public or private, which is authorized by the State of Colorado to award diplomas for secondary education. Secondary schools offer general, technical, vocational or college-preparatory curricula.

    “Secure area” means an area within a primary residence or within an associated attached or detached garage, or within an accessory structure accessible only to the person possessing, growing or processing one or more marijuana plants for personal use or for medical use. Secure areas shall be partitioned space with doors, walls, ceilings and floors constructed with rigged wood, sheet rock or other typical construction materials and locked to prevent access by children, visitors, casual passersby, vandals, or anyone not authorized to possess marijuana; provided that medical marijuana plants grown by patients possessing current, valid registry identification cards issued by CDPHE within the confines of fenced and enclosed backyards at their primary residence that are no closer than twenty (20) feet from any neighboring residential dwelling place and out of public view from ground level shall be considered to be within a secure area if, but only if, the number of plants grown by one patient shall not exceed eight (8) plants and the number of plants grown by multiple patients residing in the same primary residence shall not exceed sixteen (16) plants and further provided that no grow area in any such backyard shall exceed one hundred (100) square feet. This exception allowing for the outdoor growth of medical marijuana plants by patients shall not apply with respect to marijuana plants grown for personal recreational use or medical marijuana plants grown by caregivers. A patient growing more than six (6) medical marijuana plants must possess, in addition to a valid registry identification card, a valid and current written authorization from such patient’s licensed Colorado physician recommending that the patient’s cultivation and use of greater than six (6) medical marijuana plants is medically necessary to address the patient’s debilitating medical condition.

    “Setback line” means a line or lines designating the area outside of which buildings may not be erected.

    “Sexually oriented business” shall have the same meaning as is ascribed to in Section 5.42.020.

    “Shelter” means a residential facility used for temporary group housing and meals for individuals or families without a permanent place of residence, and may include incidental uses such as food, clothing and toy storage and distribution areas.

    “Shrub” means a bush or any type of hard-wooded plant of smaller and thicker growth than a tree or a dwarf tree.

    “Social facility” means a place, structure or facility where members of an identifiable group, such as a fraternal or service organization or membership association and their guests meet on a regular basis for purposes of sharing of common interests, activities and fellowship, and may include incidental retail sales and food and beverage service.

    “Special event” for purposes of this title means carnival, circus, rodeo, festival, street fair and other similar events for amusement and entertainment which are of short duration, usually held outdoors or within a temporary shelter.

    “Stand” or “standing” means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than momentarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers or unloading property.

    “Stored,” when used in reference to a vehicle or when used in conjunction with the word “parked,” such as in the phrase “parked or stored,” refers to a situation where a vehicle is parked and left unattended at a fixed location for a period that is in excess of eight (8) continuous hours. The act of moving a parked vehicle from one location on a lot to a different location on the same lot shall not change the status of such vehicle from one which is “parked or stored” if the vehicle in question remains on the same lot for any period longer than eight (8) hours during any twenty-four (24) hour period.

    “Street” means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way provided for public use, for the purpose of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and placement of utilities, including the terms “highway,” “road,” “lane,” “avenue,” “drive,” “alley,” or other similar designation.

    “Structural alteration” means any change to the supporting members of a structure, including foundations, bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, girders or any structural change in the roof.

    “Structure” means anything erected or constructed with a fixed location from the ground above grade but not including poles, lines, cables or other transmission or distribution facilities of public utilities.

    Structure, Accessory. See “Accessory structure or use.”

    Structure, Principal. “Principal structure” means the structure in which the principal use of the lot, upon which the structure is located, is conducted.

    “Temporary use” a specific land use as set forth in this title allowed by permit or other approval for a limited period of time on a particular parcel of land at a particular location which does not utilize any permanent structure except as may otherwise be permitted herein.

    “Townhouse” means a single-family dwelling unit, with a private entrance, which is part of a structure whose dwelling units are attached horizontally in a linear arrangement, and having a totally exposed front and rear wall to be used for access, light, and ventilation.

    “Trade and repair shop” means a shop where a form of occupation, some line of skilled mechanical work, manual craft, or artisanal skills is conducted, such as by a printer, electrician, jeweler, office machine or appliance repairman, woodworker, metalworking, glass-blower and leather craftsman.

    “Training facility” means a school for special instruction in artistic or practical/professional skills, including, but not limited to, art, dancing, gymnastics, archery or martial arts.

    “Training facility, Type II” means a facility in which a consistent group of people meet regularly for no more than twelve (12) hours per week under the supervision of a teacher or mentor for support or tutoring as part of an online or blended learning program. This type of facility may also be known as an “Educational Drop-in Center” and for purposes of this title, a Type II Training Facility is not considered to be a school.

    “Tree” means a perennial plant having a trunk, or woody stem with branches, or any plant form resembling a tree.

    “Underlying zone” or “underlying zone district” means that certain zone district identified in Article II of Chapter 17.12 that has been approved by the City Council and assigned to a parcel of land. All parcels of land in the City are zoned.

    “Use” means the purpose for which land or a structure is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.

    Use, Accessory. See “Accessory structure or use.”

    Use, Nonconforming. “Nonconforming use” means a use that was valid when brought into existence, but by subsequent regulation becomes no longer conforming. This may be a structure, use, or parcel of land.

    Use, Permitted. “Permitted use” means a use permitted in a district without the need for special review approval, upon satisfaction of the standards and requirements of this title.

    Use, Principal. “Principal use” means the main use of land or structure, as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use.

    Utility Services, Public or Essential Government. “Public or essential governmental utility services” mean the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or municipal departments of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam, or water transmission distribution systems, collection, communication, supplier-disposal systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal departments or commissions or for the public health or safety or general welfare. No office, repair, storage or production facility may be located in residential districts; installations such as electric substations, sewer lift stations, etc., must be located more than one hundred (100) feet from residential units.

    “Utility trailer” means any wheeled vehicle, whether commercially manufactured or homemade, without motive power, that is designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle and that is generally and commonly used to carry and transport personal belongings, articles of household furniture, loads of trash and rubbish, or similar items over the public streets and highways.

    “Vision clearance area” means a triangular area on a lot at the intersection of two (2) streets or a street and a railroad or alley, two (2) sides of which are lot lines measured from the corner intersection of the lot lines to a distance specified in the regulations. The third side of the triangle is a line across the corner of the lot joining the ends of the other two (2) sides. Where the lot lines and intersections have rounded corners, the lot lines will be extended in a straight line to a point of intersection. The vision clearance area shall contain no plantings, walls, structures or temporary or permanent obstructions exceeding two and one-half (2-1/2) feet in height, measured from the top of the curb or existing street grade. Reference Section 17.20.200.

    “Vocational or business school” means a secondary or higher educational facility primarily teaching usable skills that prepare students for jobs in a trade or business.

    “Watchman’s quarters” mean one accessory single-family dwelling unit located within a principal commercial or industrial non-residential structure, or detached from but on the same parcel of land as the principal commercial or industrial non-residential structure, for occupancy by the owner, operator, or an employee of the principal use acting as caretaker, custodian or security personnel, together with his or her immediate family, if applicable.

    “Winery” means a facility where grapes, berries or other fruits are processed, fermented and bottled into more than two hundred (200) gallons of wine per year. A winery may include wine tasting and the sale of wine and other related products to the public.

    “Yard” means an open space on a lot which is unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this title.

    Yard, Front. “Front yard” means the yard between side lot lines measured horizontally at right angles to the front lot line to the nearest point of the main building.

    Yard, Rear. “Rear yard” means the yard extending between side lot lines and measured horizontally at right angles to the rear lot line from the rear lot line to the nearest point of the principal structure.

    “Yard sale” means and includes casual or informal sales conducted on or from a residential premises within the city where articles of tangible personal property are sold or offered for sale. Yard sale shall include all sales entitled “yard sale,” “garage sale,” “lawn sale,” “attic sale,” “flea market sale,” “patio sale,” “porch sale,” or any similar casual sale of tangible personal property which is advertised by any means whereby the public at large is or can be made aware of the sale.

    Yard, Side. “Side yard” means the yard between a building and the side lot line, measured horizontally at right angles to the side lot line from the side lot line to the nearest point of the main building.

    “Zero lot line” means a type of development in which one or more yards are not set back. A structure may be built directly upon the property line and in some instances this may result in common walls between structures. (Ord. 2-2020 § 4; Ord. 23-2019 § 1; Ord. 3-2018 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 11-2017 § 1; Ord. 1-2017 § 1; Ord. 23-2016 § 2; Ord. 15-2016 §§ 2—4; Ord. 10-2016 § 2; Ord. 3-2016 § 1; Ord. 1-2015 § 5; Ord. 17-2014 § 2; Ord. 16-2014 § 1; Ord. 14-2013 § 1; Ord. 2-2013 §§ 2, 3; Ord. 17-2011 §§ 1—3; Ord. 3-2011 § 2; Ord. 28-2010 § 1)

Chapter 17.12 DISTRICTS AND GENERAL REGULATIONS
Article I. General Provisions
17.12.010 Zoning districts—Established.
    In order to implement the provisions of this title, the City establishes the following basic districts:

    A.  Residential.

1.   R-L, Rural Living;

2.   R-1, Low Density;

3.   R-1A, Low Density, Small-Lot;

4.   R-2, Medium Density;

5.   R-3, High Density;

6.   MH-1, Mobile Home Park;

7.   MH-2, Mobile Home Subdivision.

    B.   Commercial.

1.   C District, General Commercial;

2.   CB District, Central Business District Commercial.

    C.   Industrial.

1.   I District, Class 1 Industrial.

    D.  Special.

1.   OPR, Open Space, Parks and Recreation;

2.   DR, Developing Resource.

(Ord. 22-2010 § 3; Ord. 6-2009 § 3; Ord. 5-2009 § 2; Ord. 24-2008 § 2; Ord. 23-2008 § 2; Ord. 34-1992; Ord. 25-1991 § 1)

 

17.12.020 Zoning districts—Boundaries.
    A.  Unless otherwise specified, district boundaries are lot lines or the centerline of streets, alleys, railroad rights-of-way, centerline of streams of water, or such lines extended.

    B.   Where a district divides a parcel of land under single ownership into two (2) districts, then the entire parcel shall be zoned for the less restrictive use by adjustment of the boundaries, provided the boundary adjustment is a distance of less than twenty (20) feet. If the adjustment involves more than twenty (20) feet, the procedures for a district change shall be followed. Nothing in this subsection, however, shall be deemed to preclude the division of a parcel of land under single ownership into two (2) zoning districts, when such division is made with the written consent of the owner of such parcel of land. (Ord. 25-1991 § 1)

 

17.12.030 Use, yard and bulk requirements.
    For each zoning district, the uses permitted as a matter of right, the uses permitted as conditional uses, and the uses permitted only through special review, the yard and bulk requirements, special provisions and exceptions are given. Unless a use is designated as a permitted use, conditional use or special review use, or is classified as a legal nonconforming use, it is prohibited. Land uses not otherwise identified in this Code may be proposed for development. In order to provide for such uses, the classification of any new or unlisted land use shall be made by the Zoning Administrator to determine if the use can be reasonably interpreted to fit into a similar use category described in this Code. Unless such determination is made, the use is not permitted. The interpretation of the Zoning Administrator concerning whether a specific use is within an express use group may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment pursuant to Chapter 17.36 of this Code. (Ord. 2-2013 § 11; Ord. 11-2010 § 3)

 

17.12.040 Accessory uses.
    Accessory uses shall comply with all requirements for the principal uses except where specifically modified by this title. (Ord. 25-1991 § 1)

 

17.12.050 Special area restrictions.
    Certain areas of the city, designated on the official zone map of Cañon City by an asterisk, are subject to special restrictions on use in addition to the regulations which apply to the zone district in which such areas are classified. Special area restrictions have been set either at the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter or subsequently through the special review process and are identified in Section 17.24.050. (Ord. 25-1991 § 1)

 

Article II. Districts and Regulations
17.12.065 R-L, Rural Living.
    The R-L Zone District is comprised of areas with limited agricultural uses with appropriate single-family residences and accessory uses and provides separation from business and industrial uses.

    A.  Permitted uses, R-L District.

1.   Accessory structures and uses;

2.   Agriculture (17.20.025);

3.   Child care, family;

4.   Children’s group home;

5.   Church;

6.   Church parking lot;

7.   Flower cultivation;

8.   Food cart or truck (17.20.085, Temporary Use Permit);

9.   Forest land and orchard;

10. Grazing land and fields;

11. Greenhouse and nursery, commercial;

12. Greenhouse and nursery, private;

13. Group home for the aged (CRS Section 31-23-303);

14. Group home for the developmentally disabled (CRS Section 31-23-303);

15. Group home for the mentally ill (CRS Section 31-23-303);

16. Home occupations (17.20.100);

17. Livestock (17.20.114);

18. Manufactured home;

19. Minor-operated business;

20. Modular home;

21. Single-family dwelling;

22. Special events (17.20.180);

23. Utility distribution elements;

24. Yard sales (17.20.220);

25. Wireless service facilities pursuant to Section 17.45.030(D).

    B.   Conditional uses, R-L District:

1.   Animal boarding (17.20.028);

2.   Bed and breakfast (17.20.031);

3.   Boarding or rooming house (17.20.034);

4.   Exotic animals (17.20.075);

5.   Farm stand (17.20.076);

6.   Kennels (17.20.111);

7.   Mobile home and recreational vehicle, temporary use.

    C.   Special Review uses, R-L District:

1.   Accessory dwelling unit;

2.   Animal hospital;

3.   Cemetery;

4.   Child care center;

5.   Children’s home;

6.   City, county, state and federal facilities, uses, buildings;

7.   Elementary and secondary schools, colleges and universities;

8.   Hospital;

9.   Rafting takeout facility (17.24.060);

10. Recreational facility;

11. Social facility.

    D.  Yard and Bulk Requirements, R-L Zone District.

 

Minimum lot area

15,000 square feet

 

 

Minimum lot width

100 feet

 

 

Maximum lot coverage

35%

Minimum front setback

25 feet

 

 

Minimum street-side setback

 

principal building

15 feet

accessory building

10 feet

housing of permitted livestock

20 feet

 

 

Minimum interior-side setback

 

principal building

10 feet

accessory building

10 feet

housing of permitted livestock

20 feet

 

 

Minimum rear setback

 

principal building

20 feet

accessory building

10 feet

except abutting an alley

5 feet

housing of permitted livestock

20 feet

 

 

Maximum height

35 feet

 

    E.   Off-Street Parking Spaces Required, R-L District. (See Chapter 17.28.) (Ord. 2-2020 § 5; Ord. 30-2017 § 2; Ord. 23-2016 § 7; Ord. 15-2013 § 1; Ord. 2-2013 § 12; Ord. 22-2010 § 4; Ord. 5-2002 § 2; Ord. 34-2001 § 2; Ord. 32-2000 § 3; Ord. 12-2000 §§ 5, 6; Ord. 5-1999 § 3(B); Ord. 13-1998 § 3; Ord. 7-1996 § 3; Ord. 3-1995; Ord. 1-1994 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 34-1992)

 

17.12.070 R-1, Low Density.
    The R-1 Zone District is comprised of areas primarily for single-family residential development and other necessary and compatible uses.

    A.  Permitted uses, R-1 District:

1.   Accessory structures and uses;

2.   Child care, family;

3.   Children’s group home;

4.   Church;

5.   Church parking lot;

6.   Crop and flower cultivation, less than one acre;

7.   Food cart or truck (17.20.085, Temporary Use Permit);

8.   Forest land and orchard;

9.   Grazing land and fields;

10. Greenhouse, private;

11  Group home for the aged (CRS 31-23-303);

12. Group home for the developmentally disabled (CRS 31-23-303);

13. Group home for the mentally ill (CRS 31-23-303);

14. Home occupations (17.20.100);

15. Livestock (17.20.114);

16. Manufactured home;

17. Minor-operated business;

18. Modular home;

19. Single-family dwelling;

20. Special events (17.20.180);

21. Utility distribution elements;

22. Yard sales (17.20.220);

23. Wireless service facilities pursuant to Section 17.45.030(D).

    B.   Conditional uses, R-1 District:

1.   Animal boarding (17.20.028);

2.   Bed and breakfast (17.20.031);

3.   Boarding or rooming house (17.20.034);

4.   Exotic animals (17.20.075);

5.   Farm stand (17.20.076);

6.   Mobile home and recreational vehicle, temporary use.

    C.   Special Review uses, R-1 District:

1.   Accessory dwelling unit;

2.   Cemetery;

3.   Child care center;

4.   Children’s home;

5.   City, county, state and federal facilities, uses, buildings;

6.   Crop and flower cultivation, one acre or more;

7.   Elementary and secondary schools, colleges and universities;

8.   Greenhouse/nursery, commercial;

9.   Hospital;

10. Rafting takeout facility (17.24.060);

11. Recreational facility;

12. Social facility.

    D.  Yard and Bulk Requirements, R-1 District.

 

Minimum lot area

6,000 square feet

 

 

Minimum lot width

60 feet

 

 

Maximum lot coverage

45%

 

 

Minimum front yard setback

25 feet

 

 

Minimum street side yard setback

 

principal building

10 feet

accessory building

1 foot*

 

 

Minimum interior side yard setback

 

principal building

5 feet

accessory building

1 foot*

 

 

Minimum rear yard setback

 

principal use

25 feet

accessory use

1 foot*

except abutting an alley

0 feet*

Maximum height

 

principal use

40 feet

accessory use

20 feet

 

 

*See Section 17.20.060

 

    E.   Off-Street Parking Spaces Required, R-1 District. (See Chapter 17.28.) (Ord. 2-2020 § 6; Ord. 30-2017 § 3; Ord. 23-2016 § 8; Ord. 15-2013 § 2; Ord. 2-2013 § 13; Ord. 22-2010 § 5; Ord. 5-2002 § 2; Ord. 34-2001 § 2; Ord. 32-2000 § 4; Ord. 12-2000 §§ 7, 8; Ord. 5-1999 § 3(C); Ord. 13-1998 § 4; Ord. 7-1996 § 4; Ord. 1-1994 §§ 3, 4; Ord. 25-1991 § 1)

 

17.12.075 R-1A, Low Density, Small-Lot Residential.
    The R-1A Zone District is intended to accommodate single-family homes and accessory structures on small lots platted prior to the City’s adoption of its Zoning Code, and/or provide for the development of residential subdivisions of small lots, where homes may or may not have one exterior wall on a side property line (zero lot line) and where residents may share common open space.

    A.  Permitted uses, R-1A District:

1.   Accessory structures and uses;

2.   Child care, family;

3.   Children’s group home;

4.   Church;

5.   Church parking lot;

6.   Food cart or truck (17.20.085, Temporary Use Permit);

7.   Greenhouse, private;

8.   Group home for the aged (CRS 31-23-303);

9.   Group home for the developmentally disabled (CRS 31-23-303);

10. Group home for the mentally ill (CRS 31-23-303);

11. Home occupations (17.20.100);

12. Manufactured home;

13. Minor-operated business;

14. Modular home;

15. Single-family dwelling;

16. Special events (17.20.180);

17. Utility distribution elements;

18. Yard sales (17.20.220);

19. Wireless service facilities pursuant to Section 17.45.030(D).

    B.   Conditional uses, R-1A District:

1.   Bed and breakfast (17.20.031);

2.   Boarding or rooming house (17.20.034);

3.   Exotic animals (17.20.075);

4.   Mobile home and recreational vehicle, temporary use.

    C.   Special Review uses, R-1A District:

1.   Cemetery;

2.   Child care center;

3.   Children’s home;

4.   City, county, state and federal facilities, uses, buildings;

5.   Crop and flower cultivation, one acre or more;

6.   Elementary and secondary schools, colleges and universities;

7.   Greenhouse/nursery, commercial;

8.   Hospital;

9.   Rafting takeout facility (17.24.060);

10. Recreational facility;

11. Social facility.

    D.  Yard and Bulk Requirements, R-1A Zone District.

 

Minimum lot area

3,500 square feet

 

 

Minimum lot width

40 feet

 

 

Maximum lot coverage

60%

 

 

Minimum front yard setback

15 feet

 

 

Minimum street side yard setback

10 feet

 

 

Minimum interior side yard setback

 

principal structure:

 

lots in zero lot line subdivisions

The combined interior side yard for any two adjacent lots shall equal ten (10) feet, in any combination, from zero (0) feet for one lot and ten (10) feet for the other, to five (5) feet for each lot. In any case, no two adjacent principal structures on separate lots shall have a combined side yard dimension of less than ten (10) feet.

all other lots

5 feet

accessory structure

1 foot

 

 

Minimum rear yard setback

 

principal structure

15 feet

accessory structure

1 foot

except abutting an alley

0 feet

 

 

Maximum height

 

principal structure

40 feet

accessory structure

20 feet

 

    E.   Off-Street Parking Spaces Required, R-1A Zone District. (See Chapter 17.28.) (Ord. 2-2020 § 7; Ord. 30-2017 § 4; Ord. 23-2016 § 9; Ord. 9-2014 § 1; Ord. 15-2013 § 3; Ord. 2-2013 § 14; Ord. 23-2008 § 1)

 

17.12.080 R-2, Medium Density.
    The R-2 Zone District is comprised of areas primarily for single-family and duplex residential development and other necessary and compatible uses.

    A.  Permitted uses, R-2 District:

1.   Accessory structures and uses;

2.   Child care, family;

3.   Children’s group home;

4.   Church;

5.   Church parking lot;

6.   Crop and flower cultivation, less than one acre;

7.   Food cart or truck (17.20.085, Temporary Use Permit);

8.   Forest land and orchard;

9.   Grazing land and fields;

10. Greenhouse, private;

11. Group home for the aged (CRS 31-23-303);

12. Group home for the developmentally disabled (CRS 31-23-303);

13. Group home for the mentally ill (CRS 31-23-303);

14. Home occupations (17.20.100);

15. Livestock (17.20.114);

16. Manufactured home;

17. Minor-operated business;

18. Modular home;

19. Single-family dwelling;

20. Special events (17.20.180);

21. Two-family dwelling;

22. Utility distribution elements;

23. Yard sales (17.20.220);

24. Wireless service facilities pursuant to Section 17.45.030(D).

    B.   Conditional uses, R-2 District:

1.   Bed and breakfast (17.20.031);

2.   Boarding or rooming house (17.20.034);

3.   Exotic animals (17.20.075);

4.   Farm stand (17.20.076);

5.   Mobile home and recreational vehicle, temporary use.

    C.   Special Review uses, R-2 District:

1.   Accessory dwelling unit;

2.   Ambulance and taxi service;

3.   Child care center;

4.   Children’s home;

5.   City, county, state and federal facilities, uses and buildings;

6.   Clinic;

7.   Crop and flower cultivation, one acre or more;

8.   Elementary and secondary schools, colleges and universities;

9.   Greenhouse/nursery, commercial;

10. Hospital;

11. Rafting takeout facility (17.24.060);

12. Recreational facility;

13. Social facility.

    D.  Yard and Bulk Requirements, R-2 Zone District.

 

Minimum lot area

 

single-family dwelling

6,000 square feet

two-family dwelling

7,000 square feet

 

 

Minimum lot width

60 feet

 

 

Maximum lot coverage

45%

 

 

Minimum front yard setback

25 feet

 

 

Minimum street side yard setback

 

principal building

10 feet

accessory building

1 foot*

 

 

Minimum interior side yard setback

 

single-family dwelling

5 feet

two-family dwelling

7 feet

accessory buildings

1 foot*

 

 

Minimum rear yard setback

 

principal structure

25 feet

accessory structure

1 foot*

except abutting alley

0 feet*

 

 

Maximum height

 

principal structure

45 feet

accessory structure

20 feet

 

 

*See Section 17.20.060

 

 

    E.   Off-Street Parking Spaces Required, R-2 District. (See Chapter 17.28.) (Ord. 2-2020 § 8; Ord. 30-2017 § 5; Ord. 23-2016 § 10; Ord. 15-2013 § 4; Ord. 2-2013 § 15; Ord. 22-2010 § 6; Ord. 5-2002 § 2; Ord. 34-2001 § 2; Ord. 32-2000 § 5; Ord. 12-2000 §§ 9, 10; Ord. 5-1999 § 3(D); Ord. 13-1998 § 5; Ord. 7-1996 §§ 5, 6; Ord. 1-1994 § 5; Ord. 25-1991 § 1)

 

17.12.090 R-3, High Density.
    The R-3 Zone District is comprised of residential areas primarily intended for multi-family residential developments of three (3) or more dwelling units per structure, including, but not limited to, townhomes, condo-minimums, apartments and other types and forms of dwelling units permitted under the Colorado Common Interest Ownership Act, CRS Section 38-33.3-101 et seq.

    A.  Permitted uses, R-3 District:

1.   Accessory structures and uses;

2.   Assisted living facility;

3.   Bed and breakfast;

4.   Boarding or rooming house;

5.   Child care, family;

6.   Children’s group home;

7.   Children’s home;

8.   Church;

9.   Church parking lot;

10. Crop and flower cultivation, less than one acre;

11. Food cart or truck (17.20.085, Temporary Use Permit);

12. Forest land and orchard;

13. Grazing land and fields;

14. Greenhouse, private;

15. Group home for the aged (CRS 31-23-303);

16. Group home for the developmentally disabled (CRS 31-23-303);

17. Group home for the mentally ill (CRS 31-23-303);

18. Home occupations (17.20.100);

19. Livestock (17.20.114);

20. Manufactured home;

21. Minor-operated business;

22. Modular home;

23. Multi-family dwelling;

24. Nursing home;

25. Single-family dwelling;

26. Special events (17.20.180);

27. Two-family dwelling;

28. Utility distribution element;

29. Vehicle parking lot and garage accessory to permitted use (17.28);

30. Yard sales (17.20.220);

31. Wireless service facilities pursuant to Section 17.45.030(D).

    B.   Conditional uses, R-3 District:

1.   Exotic animals (17.20.075);

2.   Mobile home and recreational vehicle, temporary use.

    C.   Special Review uses, R-3 District:

1.   Accessory dwelling units;

2.   Ambulance and taxi service;

3.   Child care center;

4.   City, county, state and federal facilities, uses and buildings;

5.   Clinic;

6.   Convenience store;

7.   Crop and flower cultivation, one acre or more;

8.   Elementary and secondary schools, colleges and universities;

9.   Hospital;

10. Personal services;

11. Professional offices;

12. Rafting takeout facility (17.24.060);

13. Recreational facility;

14. Recreational vehicle (RV) park;

15. Retail goods;

16. Social facility;

17. Trade and repair shop;

18. Training facility.

    D.  Yard and Bulk Requirements, R-3 Zone District.

 

Minimum lot area

 

1 dwelling unit

6,000 square feet

2 dwelling units

7,000 square feet

3 dwelling units

7,500 square feet

4 or more dwelling units

7,500 plus 1,500 square feet per each additional dwelling unit over 3

 

 

Minimum lot width

 

1—8 dwelling units

75 feet

9 or more dwelling units

100 feet

 

 

Maximum lot coverage

45%

 

 

Minimum front yard setback (all structures)

25 feet + 2 feet per story over second story

 

 

Minimum street side yard setback

 

1—3 dwelling units

10 feet

4 or more dwelling units

15 feet

accessory structure

10 feet

 

 

Minimum interior side yard setback

 

1—3 dwelling units

5 feet

4 or more dwelling units

10 feet + 2 feet per story over second story

accessory structure

5 feet

 

 

Minimum rear yard setback

 

principal structure

25 feet + 2 feet per story over second story

accessory structure

10 feet

 

 

Maximum height

 

1—8 dwelling units

55 feet (not to exceed 3 stories)

9 or more dwelling units

100 feet

accessory structure

30 feet

 

    E.   Off-Street Parking Spaces Required, R-3 District. (See Chapter 17.28.) (Ord. 2-2020 § 9; Ord. 30-2017 § 6; Ord. 23-2016 § 11; Ord. 14-2014 § 1; Ord. 15-2013 § 5; Ord. 2-2013 § 16; Ord. 25-2010 § 3; Ord. 24-2010 § 1; Ord. 22-2010 § 7; Ord. 5-2002 § 2; Ord. 34-2001 § 2; Ord. 32-2000 § 6; Ord. 12-2000 §§ 11, 12; Ord. 5-1999 § 3(E); Ord. 13-1998 § 6; Ord. 7-1996 § 7; Ord. 2-1994; Ord. 1-1994 §§ 6, 7; Ord. 25-1991 § 1)

 

17.12.110 MH-1 District, Mobile Home Parks.
    The MH-1 Zone District is comprised primarily of mobile home parks, but may include single-family dwellings located on individual lots.

    A.  Permitted uses, MH-1 District:

1.   Accessory structures and uses (recreational facility, storage buildings, vehicle parking lot, etc. for tenants and guests of a mobile home park only);

2.   Child care, family;

3.   Church (only when authorized under Section 17.32.110A);

4.   Church parking lot (only when the church it serves is authorized and legally established under Section 17.32.110A);

5.   Convenience store (only when authorized under Section 17.32.110A);

6.   Group home for the aged (CRS 31-23-303);

7.   Group home for the developmentally disabled (CRS 31-23-303);

8.   Group home for the mentally ill (CRS 31-23-303);

9.   Home occupations (17.20.100);

10. Manufactured home;

11. Minor-operated business;

12. Mobile home (17.12.110F);

13. Mobile home park;

14. Modular home (see Ch. 15.24);

15. Single-family dwelling;

16. Special events (17.20.180);

17. Utility distribution elements;

18. Yard sales (17.20.220);

19. Wireless service facilities pursuant to Section 17.45.030(D).

    B.   Conditional uses, MH-1 District:

1.   Exotic animals (17.20.075);

2.   Mobile home sales office (17.20.128).

    C.   Special Review uses, MH-1 District:

1.   Church, if not authorized under Subsection 17.32.110A;

2.   Church parking lot;

3.   Convenience store (17.32.110);

4.   Rafting takeout facility (17.24.060);

5.   Recreational vehicle (RV) park.

    D.  Yard and Bulk Requirements, MH-1 Zone District.

    1.   The following yard and bulk requirements shall apply for all main structures or projections thereof, including porches, decks, attached garage or carport placed in any mobile home park in the MH-1 Zone District. Setback requirements are measured from the boundaries of the rental space unless otherwise indicated:

 

 

Minimum rental space area

 

Single-wide mobile home

4,000 sq. feet

Double-wide mobile home

5,200 sq. feet

 

 

Minimum rental space width

 

Single-wide mobile home

40 feet

Double-wide mobile home

55 feet

 

 

Maximum rental space coverage

45%

Minimum setback, all parks established prior to 12/31/91

 

Abutting interior roadway

10 feet

Abutting public right-of-way

15 feet

Abutting property line other than public right-of-way

 

Principal structure

10 feet

Accessory structure

5 feet

Separation between all structures on adjoining spaces, side and rear

10 feet

 

 

Minimum setback, all parks established after 12/31/91

 

Abutting interior roadway

15 feet

Abutting public right-of-way

25 feet

Abutting property line other than public right-of-way

 

Principal structure

25 feet

Accessory structure

5 feet

 

 

All parks established after 12/31/91 but before 12/31/97

 

Separation between all structures on adjoining spaces, side and rear

10 feet

 

 

All parks established after 12/31/97

 

Setbacks from interior side and rear space lines not abutting roadway, public right-of-way or property line

5 feet

 

    2.   The following yard and bulk requirements shall apply for any residential use not located in a mobile home park, including single-family homes, mobile homes, manufactured homes and modulars on individually owned lots in the MH-1 Zone District:

 

Minimum lot area

6,000 sq. feet

 

 

Minimum lot width

60 feet

 

 

Maximum lot coverage

45%

 

 

Minimum front yard setback

25 feet

 

 

Minimum street-side yard setback

 

Principal structure

10 feet

Accessory structure

1 foot

 

 

Minimum interior side yard setback

 

Principal structure

5 feet

Accessory structure

1 foot

 

 

Minimum rear yard setback

 

Principal structure

25 feet

Accessory structure

1 foot if not abutting an alley

 

zero feet if abutting an alley

Maximum height

 

Principal structure

40 feet

Accessory structure

20 feet

 

    E.   Design Standards and Licensing, Management and Operation Requirements for Mobile Home Parks and Standards for the Installation of Mobile Homes. Design standards and licensing, management and operation requirements for mobile home parks and standards for the installation of mobile homes shall be as described in Subsections 17.20.135(B), (C) and (D) of this title.

    F.   Replacement mobile homes.

    1.   Except as provided in paragraph 2 of this Subsection F, no replacement mobile home shall be moved onto any space within a mobile home park unless such mobile home is certified pursuant to the “National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974,” 42 U.S.C. Section 5401 et seq.

    2.   A mobile home that was lawfully established as a dwelling unit within the City on or before July 15, 1998 and which has remained in the City and continuously been used as a dwelling unit at all times thereafter shall be exempt from the requirements of paragraph 1 and may be relocated to a lot within a mobile home park, if such relocation can be accomplished in compliance with all other applicable laws, rules and regulations. (Ord. 2-2020 § 10; Ord. 30-2017 § 7; Ord. 15-2016 § 5; Ord. 2-2013 § 17; Ord. 6-2009 § 1; Ord. 5-2002 § 2; Ord. 34-2001 §§ 3, 4; Ord. 32-2000 § 8; Ord. 5-1999 § 3(G); Ord. 1-1998 § 6: Ord. 4-1997 § 1; Ord. 13-1994; Ord. 2-1994; Ord. 25-1991 § 1)

 

17.12.120 MH-2 District, Mobile Home Subdivisions.
    The MH-2 Zone District is comprised of residential subdivisions wherein mobile homes, manufactured homes and/or modular homes are placed on individually owned lots, creating a low-density, quiet, single-family environment. Mobile home subdivisions shall require the same procedure and approval as is necessary for any residential subdivision pursuant to the subdivision and development regulations of the City. The requirements herein shall apply to additions to and extensions of existing subdivisions as well as to new subdivisions.

    A.  Permitted uses, MH-2 District:

1.   Accessory structures and uses;

2.   Child care, family;

3.   Church;

4.   Church parking lot;

5.   Crop and flower cultivation;

6.   Forest land and orchard;

7.   Grazing land and fields;

8.   Group home for the aged (CRS 31-23-303);

9.   Group home for the developmentally disabled (CRS 31-23-303);

10. Group home for the mentally ill (CRS 31-23-303);

11. Home occupations;

12. Manufactured home;

13. Minor-operated business;

14. Mobile home (see 17.12.120G);

15. Modular home;

16. Single-family dwelling;

17. Special events (17.20.180);

18. Utility distribution elements;

19. Yard sales (17.20.220);

20. Wireless service facilities pursuant to Section 17.45.030(D).

    B.   Conditional uses, MH-2 district:

1.   Exotic animals (17.20.075);

2.   Mobile home sales office (17.20.128).

    C.   Special Review uses, MH-2 District:

1.   Child care center;

2.   City, county, state and federal facilities, uses and buildings;

3.   Convenience store;

4.   Elementary and secondary schools, colleges and universities;

5.   Personal services;

6.   Professional offices;

7.   Rafting takeout facility (17.24.060);

8.   Recreational facility;

9.   Social facility.

    D.  Yard and Bulk Requirements, MH-2 Zone District.

 

Minimum lot area

6,000 square feet

 

 

Minimum lot width

60 feet

 

 

Maximum lot coverage

45%

 

 

Minimum front yard setback, subdivisions established prior to 12/31/1991

 

All structures

10 feet

 

 

Minimum front yard setback, subdivisions established after 12/31/1991

 

All structures

20 feet

 

 

Minimum interior side yard setback

 

Principal use

5 feet

Accessory use

1 foot

 

 

Minimum street side yard setback

 

Principal use

10 feet

Accessory use

1 foot

 

 

Minimum rear yard setback, subdivisions established prior to 12/31/1991

 

Principal structure

10 feet

Accessory structure

5 feet

 

 

Minimum rear yard setback, subdivisions established after 12/31/1991

 

Principal structure

20 feet

Accessory structure

5 feet

 

 

Maximum height all structures

30 feet

 

    E.   Off-Street Parking Spaces Required, MH-2 Zone District. (See Chapter 17.28.)

    F.   Standards for Mobile Home, Manufactured Home and Modular Home Installation and Placement.

    1.   Any mobile homes placed on any lot within the MH-2 Zone District shall be installed and anchored in accordance with applicable state law unless it is installed on a permanent engineered foundation. (See CRS Section 24-32-3301 et seq., and Resolution No. 38 of the Colorado State Housing Board.)

    2.   In the case of a mobile home, manufactured home or modular home installed on a permanent foundation, that foundation must be engineered, and a foundation permit must be obtained from the City Building Official, who will conduct an inspection of the foundation pursuant to the issuance of the permit.

    3.   A mobile home placement and skirting permit shall be required prior to the installation and placement of any mobile home, manufactured home or modular home, unless it is installed on a permanent engineered foundation. The fee for the permit shall be as set forth in Section 17.44.040 of this title.

    4.   The placement of any mobile home, manufactured home or modular home shall conform to all applicable setback regulations.

    5.   Skirting shall be required in accordance with Section 17.20.135(D), Standards for Mobile Home Installation and Placement.

    G.  Replacement mobile homes.

    1.   Except as provided in paragraph 2 of this Subsection G, no replacement mobile home shall be moved onto any lot within a mobile home subdivision unless such mobile home is certified pursuant to the “National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974,” 42 U.S.C. Section 5401 et seq.

    2.   A mobile home that was lawfully established as a dwelling unit within the City on or before July 15, 1998 and which has remained in the City and continuously been used as a dwelling unit at all times thereafter shall be exempt from the requirements of paragraph 1 and may be relocated to a lot within a mobile home subdivision, if such relocation can be accomplished in compliance with all other applicable laws, rules and regulations. (Ord. 2-2020 § 11; Ord. 30-2017 § 8; Ord. 2-2013 § 18; Ord. 6-2009 § 2; Ord. 5-2002 § 2; Ord. 4-2002 § 1; Ord. 34-2001 § 2; Ord. 32-2000 § 9; Ord. 12-2000 §§ 15, 16; Ord. 9-1999 § 1; Ord. 5-1999 § 3(H); Ord. 1-1998 § 7: Ord. 4-1997 § 2; Ord. 7-1996 § 9; Ord. 13-1994; Ord. 2-1994; Ord. 1-1994 § 9; Ord. 25-1991 § 1)

 

17.12.130 C District, General Commercial.
    The C District is intended to provide for a wide range of retail sales and service establishments, a full range of wholesale facilities and includes opportunities for a variety of comparative shoppers’ goods. This district is meant to serve both long and short term needs of Cañon City as well as surrounding communities and the tourist trade.

    A.  Permitted uses, C District:

1.   Accessory buildings and uses;

2.   Ambulance and taxi service;

3.   Amusement and entertainment facility;

4.   Answering and dispatch service;

5.   Bakery;

6.   Car wash;

7.   Child care center;

8.   Church;

9.   Church parking lot;

10. City, county, state and federal facilities, uses and buildings;

11. Cleaning and laundry plant;

12. Cold storage locker;

13. Construction material and hardware;

14. Eating and drinking establishment;

15. Financial institution;

16. Food cart or truck (17.20.085, Temporary Use Permit);

17. Gasoline station;

18. Greenhouse, florist;

19. Hotels and motels;

20. Medical and dental clinic;

21. Medical marijuana facility, licensed (17.20.125);

22. Multi-unit dwellings;

23. One and two family residential, existing only;

24. Personal services;

25. Professional offices;

26. Retail commercial use;

27. Sexually oriented business (17.20.162);

28. Social facility;

29. Special events (17.20.180);

30. Storage, sales, repair or rental, motor vehicles, mobile homes, recreational vehicles and equipment, farm and construction vehicles and equipment;

31. Trade and repair shop;

32. Training facilities;

33. Training facilities, Type II;

34. Utility services;

35. Vehicle parking garage/lot;

36. Vocational and business school;

37. Warehouse and storage;

38. Wholesale outlets and services;

39. Yard sales;

40. Wireless service facilities pursuant to Section 17.45.030(D).

    B.   Conditional uses, C District:

1.   Animal boarding (17.20.028);

2.   Backyard chickens (17.20.029);

3.   Bed and breakfast (17.20.031);

4.   Boarding or rooming house (17.20.034);

5.   Farmers’ market (17.20.077);

6.   Flea market (17.20.077);

7.   Kennels (17.20.111);

8.   Mobile home sales office (17.20.128);

9.   More than one principal building per lot (17.20.050);

10. Recyclables and donations collection station (17.20.146);

11. Watchman’s quarters.

    C.   Special Review uses, C District:

1.   Animal kennel, clinic or hospital;

2.   Elementary and secondary schools, colleges and universities;

3.   Hospital;

4.   Hospital heliport;

5.   Light starter industry with less than one hundred (100) employees;

6.   Mortuary and funeral home;

7.   Nursing home;

8.   Outdoor retail sales;

9.   Pet crematory;

10. Rafting takeout facility (17.24.060);

 

11. Rail services and facilities;

12. Recreational facility;

13. Recreational vehicle (RV) park;

14. Retirement home;

15. Shelter.

    D.  Yard and Bulk Requirements, C District.

 

Minimum lot size

5,280 square feet

 

 

Minimum frontage

44 feet

 

 

Maximum lot coverage

 

Residential use

45%

Commercial use

75%

 

 

Minimum front yard setback (all structures)

 

Residential

25 feet + 2 feet per story over second story

Commercial abutting residential zone

25 feet

Commercial abutting commercial or industrial zone

0 feet*

 

 

Minimum street side yard setback

 

Principal structure

15 feet

Accessory structure

10 feet

 

 

Minimum interior side yard setback (all structures)

 

Commercial abutting residential zone

15 feet

Commercial abutting commercial or industrial zone

0 feet*

 

 

Minimum principal rear yard setback

 

Abutting residential zone

15 feet

Abutting commercial zone

10 feet

Abutting industrial zone

5 feet

 

 

Minimum accessory rear yard setback

 

Abutting residential zone

10 feet

Abutting commercial zone

5 feet

Abutting industrial zone

0 feet*

Abutting an alley

0 feet*

 

 

Maximum height within 100 feet of residential zone

55 feet

 

 

Maximum height

100 feet

 

 

*See Section 17.20.060

 

 

    E.   Off-Street Parking Spaces Required, C District. (See Chapter 17.28.) (Ord. 30-2017 § 9; Ord. 11-2017 § 2; Ord. 23-2016 § 3; Ord. 21-2014 § 1; Ord. 20-2014 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 16-2014 §§ 2, 3; Ord. 2-2013 § 19; Ord. 28-2010 §§ 2, 3; Ord. 19-2010 § 2; Ord. 8-2010 § 2; Ord. 4-2008 § 2; Ord. 13-2004 § 2; Ord. 5-2002 § 2; Ord. 34-2001 § 2; Ord. 30-2000 § 4; Ord. 12-2000 §§ 17, 18; Ord. 19-1999 § 1; Ord. 5-1999 § 3(I); Ord. 4-1999 § 2; Ord. 7-1996 § 12; Ord. 7-1995 §§ 1—3; Ord. 2-1994; Ord. 1-1994 §§ 10, 11; Ord. 36-1992; Ord. 8-1992 § 2; Ord. 25-1991 § 1)

 

17.12.140 CB District, Central Business District Commercial.
    The CB District is intended to provide for a selective range of retail sales and services within the designated central business district, which includes opportunities for a variety of shoppers’ goods and supportive services.

    A.  Permitted uses, CB District:

1.   Accessory buildings and uses;

2.   Amusement and entertainment facility;

3.   Answering and dispatch service;

4.   Apartments in above-ground spaces;

5.   Child care center;

6.   Church, existing only;

7.   Church parking lot;

8.   Eating and drinking establishment;

9.   Financial institution;

10. Food cart or truck (17.20.085, Temporary Use Permit);

11. Library;

12. Medical and dental clinic;

13. Motels and hotels;

14. Personal services;

 

15. Professional offices;

16. Retail goods;

17. Retirement home;

18. Single-family dwelling, existing only;

19. Trade and repair shop;

20. Utility services;

21. Vehicle parking lot/garage;

22. Yard sales (17.20.220);

23. Wireless service facilities pursuant to Section 17.45.030(D).

    B.   Conditional uses, CB District:

1.   Bed and breakfast (17.20.031);

2.   Boarding or rooming house (17.20.034);

3.   Farmers’ market (17.20.077);

4.   Flea market (17.20.077);

5.   More than one principal building per lot (17.20.050);

6.   Recyclables and donations collection station (17.20.146);

7.   Sales of motorcycles, all-terrain vehicles (ATVs), snowmobiles and personal watercraft;

8.   Social facility;

9.   Training facility.

    C.   Special Review uses, CB District:

1.   Ambulance and taxi service;

2.   Building height above three (3) stories (17.20.054);

3.   Church;

4.   Elementary and secondary schools, colleges and universities;

5.   Mortuary;

6.   Multi-unit dwellings;

7.   Outdoor retail sales;

8.   Rafting takeout facility (see 17.24.060);

9.   Recreational facility;

10. Vocational and business school.

    D.  Yard and Bulk Requirements, CB District.

 

Minimum lot area

5,280 square feet

 

 

Minimum lot area per unit, multi-unit dwelling

1,500 square feet

 

 

Minimum frontage

44 feet

 

 

Maximum lot coverage

 

Residential

45%

Commercial

100%

 

 

Minimum front yard setback

 

Abutting residential zone

25 feet

Commercial use

0 feet

 

 

Minimum side yard setback

 

Abutting residential zone

10 feet

Abutting commercial zone

0 feet*

 

 

Minimum rear yard setback

 

Abutting residential zone

15 feet

Abutting commercial zone

0 feet*

 

 

Maximum height

100 feet (17.20.054)

 

 

*See Section 17.20.060

 

 

    E.   Off-Street Parking Spaces Required, CB District. (See Section 17.28.010 for exception.) (Ord. 30-2017 § 10; Ord. 23-2016 § 4; Ord. 25-2014 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 16-2014 §§ 4, 5; Ord. 2-2013 § 20; Ord. 12-2012 § 1; Ord. 28-2010 §§ 4, 5; Ord. 6-2002 § 1; Ord. 5-2002 § 2; Ord. 34-2001 § 5; Ord. 12-2000 §§ 19, 20; Ord. 5-1999 § 3(J); Ord. 7-1996 §§ 13, 14; Ord. 3-1995; Ord. 1-1994 §§ 12, 13; Ord. 25-1991 § 1)

 

17.12.150 I District, Light Industrial.
    The I District is comprised of development which is primarily non-offensive types of industry, processing, assemblage, limited fabrication and light manufacturing. This district also accommodates attendant services and certain complementary and supporting uses. All uses must comply with state, local and federal laws with respect to the impacts of such uses and with Section 17.20.105 of this Code.

    A.  Permitted uses, I District:

1.   Accessory structures and uses;

2.   Ambulance and taxi services;

3.   Automobile body shop;

4.   Automated fueling centers;

5.   Bars and taverns;

6.   Blacksmiths;

7.   Brewery, distillery, winery or other alcoholic beverage manufacturing;

8.   Bulk fuel dealers;

9.   Cold storage locker;

10. Constructions materials and hardware sales;

11. Dry cleaning and laundry plant;

12. Fleet and/or equipment maintenance facilities;

13. Food carts or truck (17.20.085, Temporary Use Permit);

14. Gasoline stations;

15. General research facilities;

16. Health and membership clubs;

17. Light industry;

18. Materials recovery facilities: Type 1 (17.20.120);

19. Medical marijuana facility, licensed (17.20.125);

20. Professional offices;

21. Recyclables and donations collection station (17.20.146);

22. Residential uses, existing only;

23. Restaurants with or without drive-through facilities;

24. Sexually oriented business (17.20.162);

25. Social facilities;

26. Storage, sales, repair and rental of motor vehicles, mobile homes, recreational vehicles and equipment, farm and construction vehicles and equipment;

27. Structural steel fabrication;

28. Tire recapping and retreading;

29. Trade and repair shops;

30. Utility services;

31. Vehicle parking facilities;

32. Vehicle washing facilities;

33. Warehouses, distribution and storage facilities;

34. Welding and machine shops;

35. Wholesale outlet and related services;

36. Yard sales;

37. Wireless service facilities pursuant to Section 17.45.030(D).

    B.   Conditional uses, I District:

1.   Animal boarding (17.20.028);

2.   Animal hospitals or clinics;

3.   Backyard chickens (17.20.029);

4.   Child care centers;

5.   Farm stand (17.20.076);

6.   Kennels (17.20.111);

7.   More than one (1) principal building per lot (17.20.050);

8.   Training facilities;

9.   Watchman’s quarters.

    C.   Special Review uses, I District:

1.   Pet crematories;

2.   Rafting takeout facilities (17.24.060);

3.   Rail services and facilities;

4.   Recreational vehicle (RV) parks (17.20.145);

5.   Materials recovery facilities: Type 2 (17.20.120);

6.   Salvage yards;

7.   Shelter (17.20.165);

8.   Vocational and business schools;

9.   Waste transfer facilities;

10. Community Marijuana Cultivation Facility.

    D.  Yard and Bulk Requirements, I District.

 

Minimum lot size

10,000 square feet

 

 

Minimum frontage

100 feet

 

 

Minimum front yard setback

25 feet

 

 

Minimum principal side yard setback

 

Abutting residential zone

25 feet + 2 feet per story over one story

Abutting commercial zone

15 feet

Abutting streets

15 feet

Abutting industrial zone

10 feet

 

 

Minimum accessory side yard setback

 

Abutting residential zone

15 feet

Abutting commercial zone

10 feet

Abutting streets

10 feet

Abutting industrial zone

5 feet

 

 

Minimum principal rear yard setback

 

Abutting residential zone

25 feet

Abutting commercial zone

15 feet

Abutting industrial zone

10 feet

 

 

Minimum Accessory rear yard setback

 

Abutting residential zone

15 feet

Abutting commercial zone

10 feet

Abutting industrial zone

5 feet

 

 

Maximum height within 100 feet of a residential use

100 feet

 

 

NOTE: These minimum yard and bulk standards may be increased on any use approved by special review.

 

    E.   Off-Street Parking Spaces Required, I District. (See Chapter 17.28.) (Ord. 30-2017 § 11; Ord. 1-2017 § 2; Ord. 23-2016 § 5; Ord. 1-2015 § 1; Ord. 21-2014 § 2; Ord. 20-2014 §§ 3, 4; Ord. 16-2014 §§ 6, 7; Ord. 2-2013 § 21; Ord. 28-2010 §§ 6, 7; Ord. 19-2010 § 3; Ord. 8-2010 § 3; Ord. 4-2008 § 3; Ord. 5-2002 § 2; Ord. 30-2000 § 5; Ord. 19-1999 § 1; Ord. 5-1999 § 3(K); Ord. 4-1999 § 3; Ord. 7-1996 §§ 15, 16; Ord. 7-1995 § 4; Ord. 2-1994; Ord. 36-1992; Ord. 8-1992 § 2; Ord. 25-1991 § 1)

 

17.12.160 OPR District, Open Space, Parks and Recreation.
    The OPR District is comprised of areas designated for public and semi-public uses for the conservation of open space, the preservation of environmentally sensitive areas, and the creation and regulation of land for active and passive recreational uses and facilities and limited commercial activities where appropriate. The OPR District also may provide areas for various City-owned facilities, including, but not necessarily limited to water treatment and distribution facilities and stormwater management facilities, including ditches, floodways, detention basins and similar features. Commercial activities as allowed and as permitted in the OPR District or any City-controlled park, plaza, or open space may be limited as to the total number of activities in any given park, the particular location, the days allowed or any other operating characteristics as may be determined by the Cañon City Parks Department.

    A.  Permitted uses, OPR District:

1.   Accessory structures and uses, limited to the following:

a.   Benches, picnic tables and shelters;

b.   Hard or soft surface pedestrian or equestrian trails;

c.   Maintenance facilities;

d.   Parking lots and driveways;

e.   Perimeter fencing;

f.    Public restrooms;

g.   Wildlife observation decks and platforms;

2.   City-owned facilities as authorized by the City Council;

3.   Farmers’ market (Park Permit);

4.   Food cart or truck (Park Permit);

5.   Open space;

6.   Riparian habitat;

7.   Scenic view corridors;

8.   Special events (Park Permit);

9.   Stormwater management facilities;

10. Underground utility lines;

11. Water storage reservoirs and tanks;

12. Water treatment, transmission and distribution lines and facilities;

13. Wildlife habitat;

14. Wireless service facilities pursuant to Section 17.45.030(D).

    B.   Conditional uses, OPR District:

1.   Public utility installations, including overhead transmission lines and substations.

    C.   Special Review uses, OPR District:

1.   Cemeteries;

2.   Oil or gas wells;

3.   Public administrative offices and services buildings;

4.   Rafting takeout facility (17.24.060);

5.   Recreational facilities;

6.   Structures otherwise permitted pursuant to Subsection A or this Subsection C that are closer than one hundred (100) feet to existing adjacent residential structures (see Subsection D);

7.   Wireless communication towers and installations.

    D.  Yard and Bulk Requirements, OPR District.

 

Minimum lot area

not applicable

 

 

Minimum lot width

not applicable

 

 

Maximum lot coverage

not applicable

 

 

Minimum separation of all structures from any existing adjacent residential structure

100 feet, unless a lesser separation is authorized and specified through special review. (See Subsection (C)(5)). Note: All other minimum setback requirements shall be subject to this minimum separation requirement in circumstances where this requirement is applicable.

 

 

Minimum street frontage

 

public access uses

60 feet

non-public access uses

not applicable

 

 

Minimum front yard setback

25 feet

 

 

Minimum side yard setback

 

principal structure

25 feet

accessory structure

10 feet

special review uses

as determined during the special review process

 

 

Minimum rear yard setback

 

principal structure

25 feet

accessory structure

10 feet

 

 

Maximum height

35 feet

 

    E.   Off-Street Parking Spaces Required, OPR District. The number and location of off-street parking spaces and drive aisles shall be as determined by the Zoning Administrator for permitted uses, or, where applicable, as approved through special review. The surface of all parking spaces, drive aisles and maneuvering areas must be concrete or asphalt, unless the use of a durable and dustless surface material, including pervious paving techniques, is approved by the City Council. (Ord. 30-2017 § 12; Ord. 23-2016 § 6; Ord. 27-2014 § 1; Ord. 16-2014 § 8; Ord. 2-2013 § 22; Ord. 24-2008 § 1)

 

17.12.170 DR District, Developing Resource.
    The Developing Resource Zone District is intended to function as a holding zone district for newly-annexed properties that were used for agriculture or other non-urban uses prior to annexation and for which there are no specific and immediate plans for development. These areas may be designated in the City’s Comprehensive Plan as potentially suitable for urban development, but may lack the utilities, services, infrastructure, and/or other facilities or uses necessary to support that development at the time of annexation and for an indefinite period thereafter.

    A.  Uses Permitted, DR District.

    1.   Those uses that lawfully existed at the time of annexation;

    2.   Stormwater management facilities;

    3.   Underground utility lines;

    4.   Water storage reservoirs and tanks;

    5.   Water treatment, transmission and distribution lines and facilities;

    6.   Wireless service facilities pursuant to Section 17.45.030(D).

    B.   Uses Permitted Only Through Special Review, DR District.

    1.   New single-family dwelling and accessory structures and uses;

    2.   Any installation, expansion or enlargement of a permanent structure containing a use that existed at the time of zoning or rezoning into the DR District.

    C.   Yard and Bulk Requirements, DR District. Lot area and setback requirements, building height requirements, etc., for the Developing Resource Zone District shall be the same as for the R-1, Low Density Residential District.

    D.  The process for rezoning of land in the DR District to another zone district of the City shall be consistent with the procedures, policies and conditions of Chapter 17.40.

    E.   Any nonconforming use of either land or structures that was established at the time of the designation of the land into the DR District shall continue to be nonconforming upon the rezoning of such land into another zone district, unless such land is rezoned into a zone district where such use is listed as a permitted use.

    F.   The City Council may incorporate by reference into the ordinance designating such land for inclusion in a DR Zone District some or all of the provisions of a fully-executed annexation agreement between the City and the owner or owners of such land. Such provisions may provide for the continuation, enlargement, expansion or elimination of some or all uses that exist on the land at the time such land is first included in a DR Zone District. (Ord. 30-2017 § 13; Ord. 5-2009 § 1)

Chapter 17.13 ADMINISTRATIVE EXCEPTIONS
17.13.010 Intent, purpose and approval authority.
    A.  Generally, relief from the yard, bulk and other zoning standards that apply in any particular zone district may be obtained, if at all, only through a variance granted by the Board of Adjustment according to the provisions of Chapter 17.36, including the strict criteria set forth in Section 17.36.040.

    B.   The purpose of this Chapter 17.13 is to create an administrative process through which certain minor variances may be applied for and approved by the Zoning Administrator as “administrative exceptions” to the strict standards of Subsection 17.36.040(E). Administrative exceptions are intended to allow a limited amount of flexibility in the siting and height of certain structures. The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to grant or deny applications for administrative exceptions for such circumstances as this title allows subject to the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 17-2014 § 1)

 

17.13.020 Administrative exceptions considered.
    A.  An administrative exception to the current standards of the Zoning Regulations may be granted as long as all other requirements contained herein are met:

    1.   a maximum ten percent (10%) reduction of the side and/or rear yard setback standard for a new principal or accessory structure, or an addition to an existing principal or accessory structure in any zone district; or,

    2.   a maximum ten percent (10%) increase of the height standard for a new accessory structure in any zone district except RL, Rural Living, MH-2, Mobile Home Subdivision, and C, Commercial;

    3.   an exception for the construction of landings, stairs or porches of a single-family dwelling, existing or new, in residential districts where the existing dwelling is in compliance with the established front yard setback and where the encroachment into the front yard setback for the landing, stairs or porch will not exceed a depth of five (5) feet and length shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the length of the dwelling’s front elevation.

    B.   An administrative exception shall not be granted for any permitted, conditional or special review use within any zone district.

    C.   No exception shall be considered where the standard setback is five (5) feet or less.

    D.  No exception shall be considered where the existing structure (in the case of a requested addition to a structure) does not meet the minimum standard setback.

    E.   No exception shall be considered for a reduction of setback for livestock housing in the RL, Rural Living zone district.

 

    F.   No exception for reduction of setback shall be considered for the MH-1, Mobile Home Park zone district. (Ord. 17-2014 § 1)

 

17.13.030 Application.
    A.  The applicant for an administrative exception shall meet with the City Planner prior to submitting an application to discuss the submittal requirements and review process. If the administrative exception meets the consideration qualifications in Section 17.13.020 of this chapter, the City Planner shall identify adjacent property owners, and within a reasonable amount of time mail a written notice to each and every owner of adjacent properties inviting such owners to comment in favor of or in opposition to the exception requested in the application not later than ten (10) days following the date of the notice. For purposes of this chapter adjacent properties are defined as those that share a property line with the subject property excluding streets or alleys. The Zoning Administrator shall consider all timely responses from owners of adjacent properties before granting or denying the exception requested in the application.

    B.   An application for an administrative exception shall include:

    1.   A complete building permit or site plan application, as applicable, that includes a site plan map drawn to scale that provides in legible format all of the information required for building permit or site plan review. The site plan must clearly show the required setback and the requested setback. A survey may be required by the Zoning Administrator as a precondition to the consideration of an application;

 

    2.   A written request for the administrative exception addressing all of the approval criteria or completed administrative exception application on a form provided or approved by the Zoning Administrator. (Ord. 17-2014 § 1)

 

17.13.040 Approval criteria.
    The administrative exception shall be approved if the Zoning Administrator finds that all of the following criteria have been satisfied:

    A.  The strict application of the standard from which relief has been requested will not allow reasonable use of the property in the absence of relief;

    B.   The administrative exception is the minimum amount that would afford relief;

    C.   The administrative exception shall not conflict with any other provision of the Cañon City Municipal Code or the intent and purposes of the Cañon City Comprehensive Plan, as it may be amended. (Ord. 17-2014 § 1)

 

17.13.050 Review procedure.
    A.  Once a complete building permit or site plan application has been submitted, the Zoning Administrator, within a reasonable amount of time, will review the exception application and all comments received from owners of adjacent properties and determine whether to approve, approve with conditions or deny the application based on the approval criteria set forth in Section 17.13.040.

    B.   The Zoning Administrator will send written notification of the decision to the applicant.

    C.   If an exception greater than allowed in this chapter is desired by the applicant, or if the applicant wishes to appeal the decision of the Zoning Administrator, nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the applicant from applying to the Board of Adjustment for a variance or from appealing the Zoning Administrator’s decision. In either case, all provisions and processes provided for in Chapter 17.36 shall apply. (Ord. 17-2014 § 1)

 

17.13.060 Expiration.
    An administrative exception, if granted, shall expire according to the provisions of the issued building permit or approved site plan, of which it is a part. (Ord. 17-2014 § 1)

Chapter 17.14 TRANSITIONAL MIXED-USE OVERLAY ZONE
17.14.010 Purpose.
    It is the purpose of this chapter to implement the Comprehensive Plan’s vision of active, pedestrian-oriented districts that enhance the quality of life and vitality of the City. In addition to the general purposes listed in Section 17.04.020 of this title, specific purposes of the Transitional Mixed-Use (hereinafter “TMU”) overlay zone are as follows:

    A.  Encourage mixed uses in order to create an active street life, enhance the vitality of businesses, support and maintain stable and attractive neighborhoods, and reduce vehicular traffic;

    B.   Allow for commercial, office, residential, and, in some cases, industrial developments to occur separately or combined as unified development projects in a zoning district (TMU) that encourages a concept of mixed land use within and across underlying commercial, industrial and/or residential zoning districts where all or portions of the property are suitable for re-development;

    C.   Encourage compatibility between residential and commercial or industrial uses in areas where residential zones abut commercial or industrial zones, by permitting greater design flexibility across the existing boundaries of the two (2) or more zones;

    D.  Ensure that the appearance and effects of buildings and uses are harmonious with the character of the area in which they are located.

    E.   Encourage redevelopment of properties in diverse areas of the City where the original use(s) of an existing building or property may no longer be relevant to the neighborhood in which it is located.

    F.   Redevelopment, where modifications or additions are made to existing structures and where the underlying zone district is residential, may include mixed uses as long as the project respects the residential nature of the neighborhood.

    G.  Encourage creativity in property design and landscape that minimizes impacts on existing development while enhancing the character of the area in which the project is located.

    H.  Encourage the bundling of small, adjacent parcels into unified projects. (Ord. 10-2016 § 1)

 

17.14.020 Relationship to underlying zone district(s).
    A.  Where imposed, the TMU overlay zone designation shall be added to the underlying zone designation to establish a new zone designation. The zone of the affected properties shall thereafter be designated on the Zoning Map by the symbol of the underlying zone, followed by the parenthetically enclosed letters “TMU” or (TMU).

    B.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the owner of property located within a TMU overlay zone from using or developing such property in accordance with the regulations set forth in this title that are applicable to the underlying zone district of such property or require any such owner to seek approval for any use that has been permitted through the special review process applicable to the underlying zone district of such property.

    C.   Where the TMU overlay zone has been imposed, the land use regulations and development standards of the underlying zone district shall remain in full force and effect, except as otherwise approved in a specific TMU project.

    D.  Residential uses may be located above first floor commercial uses within any portion of the underlying commercial or industrial zone.

    E.   Any previously approved special review use or conditional use permit may be permitted to remain within the proposed development if the use is found to be compatible with the proposed project. As part of their review, the Planning Commission will determine the compatibility of any previously approved conditional and/or special review use.

    F.   The allowed use(s) will be established as part of the approval of the TMU project.

    G.  Yard and bulk requirements including setbacks and lot coverage may be varied in any proposed TMU project, but will be established as part of the approval of the TMU project. (Ord. 10-2016 § 1)

 

17.14.030 When to submit a TMU project.
    A.  Any new commercial, industrial, mixed use or public development of any size on one or more contiguous parcels or lots, whether vacant or not, where the uses are or will be mixed and/or are not allowed in the underlying zone district(s). No minimum sized parcel is necessarily required if it is found that the development meets the performance standards and the approval criteria contained herein.

    B.   Any new multi-family residential development.

    C.   Additions to existing developments where a use(s) is requested that is not allowed in the underlying zone district or will create a mixed-use development.

    D.  Additions to previously approved TMU projects where the use(s) have not been previously allowed, where the established yard and bulk requirements of the original project may be exceeded, or where new principal structures are proposed.

    E.   Other developments that, due to their unique nature, require Planning Commission review. (Ord. 10-2016 § 1)

 

17.14.040 Prohibited uses where the underlying zoning is residential.
    A.  Commercial uses prohibited where any portion of the underlying zone(s) is residential. These uses include, but are not limited to:

    1.   Animal kennels, clinics and hospitals.

    2.   Bars and taverns.

    3.   Drive-up facilities associated with any commercial use.

    4.   Gas stations.

    5.   Hotels and motels.

    6.   Licensed medical marijuana facility.

    7.   Liquor stores.

    8.   Motor vehicle sales, service and repair businesses.

    9.   Recycling collection facilities.

    10. Sexually oriented businesses.

    11. Thrift stores, second-hand stores and pawnshops.

    B.   Industrial uses prohibited where any portion of the underlying zone(s) is residential. These uses include, but are not limited to:

    1.   Any industrial use requiring special review approval or that generates impacts that have the potential to adversely affect neighboring residential properties.

    2.   Automated fueling centers, bulk fuel dealers, and gas stations.

    3.   Blacksmith, welding and machine shops, and structural steel fabrication.

    4.   Drive-up facilities associated with any allowed commercial use.

    5.   Fleet and/or equipment maintenance facilities.

    6.   Licensed medical marijuana facility.

    7.   Materials recovery facilities.

    8.   Motor vehicle sales, service and repair businesses.

    9.   Sales and rentals of recreational, farm and construction vehicles and equipment.

    10. Sales of manufactured and modular homes.

    11. Sexually oriented businesses. (Ord. 10-2016 § 1)

 

17.14.050 Performance guidelines.
    A.  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to establish minimum performance guidelines for any proposed TMU project which contains residential, commercial and/or industrial uses. In order to protect residents within and adjacent to the proposed development and provide for reasonable harmony between residents and residential interests and businesses, commercial and industrial interests, no project shall be approved in a TMU overlay zone unless the design of the project has taken into account and satisfactorily addressed, in addition to all other applicable regulations and criteria under this Title, the performance guidelines enumerated in this subsection.

    1.   Noise.

    a.   Commercial and industrial uses shall be designed and operated, and hours of operation limited where appropriate, so that neighboring residents (either within or adjacent to the project) are not exposed to offensive noise, especially from traffic or late-night activity.

    b.   Common walls between residential and non-residential uses shall be constructed to minimize the transmission of noise and vibration.

    2.   Security.

    a.   Residential units shall be designed to ensure the personal security of residents, including, but not limited to, the provision of separate and secured entrances and exits that are directly accessible to secured parking areas.

    b.   Non-residential and residential uses located on the same floor shall not use common entrance hallways or common balconies, which may compromise the residential living conditions.

    c.   Parking spaces for non-residential and residential uses shall, be specifically designated by posting, pavement marking, and/or physical separation.

    3.   Lighting.

    a.   Parking areas shall provide sufficient illumination for access and security purposes.

    b.   Light fixtures on buildings and light poles in parking areas shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height and shall be oriented in such a way as to not shine onto adjoining properties. Such lighting shall not blink, flash, oscillate, or be of unusually high intensity of brightness. Downward facing and shielded lighting is required for all projects.

    4.   Odors, Dust, Vibration. No commercial or industrial use shall be permitted to expose residents, either within or adjacent to the site, to offensive odors, noxious fumes, dust, electrical interference, and/or vibration.

    5.   Refuse Storage and Location. Residential units shall be provided with refuse storage containers separate from that used by the commercial or industrial uses. They shall be clearly marked for residential use only and their use by non-residential uses is prohibited.

    6.   Parking Spaces and Traffic Lanes.

    a.   Parking places and traffic lanes for both residential and non-residential uses must be available either on site or elsewhere in the vicinity of the project as they may be allowed pursuant to Section 17.28 of this Code.

    b.   To the extent possible, pedestrian and vehicular access for the project shall be shared by all of the proposed uses. (Ord. 10-2016 § 1)

 

17.14.060 Relationship to Historic overlay zone district.
    Where the Historic overlay zone has been imposed, the requirements of the existing land use zone (herein referred to as the “underlying zone”) shall remain in full force and effect, in addition to the requirements of the Historic overlay zone. In any case where the regulations governing the Historic overlay zone and those governing the underlying zone differ, the regulations governing the Historic overlay zone shall take precedence. Where imposed, both the Historic overlay zone and the TMU overlay zone designation shall be added to the underlying zone designation to establish a new zone designation. The zone of the affected properties shall thereafter be designated on the Zoning Map by the symbol of the underlying zone, followed by the parenthetically enclosed letters “HTMU” or (HTMU). (Ord. 10-2016 § 1)

 

17.14.065 Application.
    A.  A pre-application conference with the City staff is required before the applicant may submit a TMU project application in order to discuss the general components of the development, submittal requirements, public infrastructure improvements, if any, applicable fees and costs and scheduling issues.

    B.   The applicant shall file a complete application in a form provided by the Planning Office. No application shall be allowed to proceed until it has been deemed to be complete.

    C.   The owner(s) of record of the lot or parcel of property that is the subject of the application, if not the same as the applicant, shall file an affidavit authorizing the application.

    D.  Upon the filing of an application, the applicant shall pay a fee, according to the current schedule of fees adopted by the City Council.

    E.   The application, and all accompanying documentation, shall be filed at least thirty (30) days prior to the Planning Commission meeting at which it will be reviewed.

    F.   The applicant shall provide three (3) full-size sets of all application materials. In addition, one set of all graphic documents larger than eleven (11) inches by seventeen (17) inches, reduced to no larger than eleven (11) inches by seventeen (17) inches and produced in black and white, shall also be provided. All details in such reductions shall be clearly readable.

    G.  Contents of Application. The application shall include:

    1.   Land Use Application Form. All property owners must consent in writing to the application.

    2.   Application Fee. A non-refundable fee is collected to cover the cost of review by the staff.

    3.   Proof of ownership in the form of a title commitment or title policy, dated no earlier than thirty (30) days prior to the date of submittal, to include ownership of any mineral, gravel and oil and gas leases, reservations, or any other severed ownerships, and holders of mortgages, judgments, liens, contracts, easements or agreements of record.

    4.   A site plan, floor plan, and elevations of the project, drawn to scale and dimensioned, shall be filed, which include the following information, as applicable:

    a.   Existing topography and proposed grading;

    b.   Existing trees with a trunk diameter of six (6) inches or greater;

    c.   All buildings and structures, and the uses within each room;

    d.   Improvements in the public right-of-way, including location of sidewalk, curb, gutter, street width to centerline, and dedications;

    e.   Exterior lighting details, dimensions and cut sheets;

    f.    Easements;

    g.   Off-street parking areas, including parking space striping, aisles, and driveways;

    h.   Lot dimensions;

    i.    Setbacks and spaces between buildings;

    j.    Walls, fences, and landscaping including location, height, and materials. Landscape plans must be prepared by a professional landscape architect;

    k.   Trash disposal and recycling facilities location and enclosures;

    l.    The architectural elevations of all sides of all structures depicting design, color, materials, textures, ornaments, or other architectural features;

    m.  The location, dimensions, and design of all signs;

    n.   Existing and proposed topography with two (2) foot contours, unless modified by staff;

    o.   Such other data as may be required to demonstrate that the project meets the performance guidelines and criteria set forth in Section 17.14.070(B). (Ord. 10-2016 § 1)

 

17.14.070 Planning Commission review.
    A.  Purpose. Applications for projects proposed for development in any TMU overlay zone that will involve uses or features that otherwise would not be permitted in the underlying zone(s), shall, upon proper application under this Chapter 17.14, be reviewed and decided upon by the Planning Commission. The purpose of any such review will be to ensure compatibility, originality, variety, and innovation in the architecture, design, landscaping, and site planning of developments in the City. The provisions of this Section are intended to protect property values, prevent the blight and deterioration of neighborhoods, promote sound land use, encourage design excellence, and protect the overall health, safety, and welfare of the City. Project designs which ignore or otherwise fail to adequately address the performance guidelines identified in Section 17.14.050(A) should be rejected or be approved subject to conditions imposed to mitigate adverse impacts on residents and residential interests.

    B.   Criteria. The following criteria shall be used in determining a project’s consistency with the intent and purpose of this section.

    1.   Performance Guidelines. The project meets the performance guidelines in Section 17.14.050(A); and

    2.   User Impact and Needs. The design of the project considers the impact and the needs of the user in respect to pedestrian circulation, parking, traffic, utilities, public services, noise and odor, privacy, private and common open spaces, trash collection, security and crime deterrence, physical barriers, and other design concerns.

    3.   Relationship to Physical Features. The location of buildings and structures respects the natural terrain of the site and is functionally integrated with any natural features of the landscape to include the preservation of existing trees, where feasible.

    4.   Balance and Integration with the Neighborhood. The overall design, and in particular, the building(s) and the uses they contain, are integrated and compatible with the specific neighborhood and are in harmony with the scale and bulk of surrounding properties.

    5.   Building Design and Consistency of Architectural Style. The building design elements of new or existing buildings create a well-proportioned and unified building form and exhibit an overall architectural concept. The buildings and structural designs provide innovation, variety, and creativity. Architectural elevations are designed to eliminate the appearance of flat façades or box-like construction.

    6.   Signs. Signs and sign programs meet the criteria established in Chapter 17.30, Signs, of this title. Where any portion of the underlying zone district is residential, Chapter 17.30.070 shall apply.

    7.   Conditions of Approval. The Planning Commission may require conditions related to the performance standards and/or the criteria of approval as they are deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare, to ensure that the project is consistent with the purposes of this title as declared in Section 17.04.020 and is designed to be compatible with surrounding land uses and the area of its location. Such conditions may include, but shall not be limited to:

    a.   Changes to the design of building and structures;

    b.   Additional setbacks, open spaces, and buffers;

    c.   Provision of fences and walls;

    d.   Street dedications and improvements, including curb, gutter, sidewalk, service roads and alleys;

    e.   The control of vehicular ingress, egress, and circulation;

    f.    Sign requirements or a sign program, consistent with Chapter 17.30, Signs, of this title;

    g.   Provision of landscaping and the maintenance thereof;

    h.   The regulation of noise, vibration, odor or other similar objectionable factors;

    i.    Requirements for off-street loading facilities;

    j.    Additional site planning requirements pursuant to Chapter 4.12 of the Subdivision and Development Regulations;

    k.   Such other conditions that will make the proposed development conform to the intent and purposes set forth in this chapter and the Comprehensive Plan.

    C.   Setting Hearings. All applications shall be set for a public hearing before the Planning Commission at the next regular meeting that is at least thirty (30) days following the filing of the complete application.

    D.  Notice of Public Hearing before the Planning Commission. Notice of the public hearing before the Planning Commission to consider an application for Planning Commission review shall be given by the City Planner as follows:

    1.   By publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City not less than fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the date of the public hearing; and

    2.   By mailing a written notice thereof, not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of such hearing to the applicant, to the owner(s) of the subject property and to all owners of property within three hundred (300) feet of the exterior boundary of the subject property or properties; and

    3.   By providing a sign or signs to be posted by the applicant in at least one prominent place on the subject property, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing. More than one sign may be required for parcels of land fronting on more than one street, or for parcels having in excess of two hundred (200) feet of street frontage. All signs shall be prominently placed on the private property of the applicant, and not on any utility poles or elsewhere in the public right-of-way.

    E.   Decisions of the Planning Commission. The decision of the Planning Commission regarding a request for approval of any project in the TMU overlay zone shall be set forth in a Resolution of the Planning Commission. Such Resolution shall contain any conditions of approval enumerated under paragraph 7 of subsection B of this section which, in the judgment of the Commission, have been deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare.

    F.   Appeal of Planning Commission Decision. Decisions by the Planning Commission regarding the approval, the conditions of approval, or the denial of an application filed pursuant to this chapter shall be final and conclusive unless, not later than thirty (30) days following the decision of the Planning Commission:

    1.   The applicant or any property owner to whom notice was mailed pursuant to Section 17.40.070(F)(2), using a form provided by the City Planner, files in the office of the Zoning Administrator a written appeal of such decision to the City Council, which states the grounds for appeal and the relief sought by such interested party, and pays any required fee.

    G.  Setting of the Public Hearing Before the City Council. A public hearing before the City Council shall be scheduled at the next available regular meeting of the Council that is at least thirty (30) days following the receipt of the appeal.

    H.  Notice Requirements for Public Hearing Before the City Council. Notice of the above referenced public hearing before the City Council shall be given pursuant to subsection F of this section.

    I.    Decision of the City Council. The performance guidelines identified in subsection 17.14.050(A) shall be considered and applied by City Council in any appeal of a Planning Commission decision permitted under subsection (H). The decision of the City Council on all applications shall be final and conclusive.

    J.    Expiration. An approval granted pursuant to Planning Commission review, or as the result of an appeal to City Council, of a TMU overlay zone project, shall establish a vested property right for a period of three (3) years, as set forth in Article 68 of Title 24 of the Colorado Revised Statutes. Such time limits may be extended by the City Council following a public hearing, for which adequate public notice is given pursuant to subsection F of this section, upon the written request of the applicant and payment of a fee as set forth by resolution of the City Council. The request shall be filed with the City Planner prior to the expiration of the approval and shall include presentation of proof of an unusual hardship not of the applicant’s own making. If the time limit for development set forth in the original application has expired, and no extension has been granted, the approval, and all rights and privileges established therein, shall be considered null and void following the three (3) year period of the vested property rights.

    K.  Revocation.

    1.   After a public hearing, preceded by public notice as set forth in subsection F of this section, the Planning Commission may, subject to appeal to the City Council, revoke any approval or conditional approval issued, on one or more of the following grounds:

    a.   The use(s), building(s) or site established is materially different from that which was represented in the application and approved by the Planning Commission or on appeal by the City Council;

    b.   That the use or uses for which such approval was granted has ceased for a period of at least eighteen (18) consecutive calendar months;

    c.   That there has not been substantial compliance with the terms and conditions of the approval;

    d.   That exercise of the approval violates any State, Federal or local statute or regulation.

    2.   At any hearing on the revocation of any TMU overlay zone project, the applicant and any other person whose property rights may be affected by such revocation, shall have the right to produce any arguments and introduce any evidence in support of their position.

    L.   Amendments to an Approved TMU Project.

    1.   Amendments. Variations in the location of structures, improvements, or open space areas necessitated by engineering or other unforeseen difficulties may be reviewed and approved by the City staff. All plans so amended shall be revised to show the authorized changes and shall become a part of the permanent records of the City. More substantial modifications to an approved TMU project that expand but do not change any of the approved uses and continue to meet the established yard and bulk requirements and the parking requirements of the approved project may also be reviewed by staff through one of the City’s site plan processes, as determined by staff.

    2.   When a New Application is Required. A new TMU project application will be required when any one of the following occurs: (a) the approved use(s) is requested to be changed or an additional use(s) is requested, (b) when one or more of the project’s approved yard and bulk requirements are exceeded, (c) when a new principal building is desired, or (d) when it is determined by the Zoning Administrator that revisions to the approved project contain substantial impacts warranting Planning Commission review. (Ord. 10-2016 § 1)

Chapter 17.15 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS (ADUs)
17.15.010 Purpose and intent.
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the creation of additional living quarters on lots within a single-family oriented neighborhood to help residents provide care and support for family members, provide security and companionship for property owners, and address the rising costs of homeownership, while ensuring that such arrangements are both compatible with the character of the neighborhood, whether existing or new, and will not infringe upon the quality of life expected in those neighborhoods. (Ord. 12-2011 § 1)

 

17.15.020 Definition.
    “Accessory dwelling unit (ADU)” shall mean a secondary dwelling unit established in conjunction with, but clearly subordinate to, a single-family dwelling that is the principal structure on the lot. The ADU may be attached to the principal structure or it may be a separate accessory structure or portion thereof on the same lot. (Ord. 12-2011 § 1)

 

17.15.030 Criteria for approving an accessory dwelling unit.
    A.  Zone Districts.

    1.   ADUs shall be allowed in the R-L, R-1, R-2 and R-3 Zone Districts, subject to compliance with the standards for ADUs provided in this chapter and then only after Special Review use approval (pursuant to Chapter 17.24 of this Code) is granted by the City Council.

    2.   ADUs shall be allowed in Planned Unit Developments and Planned Development Districts only when specifically designated as a permitted or special use and appropriate compliance standards for ADUs are established in the development plan approved by the City Council.

    B.   Compliance with Zone District Regulations. Except as set forth in Subsection C below, the ADU shall comply with all yard and bulk requirements set forth in Title 17 for the zone district in which the ADU will be located.

    C.   Setbacks. An ADU shall comply with the setback requirements for the principal dwelling unit in zone districts in which the ADU will be located, with the exception that when said lot is adjacent to an alley, a detached ADU shall comply with the rear setback requirement for an accessory structure in that zone district.

    D.  Minimum Lot Size. The minimum size of a lot on which an ADU may be established shall be the minimum lot size for the zone district in which the ADU will be located.

    E.   Unit Size Requirements. Each ADU shall contain at least three hundred fifty (350) square feet. The maximum size of an ADU shall be ten percent (10%) of the lot area, to a maximum of one thousand (1,000) square feet. All areas within a structure, including interior storage areas, closets, living areas and bathrooms, and interior and exterior walls shall be included in the calculation of floor area of a structure.

    F.   Occupancy. The owner of property within an R-L and R-1 Zone District containing an ADU must reside in either the ADU or the principal dwelling unit on the lot for a minimum of six (6) months each calendar year.

    G.  Parking Requirement. Each ADU shall be provided at least one off-street parking space, in addition to those parking spaces required for the principal dwelling unit.

    H.  Number of Pets. The occupants of an ADU may keep up to two (2) household pets that are commonly let outdoors for exercise or elimination. The total number of household pets commonly let outdoors for exercise or elimination kept on any property containing a principal dwelling unit and an ADU may number no more than four (4).

    I.    Special Building and Design Standards. An ADU must comply with the following building and design standards:

    1.   An ADU shall be designed to architecturally complement the principal dwelling unit in terms of quality of building materials, roof forms, the design and placement of windows, and other architectural features.

    2.   A recreational vehicle or travel trailer may not be used as an ADU in any configuration.

    3.   No exterior stairways may be constructed on the front of the principal dwelling unit to serve as access to an ADU unless the ADU, in proximity to the principal dwelling unit, is situated at the front of the lot.

    4.   The ADU shall be sited, to the maximum extent possible, to maintain the privacy of residents in the principal dwelling unit and dwelling units on adjoining lots by the use of landscape screening, fencing, window placement, and orientation of access.

    J.    Public Health.

    1.   New ADUs shall comply with all applicable Municipal Code provisions; the provisions of all fire, building, occupancy and other secondary codes adopted by the City for the protection of public health, safety and welfare; and all applicable electrical and plumbing code requirements set forth in the State of Colorado.

    2.   Existing ADUs shall comply with current code requirements for: (a) dwelling unit separation; (b) smoke alarm and carbon monoxide detector requirements; (c) electrical and plumbing; and (d) the most current edition of the Uniform Housing Code Chapter 10 “Substandard Buildings.” Electrical and plumbing systems shall be inspected by a certified home inspector approved by the City of Cañon City or a State of Colorado licensed electrician or plumber, who shall provide a letter report(s) to the Building Official certifying that the electrical and plumbing systems are safe and suitable for occupancy of the unit.

    3.   Every ADU shall have an exterior entrance separate from the principal dwelling unit.

    4.   Every ADU shall contain a cooking appliance, sink and refrigerator/freezer, sleeping area and sanitary facility separate from the principal dwelling unit.

    5.   Prior to issuance of a building permit or certificate of occupancy for an ADU, the property owner shall provide proof that the water and sanitary sewer facilities are adequate for the size of the unit and the projected number of residents.

    6.   Only one water tap/meter and one sewer tap shall be allowed to serve the combined principal dwelling unit and ADU. Evidence of payment of all water and sewer tap fees shall be required.

    K.  Ownership. The ownership of the ADU may not be legally severed from the ownership of the associated lot and any other structures on such lot. Any attempt to create a separate ownership of the ADU shall be invalid. (Ord. 12-2011 § 1)

 

17.15.040 Approval process.
    A.  With the exception of existing non-conforming ADUs that do not comply with the specific standards and limitations set forth herein, each application for an ADU shall be processed in accordance with the Special Review provisions contained in Chapter 17.24 of the Municipal Code. Approval of a special review use is discretionary on the part of the City Council and, following a public hearing, requires a finding of consistency with the criteria set forth in Section 17.24.030.

    B.   Application fees for Special Review consideration of an ADU shall be as set forth in Section 17.44.040, Schedule of Fees, of the Municipal Code. (Ord. 12-2011 § 1)

 

17.15.050 Nonconforming accessory dwelling units.
    A.  A nonconforming ADU that can be demonstrated to: (1) have existed prior to the adoption of Ordinance No. 12, Series of 2011; and (2) comply with the “Public Health” requirements of Subsection 17.15.030(J) may be legalized as an ADU as set forth in this section without further Special Review.

    B.   The owner of any such ADU may make application to the City, on forms approved by the Community Development Director, to document the size, location and proximity to other structures, height and other essential characteristics of the ADU and allow for inspection and certification. If, but only if, the ADU is deemed by the Building Official to be in compliance with the “Public Health” standards set forth in Subsection 17.15.030(J), the Zoning Administrator shall issue a certificate of compliance.

    C.   A certificate of compliance shall mean an ADU will be treated by the City as a legal nonconforming use/structure in the zone district within which it is located.

    D.  The Zoning Administrator is authorized to issue a “rebuild letter” in accordance with Subsection 17.32.070(C) for an ADU previously granted a certificate of compliance and otherwise meeting the conditions and requirements set forth in Subsection E of this section.

    E.   Notwithstanding the requirements of Section 17.32.070, an ADU previously granted a certificate of compliance that is damaged or destroyed by any means may be restored or rebuilt and its use as an ADU continued without regard to the extent of damage or destruction provided that:

    1.   The size and location on the lot, setbacks, and building height of the reconstructed ADU shall not exceed the conditions existing immediately prior to the event that caused the damage or destruction, with the exception that any ADU that was less than three hundred fifty (350) square feet in size may be rebuilt to the minimum square feet allowed for an ADU, provided that all other essential characteristics identified in Subsection B above shall be maintained.

    2.   A building permit for the repair or replacement of such damaged or destroyed ADU is issued within one year following the loss and repair or reconstruction of such ADU is commenced within eighteen (18) months of the loss and is diligently pursued to completion.

    F.   Any ADU that is deemed by the Building Official to be in noncompliance with the “Public Health” standards set forth in Subsection 17.15.030(J) herein shall also be deemed to be in violation of Title 17. (Ord. 12-2011 § 1)

Chapter 17.16 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
17.16.010 Purpose of provisions—Statutory authority.
    Pursuant to the objectives, purposes and procedures set forth in Article 67 of Title 24, Colorado Revised Statutes (also known as the Planned Unit Development Act of 1972), this chapter relating to planned unit development is included in this title to provide for a greater variety and choice of design for urban living, to gain efficiencies, to coordinate design development efforts, to conserve and make available open space, to utilize new technologies in urban land development and to gain flexibility over conventional land control regulations. (Prior code § 17.40.010)

 

17.16.020 Application and general requirements.
    A.  Application for a planned unit development (PUD) may be made for land located in any zoning district.

    B.   The setback, lot width and percentage lot coverage requirements stated in Article II of Chapter 17.12 may not apply to planned unit developments. In specific cases, the off-street parking requirements stated in Chapter 17.28 and minimum lot area as stated in Article II of Chapter 17.12 may be reduced. These requirements shall be controlled by the criteria and standards of this chapter and as shown on the approved planned unit development plan.

    C.   Where it is stated that a planned unit development is desired, it is not the intent of this chapter to prohibit development should the PUD application be denied; rather, the applicant still maintains the right to develop the property as permitted in the existing zoning district or districts. (Prior code § 17.40.020)

 

17.16.030 Permitted uses and density of development.
    Within the PUD district, the following uses and densities will be permitted subject to the approval of the City Council:

    A.  Uses as are permitted by right or permitted by special review, or any use considered as an accessory to the principal use, in the existing residential, commercial, central business district, or industrial district or districts. Under a PUD however, the City Council may allow a greater number of units per structure in PUD districts than would be otherwise permitted.

    B.   Commercial uses shall. be permitted in the PUD developed primarily for residential purposes if such development contains one hundred or more dwelling units. Such commercial centers shall be subject to the following requirements:

    1.   Commercial uses in any development stage shall not be open to use prior to the completion of fifty percent of the dwelling units in that stage and the issuance of the certificates of occupancy for that fifty percent.

    2.   Except as stated in Section 17.16.020, all requirements applicable to the C district are applicable to the commercial center in the PUD district.

    3.   Such commercial centers shall be limited to local convenience goods and services categories reasonably necessary to efficiently serve residents of the planned unit development in which it is located. (Prior code § 17.40.030)

 

17.16.040 Design standards and specifications.
    The following provisions apply to all planned unit developments:

    A.  The setback, lot width and lot coverage requirements as stated in Article II of Chapter 17.12 may not apply to planned unit developments.

    B.   The maximum allowed density shall be established based on the sketch plan in accordance with the following criteria:

    1.   The character of the surrounding neighborhood and land usage (actual or planned) and impact or proposed PUD on adjacent areas;

    2.   The ability of existing off-site transportation, utility, drainage, open space and other amenities (together with proposed improvements) to accommodate proposed PUD density;

    3.   The extent to which the proposed PUD contains unique innovative features or utilizes and incorporates special site conditions and mitigates impact on adjacent areas;

    4.   Usable on-site open space.

    C.   The number of off-street parking spaces in each planned unit development must not be less than the requirements as stated in Chapter 17.28, except that the City Council may increase or decrease the required number of off-street parking spaces in consideration of the following factors:

    1.   Probable number of cars owned by occupants of dwellings in the planned unit development;

    2.   Parking needs of any non-dwel1ing uses;

    3.   Varying time periods of use, and whatever joint use of common parking areas is proposed; and

    4.   Whenever the number of off-street parking spaces is reduced because of the nature of the occupancy, the City Council shall attain assurance that the nature of the occupancy will not change.

    D.  Subject to the express approval of the City Council, all signs within the PUD shall be controlled by written agreement between the owners and/or tenants of the PUD or otherwise, to avoid excessive advertising and insure a harmonious relationship to the PUD as a whole. Signs within a shopping center shall be limited to two types: Business identification signs and shopping center identification signs. All business identification signs within the PUD shall not project above the roofline nor project from the face of the building more than one foot. Business identification signs shall be limited in size to one square foot of sign area for each one lineal foot of building frontage. Only one sign per business is permitted unless the business has double frontage, in which case two signs are permitted. One free-standing shopping center identification sign may be authorized on the shopping center site by the City Council, and shall be shown on the final development plan for the PUD.

    E.   All other requirements applicable to the existing zoning district or districts shall apply.

    F.   The City Council must be satisfied that the preliminary development plan meets each of the following criteria, or that one or more of them is not applicable and that a practicable solution consistent with public interest has been achieved for each of these elements:

    1.   An appropriate relationship to the surrounding area;

    2.   Circulation of internal street system designed for the type of traffic generated, safety, separation from living areas, convenience, access, and noise and exhaust control; proper circulation in parking areas in terms of safety, convenience, separation and screening;

    3.   Functional open space for optimum preservation of natural features including trees and drainage areas, recreation, views, density relief, convenience of function;

    4.   Variety of housing types, densities, facilities and open spaces;

    5.   Privacy needs of individuals, families and neighbors;

    6.   Pedestrian and bicycle traffic safety, separation, convenience, access points of destination and attractiveness;

    7.   Building types appropriate to density, site relationship and bulk;

    8.   Building design orientation, spacing, materials, color and texture, storage, signs and lighting;

    9.   Landscaping, such as screening, ornamental types used and materials used, if any, maintenance, suitability and effect on the neighborhood.

    G.  The City Council may reduce or waive municipal fee requirements if it finds the common open spaces proposed are functional and designed to relieve pressure on city parks (tennis courts, swimming pool, racquetball courts, etc.).

    H.  The City Council must find that the plan is in general conformity with the comprehensive plan (master plan) of the City. (Ord. 15-2019 § 1; prior code § 17.40.040)

 

17.16.050 Preapplication conference.
    A preapplication conference shall be held with the Planning Department in order for the applicant:

    A.  To become acquainted with the planned unit development procedures and related City requirements;

    B.   To obtain a written list of what the application shall include; and

    C.   To obtain copies of any guidelines or ordinance interpretations. (Prior code § 17.40.050)

 

17.16.060 Coordination with subdivision regulations.
    A.  It is the intent of this title that subdivision review under the subdivision regulations be carried out simultaneously with the review of a planned unit development under this chapter.

    B.   The requirements of both this title and those of the subdivision regulations shall apply to all planned unit developments, and all actions of the City Council pertaining to planned unit developments shall be based upon a recommendation by the Planning Commission. (Prior code § 17.40.060)

 

17.16.070 Preliminary application—Contents.
    A.  An applicant shall make application for the approval of the planned unit development to the City. The applicant shall include with the application with a preliminary development plan as specified in this section. A copy of the preliminary development plan in an electronic format as determined by the Zoning Administrator shall also be submitted.

    B.   The preliminary development plan shall include both a preliminary development plan map and a written statement.

    1.   The preliminary development plan must, contain the following information:

    a.   The existing topographic character of the land at a contour interval of five feet or less;

    b.   The existing and proposed land uses;

    c.   The type and character of proposed development and the proposed location and number of dwelling units per gross acre and per net residential acre;

    d.   The proposed location of all streets;

    e.   The proposed location and size of public uses, including schools, parks, playgrounds, swimming pools and other open spaces;

    f.    A tentative layout of easements and a list of utilities and improvements proposed;

    g.   Type of structure, size, number of stories and height;

    h.   Show existing surrounding areas.

    2.   The written statement to accompany the preliminary development plan shall contain the following information:

    a.   An explanation of the character of the planned unit development and the manner in which it has been planned to take advantage of these regulations;

    b.   A statement of the present ownership and legal description of all the land included within the planned unit development and a list of mortgages, leases and/or optionees;

    c.   A general indication of the expected schedule of development.

    C.   The applicant may submit any other information or exhibits he deems pertinent in evaluation of the proposed planned unit development.

    D.  Accompanying the application shall be a preliminary plat application fee, as set forth in Subsection 6.1 of the Appendix to Title 16, Subdivision Regulations, of this Code. (Ord. 15-2016 § 6; Ord. 4-1994; prior code § 17.40.070)

 

17.16.080 Preliminary application—Approval procedure.
    A.  Whenever notice is required for a public hearing before the Planning Commission or the City Council for the purpose of considering a planned unit development application, such notice must be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city at least fifteen (15) days prior to such hearing; and at least fifteen (15) days prior to public hearing, notice shall be delivered or mailed first class postage prepaid to owners of abutting properties and properties located within three hundred (300) feet of the property lines of the land included in the planned unit development. Such notice shall indicate the time, date and place of the hearing, and give a brief summary or explanation of the proposed PUD and its location.

    B.   Within sixty (60) days after filing the preliminary application, the Planning Commission shall give notice of and hold a public hearing and forward the application to the City Council with or without modifications or conditions, and giving the reasons for any recommendations made.

    C.   The City Council. shall disapprove or approve the preliminary application with or without modifications or conditions.

    D.  Approval of the application shall constitute approval of the preliminary development plan and shall be valid for one year. A one-year extension of approval time may be applied for in writing to the City. Such extension requests shall then be transmitted to the Zoning Administrator for a decision on the request for extension. Extensions shall only be granted for good cause and upon evidence provided by the applicant that the final PUD application will be made within the extension period.

    E.   All or any portion of an approved preliminary development plan area may be submitted for final development plan purposes. In the case of partial submission, the approval of the remaining portion of the preliminary development plan shall automatically gain an extension of one year before another phase area of the plan must be submitted in final form.

    F.   No building permits may be issued on land within the planned unit development until the final development plan and plat have been approved by the City under the procedures provided in the following sections of this chapter. (Ord. 15-2019 §§ 2, 4; prior code § 17.40.080)

 

17.16.090 Final plan and plat—Contents.
    The final development plan and final PUD plat must be submitted within one year following approval of the preliminary development plan unless an extension of one year has been approved by the Zoning Administrator.

    A.  The final development plan shall be prepared at a scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred (100) feet, and shall be submitted in sufficient detail to evaluate the building design and other features of the PUD. The final development plan must contain, insofar as applicable, the following information:

    1.   The existing topographic character of the land at two (2) foot intervals;

    2.   Proposed land uses;

    3.   The location and size of all existing and proposed buildings, structures and improvements;

    4.   The maximum height of all buildings;

    5.   The density and type of dwellings;

    6.   The internal traffic and circulation systems, off-street parking areas, service areas, loading areas, and major points of access to public rights-of-way;

    7.   The location, height and size of proposed signs, lighting and advertising devices;

    8.   Areas which are to be conveyed, dedicated or reserved as common park areas or recreational areas, as sites for schools or other public buildings;

    9.   Areas subject to fifty (50) and one hundred (100) year flooding cycle;

    10. A general landscape plan at the time of initial submission, to be followed by a detailed landscaping plan once the site plan has been approved, showing the spacing, sizes and specific types of landscaping material;

    11. Copies of any special agreements, conveyances, restrictions or covenants which will govern the use, maintenance and continued protection of the PUD, and any of its common park areas, must accompany the final plan;

    12. Schedule of development not to exceed five (5) years unless specifically approved by the City Council.

    B.   The final PUD plat shall comply, insofar as applicable, with the following:

    1.   The sheet size shall be twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches, including a one-half-inch border;

    2.   A scale of one inch equals one hundred (100) feet shall be used unless a larger scale is deemed necessary;

    3.   Name of PUD (see sample plat statements);

    4.   An accurate and clear legal description of the PUD with the acreage;

    5.   Date of preparation, scale and north point;

    6.   Vicinity map necessary to locate the tract;

    7.   Location of land to be conveyed or reserved for public use or reserved in deeds for use of all property owners within PUD;

    8.   Dedication to the City or other public entities of lands set aside for public uses and dedication of public streets, easements and alleys to the City;

    9.   Acknowledgment of the execution of the plat before a notary public;

    10. Approval by the following or their duly appointed representatives:

    a.   Mayor- or Zoning Administrator-attested by City Clerk,

    b.   County Clerk and Recorder;

    11. Statement of record of covenants, by-laws and/or declarations where applicable;

    12. Statement of ownership and acknowledgment;

    13. A certificate waiving access rights across the right-of-way lines of major highways, parkways, streets or freeways, where required as a provision of approval;

    14. All areas shown on the map which do not constitute a part of the subdivision shall be labeled “not a part of this subdivision. “ All lines delineating such areas shall be dashed;

    15. Relative bearings and distances to the nearest quarter section established;

    16. All monuments shall be placed and set in accordance with the requirements of the State of Colorado;

    17. Certification by a registered land surveyor to the effect that the layout represents a survey made by him or her and that the monuments thereon actually exist as located and that all dimensions and other details are correct;

    18. The exact layout including:

    a.   Boundary lines with accurate distance and bearings; the exact location and width of all existing or recorded streets adjacent to the boundaries of the tract. All dimensions to be determined by accurate field survey which must balance and close within limits of one in five thousand (5,000),

    b.   The length of all arcs, internal angles, points of curvature, length and bearings of the tangents,

    c.   All easements as required by public and quasi-public agencies,

    d.   Location, size and height of all structures, which shall have accurate dimensions in feet and hundredths with bearings or angles to streets, alley lines or PUD boundary; show distance between buildings,

    e.   All units in the PUD must be identified consecutively throughout the tract, with no omissions or duplication,

    f.    The right-of-way lines, widths, locations and street names of all existing and proposed streets within; street names shall not be the same or similar to any existing street names,

    g.   Label all areas dedicated or reserved as public or common areas.

    C.   All final development plans and final PUD plat shall also be submitted in an electronic format as determined by the Zoning Administrator. In addition to the final development plan and final PUD plat, applicant shall submit:

    1.   Title insurance as proof of ownership;

    2.   Four (4) copies of improvement plans;

    3.   Two (2) copies of the drainage plans;

    4.   One copy of surveyor’s closure sheet.

    D.  The applicant may submit any other information or exhibits he deems pertinent in evaluating his or her proposed planned unit development.

    E.   Accompanying the submittal of the final development plan and final PUD plat shall be a final plat application fee, as set forth in Subsection 6.1 of the Appendix to Title 16, Subdivision Regulations, of this Code. (Ord. 15-2019 §§ 5—8; Ord. 4-1994; prior code § 17.40.090)

 

17.16.100 Final plan and plat—Approval conditions.
    Applicants for a final development plan and plat shall have two (2) options for approval as provided for this section:

    A.  If the applicant desires to seek vested rights, pursuant to Chapter 18.04 of this Code, the Applicant shall notify the City at the time of submission of the final development plan and plat. The final development plan and plat will then be transmitted to the City Council. City Council, after holding a duly noticed public hearing, will approve or disapprove, or approve with or without modifications or conditions, the final plan and plat.

    B.   If the applicant does not want to seek vested rights, the final development plan and plat shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall approve the final development plan and plat if they are in substantial compliance with the preliminary development plan and applicable regulations of the City.

    C.   Following approval by the City, pursuant to subsection A or B above, and prior to recording of the PUD plat, the developer shall:

    1.   Submit an improvement guarantee, to be approved by the City Engineer, which may include binding agreement to develop open space or common amenities;

    2.   Satisfy municipal land/fee requirements;

    3.   Satisfy school land/fee requirements; and

    4.   Submit recording fee (check payable to the City). (Ord. 15-2019 § 9)

 

17.16.110 Construction procedures and building permits.
    Provided the time limit established by the development schedule has not passed, the Building Inspector shall issue building permits for buildings and structures in the area covered by an approved final development plan and plat, provided that the plat has been recorded, if they are in conformity with the approved final development plan and plat, and with all other applicable ordinances and regulations. He or she shall issue a certificate of occupancy for any completed building or structure located in an area covered by the approved final development plan and plat if the completed building or structure conforms to the requirements of the approved final development plan and plat and all other applicable ordinances and regulations. If the time limit established by the development schedule has passed, no building permits or certificates of occupancy shall be issued until after the Planning Commission and City Council have reviewed the development plan and plat and a new development schedule has been established. (Prior code § 17.40.110)

 

17.16.120 Final plat and plan—Amendment conditions.
    A.  Minor changes in the final PUD plat may be approved by the City Planner, not including the following:

    1.   Increase in density;

    2.   Change in access to a public street;

    3.   Decrease of perimeter setbacks to less than allowed in approved PUD;

    4.   Change in use (apartment to office, etc.);

    5.   Change in open space, lot coverage, parking, etc., in excess of ten percent (10%).

    B.   All changes in the arrangements of lots, blocks and buildings, and/or changes in the provision of common open spaces and/or changes in the approved final plat which were not previously listed or allowed must be approved by the City Council under the procedures authorized for the final PUD approval.

    C.   Any changes which are approved for the final plat must be recorded as amendments to the recorded copy of the final plat.

    D.  Following the completion of the development, no changes may be made in the approved final development plat except upon application to the appropriate agency under the procedure provided below:

    1.   Any minor extension, alteration or modification of existing buildings or structures may be authorized by the Planning Commission if they are consistent with the purposes and intent of the final plat or plan. No changes authorized by this section may increase the dimensions of any building or structure by more than ten percent (10%).

    2.   A building or structure that is totally or substantially destroyed may be reconstructed only in compliance with the final development plat or plan unless an amendment to the final development plan is approved under subsection (D)(3) of this section.

    3.   All other changes in the final development plan or plat must be made by the City Council under the procedures authorized by this title for the amendment of the zoning map. No changes may be made in the final development plan or plat unless they are required for the continued successful functioning of the planned unit development or unless they are required by changes in conditions that have occurred since the final plat was approved or by changes in the development policy of the community.

    E.   No changes in the final development plan or plat which are approved under this section are to be considered as a waiver of the covenants limiting the use of land, buildings, structures and improvements within the area of the planned unit development, and all rights to enforce these covenants against any changes permitted in this section are expressly reserved. (Prior code § 17.40.120)

Chapter 17.17 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONE DISTRICT AND PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT PLAN
17.17.010 Purpose.
    The intent of this chapter is to allow greater flexibility in zoning and to accommodate innovative approaches to development that are consistent with the objectives of the City’s Comprehensive Plan and encourage creative and efficient designs of land uses, preservation of significant natural features of the City, retention of historic structures and sites, retentions of open space, compatibility with overall community objectives, promote efficient public services and infrastructure, and consideration of environmental concerns. (Ord. 3-2020 § 1)

 

17.17.020 Definitions.
    Definitions applicable to this chapter are set forth in Section 17.08.010(C). (Ord. 3-2020 § 1)

 

17.17.030 General requirements.
    A.  The zoning regulations and development and design parameters for all uses within a Planned Development District (PDD) shall be set forth in a Planned Development District Plan (PDD Plan), which shall be specific to each PDD. The PDD Plan shall establish the provisions for development, which may include, without limitation, the type of land use and the configuration and intensity of development, and the provision of services, amenities and infrastructure design that will serve all development within the PDD.

    B.   There shall be no minimum area required for any PDD, provided that no district shall be rezoned as PDD unless:

    1.   The area subject to the PDD is a minimum of ten (10) acres; or

    2.   The area subject to the PDD proposed to be developed as a single development is comprised of multiple lots with more than one zoning district and such lots are cumulatively, a minimum of four (4) acres.

    C.   Design and construction of PDDs shall include adequate, safe and convenient arrangements for pedestrian circulation, roadways, driveways, off-street parking and loading space. All developments shall provide for pedestrian access from adjacent developments, open space areas and trails through the developments to border streets or open spaces and trails, if any.

    D.  The City may require parks, school sites or sites for other public purposes to be provided by the applicant. The dedication of parks shall not constitute a purchase or gift of a public park under the City’s Charter.

    E.   The general location of all major arterials and collectors shall be shown on the PDD Plan.

    F.   Connection to public water and sewer facilities shall be required for uses in all PDDs.

    G.  All utilities shall be placed underground unless specifically identified engineering difficulties prevent such action.

    H.  Setbacks and lot sizes required in the individual zoning categories may be modified or varied. Such modification shall be in accordance with standards and procedures established in the PDD Plan for the proposed development.

    I.    The total parking requirements of the PDD may exceed the sum of the parking that would be required for each separate use pursuant to the Code, except that the total parking requirements may be reduced if the applicant demonstrates to the City by using standard parking reduction rations, that the total number of spaces is not needed within the PDD. (Ord. 3-2020 § 1)

 

17.17.040 Application requirements.
    A.  An application for a PDD shall include a PDD application and PDD Plan approval. The City may require additional information or details related to the required application material during the review process if it is deemed necessary to complete a thorough review of the applicant’s proposal. In the case of a PDD Zone comprising one hundred (100) acres or less, the Zoning Administrator is authorized to waive or limit the information to only that which is deemed necessary due to the small size and other special features of the PDD; provided that the information submitted shall be sufficient to allow for an adequate review of the proposed development.

    B.   An application for a PDD shall include the following information:

    1.   An application, PDD Plan and application fee as adopted by the City Council.

    2.   A legal description and legal survey drawing of the total site proposed for development, including any recorded easements, including the addresses of the applicant(s), all owners of property in the proposed PDD zone, all owners of severed mineral rights or oil and gas rights and any lienholders.

    3.   Evidence of the present ownership or agents thereof of all lands included within the PDD Zone in the form of a current commitment for Title Insurance or Title Insurance Policy, or an abstract opinion by an attorney at law.

    4.   Authorization of all participating property owners to the application.

    5.   Proposed Development Guide. The applicant shall submit a written Development Guide (including graphic illustrations, if appropriate) that shall include, where applicable, the following information:

    a.   A description of the character of the proposed development, the goals and objectives of the project, an explanation of the rationale behind the assumptions and choices made by the applicant, and an explanation of the manner in which all property in the PDD has been planned to conform to the City’s Comprehensive Plan and other growth policies adopted from time to time by the City Council;

    b.   A regulatory framework of land use regulations, standards, and guidelines proposed by the developer that define the future use of the entire property and how it will be developed;

    c.   A Land Use Chart identifying the following for the PDD and for each Planning Area within the PDD:

    i.    Acreage for each Planning Area;

    ii.   Maximum number of units and the residential unit density (gross);

    iii.  Maximum gross floor areas for all uses other than residential uses;

    iv.  Building coverage ratios and floor to area ratios for non-residential uses;

    v.   Minimum open space in acres and as a percent of the PDD;

    vi.  Dedicated public open space;

    vii. Acreage and percentage of dedicated road coverage for arterials and collectors;

    viii.           Height limits for each land use type;

    ix.  Specific uses by right, accessory uses, conditional uses, and special review uses;

    x.   Setbacks, setbacks from major state highways, county roads, proposed arterials, and parking setback details; and

    xi.  When a PDD contains more than one Planning Area, all numbers are to be totaled and, where appropriate, total percent of site area detailed underneath the quantitative totals. A condensed form of this chart shall be placed on the PDD Plan sheet and must be referenced back to the Development Guide.

    d.   Planning Area Map that corresponds to the Development Guide and Land Use Chart. (Ord. 3-2020 § 1)

 

17.17.050 Application review procedure.
    A.  Step 1 – General Pre-Application Conference.

    1.   Prior to submittal of the PDD application and PDD Plan, the applicant shall confer with the City Planner and City Engineer and other agencies as deemed necessary by the City in connection with the preparation of a PDD application. Any materials prepared by the applicant to be used in discussions during the pre-application conference shall be submitted to the City ten (10) days in advance of the date when the meeting is to take place.

    2.   During the pre-application conference with the applicant, City staff shall discuss matters relative to the rezoning and proposed development plan. Following the pre-application conference, the City Planner shall furnish the applicant with written comments regarding the conference, to inform the applicant about possible development issues and review procedures. City staff shall review the application for the purpose of ensuring that all required information has been submitted by the applicant. Once it is determined that all required information has been submitted, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a letter of completeness to the application.

    B.   Step 2 – Planning Commission Review.

    1.   The PDD application shall be submitted to the City for staff review and referral at least forty-five (45) days in advance of the hearing date before the Planning Commission. The City Planner will forward any written comments to the applicant ten (10) days prior to the hearing date.

    2.   The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing proceeded by public notice.

    3.   The Planning Commission, after studying the application, shall recommend that the City Council approve, approve with conditions, or deny the PDD application.

    C.   Step 3 – City Council Review.

    1.   Following the recommendation by the Planning Commission, the City Council shall hold a public hearing. The hearing shall be preceded by public notice. The Planning Commission’s findings and recommendations shall be presented to the City Council during the hearing.

    2.   Following the public hearing, the City Council by ordinance may approve, approve with conditions, or by resolution deny the PDD application.

    3.   If City Council approves the PDD application, the Official Zone District Map shall be deemed amended to reflect the PDD zone. (Ord. 3-2020 § 1)

 

17.17.060 Application approval criteria.
    In reviewing the PDD application and before it grants or recommends approval, the Planning Commission and City Council shall find that the proposed PDD application and PDD Plan meet the following criteria:

    A.  The application is complete;

    B.   The proposed PDD and PDD Plan conform with the City’s Comprehensive Plan and growth policies, and the development plan promotes the economic development objectives of the City;

    C.   The proposed development will adequately promote or enhance the character of existing land uses in the area and the community as a whole;

    D.  Open space and amenities will be provided to adequately serve the needs of new residents generated by the proposed development so that the impacts of the development on existing community facilities and amenities will not be materially adverse;

    E.   The proposed development will not result in adverse fiscal impact on the City or other service providers;

    F.   The City and related service providers are capable of serving the proposed development; the City and other service providers will continue to be capable of providing service over time through the build-out of the development; the impact of the proposed development on existing utility infrastructure and facilities will not be materially adverse; and there are adequate plans for accommodating police, fire protection and emergency medical services in the development;

    G.  The proposed development plan will include adequate, safe and reliable infrastructure, including streets and circulation, water, sewer, stormwater and other utilities and related facilities to serve the development and such infrastructure, whether public or private in nature, will be constructed to acceptable standards; there are suitable plans to ensure that such infrastructure can and will be expanded adequately over time to accommodate a phased build-out if applicable; and there will be suitable mechanisms in place to ensure that privately-owned utility infrastructure can be maintained indefinitely by its owners;

    H.  The property on which the development is proposed is suitable for the type of development proposed; and

    I.    The PDD Plan represents a practicable and feasible approach to development, that public interest has been achieved, and the plan promotes the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of Cañon City. (Ord. 3-2020 § 1)

 

17.17.070 Amendments.
    A.  The PDD Plan as finally approved shall be binding and shall not be changed during the construction of the development except upon application to the Zoning Administrator under the following procedures:

    1.   Minor changes to a PDD Plan may be authorized by the Zoning Administrator for the following modifications:

    a.   Adjustment to the Planning Area boundary lines within the PDD boundary;

    b.   Allowing land uses not specifically allowed in the PDD if it is determined that the proposed characteristics and impacts of the uses are consistent with other uses that are allowed in the PDD;

    c.   The transfer of residential density or commercial or industrial square footage from one Planning Area to another provided that there is no increase in the total number of dwelling units or commercial square footage authorized in the approved PDD and provided that the planned infrastructure can reasonably accommodate said change;

    d.   A change in the approved phasing plan; provided however, that all infrastructure improvements and facilities necessary to serve the desired development phase will be provided, or that suitable temporary improvements can be constructed to meet the needs of the development phase until such time as permanent improvements and facilities consistent with the approved PDD Plan will be provided;

    e.   A reduction of less than fifteen percent (15%) of the original areas reserved for open space and recreation areas;

    f.    An increase or decrease in any minimum or maximum dimensional standard in the approved PDD Plan (e.g., setback, height, lot width, lot coverage) by no more than twenty-five percent (25%); or

    g.   Allow for technical adjustments in detailed construction plans that are necessary to address constraints or unanticipated circumstances that arise following the PDD Plan approval, but prior to or during final design and actual construction of the project.

    2.   All other changes in use, any rearrangement of lots or changes in the provision of open space shall be considered as a new PDD Plan. (Ord. 3-2020 § 1)

 

17.17.080 Inactive developments.
    Any parcel or tract of land which has been granted PDD zoning, or any portion of land within a development which has been granted PDD zoning for a period in excess of three (3) years prior to the effective date of the ordinance granting PDD zoning, and for which no preliminary or final plat has been approved by the City or no public improvements have been constructed or secured for such parcel or tract or portion thereof, shall be required to submit and receive City Council approval of a PDD Plan amendment which shall comply with all requirements of this chapter in effect at the time of amendment prior to the submission of a preliminary plat, final plat or site plan. (Ord. 3-2020 § 1)

Chapter 17.18 RIVERFRONT ZONE DISTRICTS
Article I. General Provisions
17.18.010 Purpose and intent.
    The primary purpose and intent for use of the riverfront zone districts within the City of Cañon City is to:

    A.  Provide for a strong urban presence along the north side of the Arkansas River within the core of Cañon City;

    B.   Maximize the development potential of key sections of the City’s riverfront;

    C.   Impart strategic guidance to support exceptional development practices;

    D.  Allow for flexibility and creativity in mixed-use development;

    E.   Accommodate a variety of higher intensity residential building types for riverfront living;

    F.   Provide for public access to an expanded riverwalk along the riverfront in a manner that complements development; and

    G.  Provide for a transition from the RF-MU district and other non-residential uses to residential and/or agricultural uses. (Ord. 27-2019 § 1)

 

17.18.020 Applicability.
    A.  General Location Within City Limits. The riverfront zone districts are intended to be utilized generally as follows:

    1.   Riverfront Mixed-Use (RF-MU): between 1st and 11th streets on the north side of the Arkansas River and south of the railroad tracks.

    2.   Riverfront Residential (RF-R): between 1st and 11th streets on the south side of the Arkansas River, within five hundred (500) feet of the edge of floodway and excluding existing in-use commercial or industrial property near 9th Street.

    B.   Framework Plan. The Framework Plan (Figures 1 and 2) provides guidance on general areas for application of the riverfront zone districts (RF-MU and RF-R). The Framework Plan also identifies key frontages for parcels and where sub-areas, depending on context, are accommodated.

    C.   Applicability of Other Provisions of Title 17. Unless otherwise expressly stated in this chapter, for matters not addressed in this Chapter 17.18, applicable provisions of Title 17 shall apply. In the event of a conflict between this chapter and other provisions of Title 17, the provisions of this chapter shall control.

 

Figure 1: Riverfront Mixed -Use (RF-MU) Framework Plan



 

Figure 2: Riverfront Residential (RF-R) Framework Plan



(Ord. 27-2019 § 1)

 

17.18.030 Definitions.
    The definitions listed in this section shall apply only to zone districts governed by this chapter. The words and terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings set forth below. If a definition is not listed below, then the definition listed in Section 17.08.010 of this Code shall govern. If there is a conflict between the definitions in Section 17.08.010 and the definitions in this chapter, then the definitions in this chapter shall govern. If a term is not found in this Code, the term shall have its common meaning.

    “Amenity zone” means the part of a public right-of-way that includes incidental public amenities such as benches, trash receptacles, and pedestrian light fixtures.

    “Conference/meeting facilities” means a type of use that has fundamental equipment, facilities and services necessary to hold and run conferences or meetings.

    “Court” means an open space enclosed by residential building(s) which front the open space for access.

    “Day spa” means a business that provides a variety of services for the purpose of improving health and beauty through personal services such as hair, facial, massage.

    “Dwelling. Multi-family” means a building used by three (3) or more attached dwelling units, including apartments and condominiums primarily, but not exclusively with common entries from the street, and not including hotels, motels, resorts or group accommodations.

    “Dwelling. Rowhome” means a residential building containing three (3) or more attached dwelling units, each on its own lot and with direct access to the outside, but not including hotels, motels, resorts or group accommodations.

    “Fitness center” means a business that is equipped to provide indoor exercise and health related functions, and may include incidental retail sales and food and beverage service.

    “Floorplate” means the horizontal structure at the base of a building and/or between stories of a building. The floorplate includes joists and other structural components, subflooring and finish flooring material. Floorplate area is the square feet of the length multiplied by the width of a floorplate.

    “Kennel, limited” means a commercial facility licensed by the State of Colorado Department of Agriculture to house dogs, cats or other small household pets, indoor only, for boarding or training purposes. This use shall not include the selling, transferring, adopting, or breeding of dogs.

    “Key frontage” means the frontage of a parcel identified of the Framework Plan to regulate setbacks and design standards.

    “Lane” means a public or private right-of-way designed to accommodate pedestrians, bicycles and vehicles equally, with a narrow design and slow speed of travel for vehicles.

    “Lot” means a parcel of land shown as a lot on a recorded plat or a parcel of land described by metes and bounds on a recorded deed.

    “Parapet” means the part of a wall that extends above the roof.

    “Personal services, limited” means an activity primarily engaged in providing services generally involving the care of the person including activities like day spas or travel agencies. This use does not include laundry, dry cleaning services, employment or answering services.

 

    “Primary frontage” means the key frontage as identified in the Framework Plan, the street frontage if a key frontage is not identified, or the primary entrance façade of a business that may not have street frontage.

    “Structure, accessory” means a structure located on the same lot as the principal structure. Accessory structures are incidental and subordinate to the principal structure. Accessory structures include items such as garages, sheds, barns, private greenhouses, decks and fences but do not include shipping containers or similar storage units.

    “Structured parking garage” means a building or structure, consisting of one or more levels or floors used for the parking or storage of vehicles. A parking structure maybe below grade or either partially or totally above grade with those levels or floors being either open or enclosed.

    “Structure, historic” means a structure that is designated at the state or national level as an individual structure or a contributing structure to a designated district for historic, cultural or architectural reasons.

    “Surface parking lot” means a site or a portion of a site, devoted to the off-street parking of vehicles, including parking spaces, aisles, access drives, and landscaped areas, and areas providing vehicular access to a public street.

    “Trade or repair shop, limited” means a shop where a form of occupation, skilled manual or limited mechanical work, manual craft, or artisan skills is conducted, such as by a jeweler, woodworker, metalworking, glass- blower, and leather craftsman, so long as the occupation or activity does not emit loud noises or noxious fumes. Shops may not employ more than fifteen (15) persons.

 

    “Use, accessory” means a use which is normally incidental to, subordinate to and devoted exclusively to the primary use of the property.

    “Utility services, public or essential government, limited” means the erection, construction alteration or maintenance by public utilities or municipal government of local provision gas, electrical, steam, cable, internet, or water services. No office, repair, storage, substation or production facilities are allowed. (Ord. 27-2019 § 1)

 

Article II. Districts and Regulations
17.18.040 Riverfront Mixed-Use (RF-MU).
    The following lot standards, building placement, building height easements, and related information for the RF-MU District is primarily relayed in tables with supporting figures. Utilize the reference to the left of a table as a guide to the visual representation of the regulations via figures. All figures are for illustrative purposes only.

    A.  Lot Standards, Building Placement and Building Height.

 

Table 1: Lot Standards

 

 

MU-A

MU-B

MU-C

Reference

 

(lst to 5th Streets)

(5th to 11th Streets)

(9th to 11th Streets)

 

Lot size (min)

25,000 sq ft

18,000 sq ft

20,000 sq ft

 

Lot width, river frontage (min)

350 ft

150 ft

NIA

 

Lot width, street frontage (min)

350 ft

110 ft

110 ft

Figure 3

Lot coverage (min/max)

60% / 90%

60% / 80%

60% / 80%

 

Figure 3: Minimum and Maximum Lot Coverage and Minimum River Frontage Buildout



Table 2: Building Placement (Setbacks)

Reference Figure 4

 

MU-A

MU-B

MU-C

(1st to 5th Streets)

(5th to 11th Streets)

(9th to 11th Streets)

A

River front (min/max) 1

5ft/10ft

5ft /10ft

N/A

B

Street front (min/max)

N/A

0 ft / 18ft

0 ft / l8ft

C

Side yard on a street

0 ft

0 ft

0 ft

D

Side yard interior (min)

 

 

 

 

Abutting residential zone

N/A

15 ft

15 ft

 

Abutting commercial zone

0 ft

0 ft

0 ft

E

Street if abutting river front and street is opposite river frontage (max)

0 ft

0 ft

N/A

F

Alley/Lane (min )

0 ft

0 ft

0 ft

G

Rear (min)

 

 

 

 

Abutting residential zone

NIA

15 ft

15 ft

 

Abutting commercial zone

0 ft

0 ft

0 ft

Figure 3.H

River frontage buildout (min), if parcel abuts river 2 3

65%

65%

N/A

1     To be measured from any required riverwalk easement.

 

2       Pursuant to Chapter 17.13 of the Code, an administrative exception to these limits may be granted, up to 5% for landscaping and screening.

3       If property contains a designated historic structure, buildout can be reduced to 45% to retain a view corridor from the river to the historic structure.

 

Figure 4: General Setbacks RF-MU



 

Table 3: Building Height

Reference

 

MU-A

MU-B

MU-C

(1st to 5th Streets)

(5th to 11th Streets)

(9th to 11th Streets)

Figure 5

Height (min/max) (measured to top of parapet)

24 ft / 70 ft

24 ft / 70 ft

24 ft / 70 ft

Figure 5

Height increase for rooftop deck access

<= l 0% of floorplate, not taller than 79 ft, and not within 10 ft of river front or street front edge of building

Figure 6

Rules of measurement to determine maximum building height

Maximum height will be determined by measuring the average ground elevation of river front (or other street or alley frontage) and opposite street edge of property, or at street front edge of property if no river frontage.

 

 

Figure 5: Minimum/Maximum Building Height and Rooftop Access Provisions



 

Figure 6: Rules of Measurement for Height



 

Figure 7 A and B: Minimum Building Footprint

    Figure 7 A and B illustrate the minimum lot coverage required, minimum lot frontage required, and the minimum building height allowed in the RF-MU district.

 



Figure 8 A and B: Maximum Building Footprint

    Figure 8 A and B illustrate the maximum lot coverage required, maximum lot frontage required, and the maximum building height allowed in the RF-MU district.

 



 

    B.   Uses.

    The following uses are Permitted (P), permitted as a Conditional Use (C), or permitted as a Special Review Use (S). Any uses not listed in the Table and any uses not designated in a sub-area are prohibited. Uses designated with a C or S are only permitted with the appropriate approval and where designated, uses must comply with supplemental regulations in Title 17.

 

Table 4: Uses

 

MU-A

MU-B

MU-C

(1st to 5th Streets)

(5th to 11th Streets)

(9th to 11th Streets)

Bed and breakfast (Section 17.20.031)

 

 

C

Boarding or rooming house (Section 17.20.034)

 

C

C

Childcare Center 1

C

P

P

Conference/meeting facilities1

C

C

P

City, county, state and federal facilities, uses and buildings

 

S

S

Dwelling, multi-family

P (AGF)

P (AGF-riverfront abutting 5th to 9th)

P

Eating and drinking establishments

P

P

P

Financial institution

P (AGF)

P

P

Fitness center

 

P

P

Food cart or truck (Section 17.20.085)

P

P

P

Hotels

P

P

P

Kennel, limited

 

 

C

Light industry, less than 25 employees

 

C

C

Medical and dental clinic

P (AGF)

P

P

Medical marijuana facility, licensed (Section 17.20.125)

 

P

P

More than one principal building per lot

(Section 17.20.050)

C

C

C

Personal services, limited

P (AGF)

P

P

Professional offices

P (AGF)

P

P

Rafting takeout facility

S

S

 

Retail

P

P

P

Special events (Section 17.20.180)

P

P

P

Structure accessory

 

 

P

Structured parking garage 2

P

P

P

Surface parking lot 3

C

C

C

Trade or repair shop, limited

C

P

P

Training facilities

 

P

P

Training facilities, Type II

 

P

P

Use, accessory

P

P

P

Utility services, limited

P

P

P

Vocational and business school

 

S

S

Wireless service facilities (Section 17.45.030(D))

P

P

P

Notes:

AGF=Above ground floor only.

1      Childcare center and conference/meeting facilities only as an accessory use to a principal use in RF-MU-A.

2      Structured parking garages are allowed as a principal or accessory use in all RF-MU districts.

3      Surface parking lots are only allowed as an accessory use to a principal use in all RF-MU districts.

 

    C.   Other Requirements.

    1.   River front easement RF-MU. For every property that abuts the Arkansas River, the owner, at the time of rezoning to a riverfront zone district, shall grant an easement to the City of a width that is adequate and necessary for the purposes of public access to the river, the construction and maintenance of a public riverwalk path, and the maintenance and repair, and associated activities, of the riparian areas adjacent to the River.

    2.   Side yard easement RF-MU (Figure 9). For every property that exceeds three hundred fifty (350) feet of river frontage, the owner, at the time of rezoning to a riverfront zone district, shall grant to the City a side yard easement on each side of the property of a width that is adequate and necessary for the purpose of providing public access between the riverfront and streets, as well as for access to the riverwalk for maintenance and repair of the riverwalk path along the River and other areas adjacent to the River.

Figure 9: Side Yard Easement



(Ord. 27-2019 § 1)

 

17.18.050 Riverfront Residential (RF-R).
    The following lot standards, building placement, building height, easements, and related information for the RF-R District is primarily relayed in tables and figures. Utilize the reference to the left of a table as a guide to the visual representation of the regulations via figures. All figures are for illustrative purposes only.

    A.  Lot Standards, Building Placement and Building Height.

 

Table 5: Lot Standards

Reference

 

RF-R

 

Lot size (min / max)

 

 

Dwelling, Single-Family

2,300 sq ft / 3,600 sq ft

 

Dwelling, Two-Family or Rowhome

N/A / 3,000 sq ft per dwelling

 

Dwelling, Multi-Family

10,000 sq ft / 22,000 sq ft

Figure 10

Lot width (min / max)1

 

 

Dwelling Single-Family

30 ft / 40 ft

 

Dwelling, Two-Family or Rowhome

16 ft / 30 ft per dwelling

 

Dwelling, Multi-Family

90 ft / 200 ft

Figure 10

Lot coverage (max)

 

 

Dwelling, Single-Family

70%

 

Dwelling, Two-Family or Rowhome

80% per lot

 

Dwelling, Multi-Family

65%

1      Corner lot width, or two family or rowhome interior end unit, can be increased by five (5%) feet, maximum area to increase proportionate to the additional width.

 

Figure 10: General Single-Family, Duplex and Rowhome Lot and Building Placement Configurations

    Figure 10 illustrates general single-family, duplex and rowhome lot and building placement configurations for the RF-R district.

 



 

Table 6: Building Placement (Setbacks)

Reference

 

RF-R

Figure 11 A

Street front (min / max)

 

 

Dwelling, Single Family, Two-Family or Rowhome

10 ft / 14 ft

 

Dwelling, Multi-Family

14 ft / 18 ft

Figure 11 B

Court Front (min / max)

 

 

Dwelling, Single Family, Two-Family or Rowhome

8 ft / 12 ft

 

Dwelling, Multi-Family

10 ft / 14 ft

Figure 11 C

Side Interior (min)

 

 

Dwelling, Single Family, Two-Family or Rowhome end

5 ft

 

Dwelling, Two-Family or Rowhome attached

0 ft

 

Dwelling, Multi-Family

10 ft

Figure 11 D

Side Street (min)

 

 

Dwelling, Single Family, Two-Family or Rowhome

5 ft

 

Dwelling, Multi-Family

10 ft

Figure 11 E

Rear/Alley/Lane (min)

5 ft

Figure 12 F

Riverfront (min) from edge of floodway

 

 

Dwelling, Single Family, Two-Family or Rowhome

5 ft

 

Dwelling, Multi-Family

10 ft

Figure 13

Encroachment into setback

 

 

Porch, Patio, Stoop

4 ft

 

Figure 11: General Setbacks RF-R



 

Figure 12: Floodway Setbacks RF-R



Figure 13: Encroachment Diagram



 

Table 7: Building Height

Reference

 

RF-R

Figure 14

Maximum

37 ft

Figure 14

Height increase for enclosed rooftop access

<= 20% of floorplate area, not taller than 43 ft, and not be closer than 20 ft from a streetyard setback.

 

 

Figure 14: Maximum Building Height RF-R



 

    B.   Uses.

    The following uses are Permitted (P), permitted as Conditional Use (C), or permitted as Special Review Use Approval (S). Any uses not listed are prohibited. Uses designated with a C or S are only permitted with the appropriate approval and where designated, uses must comply with supplemental regulations in Title 17.

 

Table 8: Uses

 

RF-R

Accessory dwelling unit

C (Single-Family Dwelling lot only, Max. size of dwelling unit is 15% of total lot area)

Accessory structure

P

Accessory use

P

Bed and breakfast (Section 17.20.031)

C

Boarding or rooming house (Section 17.20.034)

C

Dwelling, Single-Family

P

Dwelling, Two-Fami1y

P

Dwelling, Rowhome

P

Dwelling, Multi-Family 1

P

Childcare, family

P

Food cart or truck (Section 17.20.085 temporary use permit)

P

Home occupations (Section 17.20.100)

P

More than one principal building per lot (Section 17.20.050)

C

Utility services, limited

P

Special events (Section 17.20.180)

P

Vehicle parking lot and garage accessory to the principal use

P

Wireless service facilities (Section 17.45.030(D))

P

Yard Sales (Section 17.20.220)

P

1      No more than 25% of units in a multi-family development shall have three or more bedrooms.

(Ord. 27-2019 § 1)

 

Article III. Development Standards and Guidelines
17.18.060 Building.
    A.  Standards. The following minimum design standards shall govern the applicable zone district.

    1.   Riverfront Mixed-Use (RF-MU).

    a.   Ground floor transparency.

    i.    A minimum seventy-five percent (75%) transparency (Figure 15) is required on key frontage per the Framework Plan (refer to Figures 1 and 2). If a building has >eighty percent (80%) lot frontage build out, then transparency can be lowered to sixty-five percent (65%).

    ii.   A minimum of sixty-five percent (65%) transparency is required on non-key primary fronts.

 

Figure 15: Minimum 75% Transparency



 

    b.   Materials.

    i.    No exterior insulation finishing system (EIFS) or stucco is permitted on the ground floor elevations facing a key river or street front per the Regulating Plan. EIFS/stucco shall not be installed within thirty-six (36) inches of the ground on remaining elevations.

    ii.   Only integrally colored concrete masonry unit (CMU) is permitted.

    iii.  Not permitted on exposed surface:

    (A) No smooth-faced CMU.

    (B) Faux wood finish on CMU or on poured concrete.

    iv.  All storefront glazing systems facing a key frontage shall be clear low-e glass with black, bronze, grey, or clear anodized frames. Remaining façades shall utilize the same frame color.

    v.   Frames of awnings shall match storefront glazing.

    vi.  Any roofing visible from the adjacent riverwalk, street or alley level view of a pedestrian (e.g. a shed roof that is on a shorter portion of a taller building with flat roof and parapet wall) shall be shingled or of metal roofing, no rolled roofing permitted. (See Figure 16.)

 

Figure 16: Roofing Visible From Adjacent View of a Pedestrian



 

    c.   Service entrances.

    i.    No service entrance shall be located on the key frontage identified on the Framework Plan.

    ii.   A service entrance may be located on a non-key street frontage but must be enclosed to the fullest extent possible and designed to minimize impact to pedestrians.

    d.   Structured parking.

    i.    Ground floor.

    (A) Maximum length:

    (1)  Key frontage per Framework Plan: Ground floor structured parking shall comprise of no more than thirty-five percent (35%) of the minimum frontage.

    (2)  Street frontage (other than key frontage per Framework Plan): No more than sixty-five percent (65%) of the building frontage on the street.

    (B) The façade of the ground level (level most at eye level of a pedestrian) shall be a minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) and a maximum of fifty percent (50%) transparency to eliminate both blank walls from the riverwalk/street and fully exposed parking.

    ii.   Upper floors. The façade of upper levels of structured parking shall be designed with a maximum fifty percent (50%) transparency.

    e.   Projections.

    i.    Second story or above balconies may project onto a street, lane or side yard easement as long as the projection does not extend beyond the property line. No projections are permitted into a river front easement.

    ii.   Umbrellas as part of outside cafes shall not obstruct any pedestrian way and shall not contain any signage.

    f.    Internal roof drains shall be required.

    g.   All rooftop appurtenances shall be screened from pedestrian view on an adjacent riverwalk, street or alley. Rooftop appurtenances shall also be screened from view from any riverwalk on the opposite bank of the river directly across from the site. (See Figure 17.)

 

Figure 17: Rooftop Appurtenance Screening



    2.   Riverfront Residential (RF-R).

    a.   No outside storage shall be visible from the riverwalk or a street.

    b.   Ground floor living spaces shall be raised a minimum of eighteen (18) inches above grade to provide a transition from the public realm to the private realm.

    B.   Guidelines. The following design guidelines are encouraged to be employed in any riverfront district.

    1.   Employ a strong sense of three hundred sixty (360) degree architecture.

    2.   Employ human scale design, particularly at the ground floor levels of buildings.

    3.   Utilize regional materials and colors (e.g. buff sandstone, ashlar patterns)

    4.   Design to LEED or other energy efficient/sustainable design parameters.

    5.   Avoid large blank expanses of façade without fenestration / variation / articulation. Similarly, avoid over articulation.

    6.   Utilize a high saturation level in exterior material colors to exude richness and counter the “washing out” impact that can occur with the Colorado sun.

    C.   Submittal Requirements. In addition to the elements required as part of a building permit application, the following shall be submitted.

    1.   A full product sample board of all site and building materials shall be submitted as part of site/building permit applications.

    2.   A building mock-up is required as part of the building permit process. (Ord. 27-2019 § 1)

 

17.18.070 General Site.
    The following minimum design standards shall govern the applicable zone district.

    A.  Riverfront Mixed-Use (RF-MU).

    1.   Utilize shared curb cuts between properties wherever feasible when accessing from a street.

    2.   Drop-off bays are only permitted for hotels and shall be designed to have minimal impact to the public realm.

    3.   Ground level or above grade structured parking shall be a minimum of five (5) feet from a street or river front façade. (See Figure 18.)

    4.   Ground level structured parking shall not extend beyond the front façade of the occupied portion of a building on a street front. (See Figure 19.)

 

Figure 18: Ground Level Structured Parking Setback



 

Figure 19: Ground Level Structured Parking Alignment



 

    5.   Access/loading shall not be from a primary frontage.

    6.   Storage units are not permitted except during construction.

    7.   Outdoor cafes:

    a.   Only durable metal or composite exterior furnishings and fencing/railings are permitted in colors to match the building storefront or in black.

    b.   No plastic or fiberglass materials are allowed.

    c.   Outdoor café furnishings shall be designed/secured in a way to be able to withstand strong winds.

    d.   Outdoor gas line fed fire pits must be contained on the private property.

    e.   Outdoor café encroachments must comply with Table 9.

 

Table 9: Outdoor Café Encroachments

Reference

 

MU-A

MU-B

MU-C

(1st to 5th Streets)

(5th to 11th Streets)

(9th to 11th Streets)

Figure 20

Outdoor dining

A

On private property

Allowed in front and sideyard setback, not abutting residential

B

In Riverwalk (within amenity zone if one exists)

Allowed with Sidewalk Café Permit I

N/A

 

In street right-of-way

Allowed with Sidewalk Café Permit

 

 

Figure 20: Outdoor Café Encroachments-Riverwalk Context



 

    B.   Riverfront Residential (RF-R).

    1.   Provide a clear indication from a street or lane where the front door to a housing unit is if a lot must be garage/parking front loaded. (Figure 21.)

 

Figure 21: Residential Front Door Visibility



(Ord. 27-2019 § 1)

 

17.18.080 Landscaping, Fencing and Screening.
    The following minimum standards shall govern each applicable zone district to increase the visual appearance of the built environment.

    A.  Riverfront Mixed-Use (RF-MU).

    1.   Trees shall be planted as follows.

    a.   Street trees: One deciduous tree per thirty-five (35) feet of street frontage, minimum two (2) inch caliper.

    b.   Sideyard easement trees: One deciduous tree per thirty-five (35) feet of street frontage, minimum two (2) inch caliper.

    c.   Parking areas: refer to Section 17.18.100.

    2.   Pervious surfaces.

    a.   Any area that is not within the building footprint, parking lot footprint, walkways, or paved support areas such as trash enclosure or detention facilities shall be pervious surface.

    b.   A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the pervious surface of a site shall be planted and maintained with live plant material.

    c.   Irrigation shall be installed to ensure longevity of turf/live plant material.

    d.   A variety of plant materials shall be employed to provide year-round interest.

    e.   Drought tolerant and native plant material shall be used to the greatest extent possible.

    3.   Fencing.

    a.   No wood fencing or plain faced CMU permitted.

    b.   Fencing up to forty-two (42) inches high (this does not include trash enclosures) is permitted.

    4.   Screening.

    a.   Solid masonry (no smooth faced CMU, EIFS or stucco permitted) or metal trash enclosures with metal gates are required to fully screen trash receptacles. Enclosures shall include metal gates for screening and to secure the area. Enclosures shall be designed in the color/material palette of the principal structure.

    b.   Parking areas:

    i.    Surface parking lots:

    (A) Shall have a minimum five (5) foot setback from any adjacent right-of-way.

    (B) Shall not extend beyond the street front or river front façade of a building.

    (C) Shall be screened from rights-of-way, riverwalk or adjacent properties by use of evergreen shrubs or low walls with seventy-five percent (75%) opacity.

    (D) Low screen walls shall be forty-two (42) inches tall and shall not be of wood, plastic/plastic composite or smooth-faced CMU.

    (E) Shrubs shall be a minimum five (5) gallon container at time of planting.

    (F)  Dead plant material shall be replaced in a timely manner.

    (G) Parking lot screening shall not impede vision triangles created at egress points from lots.

    ii.   Ground level parking structures:

    (A) Shall be screened by use of evergreen shrubs.

    (B) Shrubs shall be a minimum five (5) gallon container at time of planting.

    (C) Dead plant material shall be replaced in a timely manner.

    B.   Riverfront Residential (RF-R).

    1.   Trees shall be planted as follows.

    a.   Street trees: One deciduous tree per thirty-five (35) feet of street frontage.

    b.   Per lot:

    i.    Dwelling, Single-family, two-family, townhome: One deciduous tree per lot.

    ii.   Dwelling, Multi-family: One deciduous tree per five (5) units.

    2.   Pervious surfaces.

    a.   A minimum of sixty percent (60%) of the front yard shall be planted and maintained with live plant material.

    b.   A variety of plant materials shall be employed to provide year-round interest.

    c.   Drought tolerant and native plant material shall be used to the greatest extent possible.

    3.   Fencing up to seventy-two (72) inches is permitted in the front yard along a street or a lane if the opposite side of the property is abutting the floodway with no vehicular access, and vehicular access is from the street or lane. The fence shall be set back eighteen (18) inches from the property line and the top twelve (12) inches shall have fifty percent (50%) transparency. (Figure 22.)

    4.   Fencing and landscaping shall meet vision triangle requirements.

    5.   Structured parking for multi-family shall meet requirements for structured parking in RF-MU.

 

Figure 22: Fence



(Ord. 27-2019 § 1)

 

17.18.090 Lighting.
    The following minimum standards shall govern the applicable zone districts to minimize adverse glare, spillover and night sky impacts of lighting.

    A.  Riverfront Mixed-Use (RF-MU).

    1.   Site and building lighting shall be minimized to the extent necessary to meet safety purposes.

    2.   Lighting shall not be aimed nor spill onto adjacent properties.

    3.   Automatic switching controls that automatically extinguish all outdoor lighting when sufficient daylight is available using a control device shall be provided.

    4.   Full cut-off fixtures are required.

    5.   The following are not permitted:

    a.   Low pressure sodium and mercury vapor light sources.

    b.   Neon.

    c.   Exposed light source.

    d.   Uplighting.

    6.   Freestanding outdoor lighting fixtures shall:

    a.   Only be permitted for parking lots or drop off areas.

    b.   Not be taller than twenty-four (24) feet, or not be taller than sixteen (16) feet within fifty (50) feet of a residential zone district or on the rooftop of a parking structure.

    B.   Riverfront Residential (RF-R).

    1.   Site and building lighting shall be minimized to the extent necessary to meet safety purposes.

    2.   Lighting shall not be aimed nor spill onto adjacent properties.

    3.   Automatic switching controls that automatically extinguish all outdoor lighting when sufficient daylight is available using a control device shall be provided.

    4.   Full cut-off fixtures are required.

    5.   The following light sources are permitted:

    a.   Incandescent.

    b.   LED.

    c.   RF-MU allowed lighting sources may be approved by the Zoning Administrator at time of site plan review for multi-family buildings over twelve (12) units in size.

    6.   The following are not permitted:

    a.   Neon.

    b.   Pole mounted lighting over eight (8) feet in height. (Ord. 27-2019 § 1)

 

17.18.100 Parking.
    This section shall only apply to the zone districts governed by Chapter 17.18. If a parking requirement is not otherwise addressed in this section, the standards in Chapter 17.28 shall apply. If there is conflict between this section and Chapter 17.28, the standards in this section shall govern.

    A.  Purpose.

    1.   To allow for efficient parking ratios, offsite parking, shared parking, and other creative parking solutions within the riverfront area.

    2.   To minimize the visual impact of off-street parking areas.

    B.   General Regulations.

    1.   The long-term parking or storage of boats/recreational vehicles, semi-tractors and semi-trailers, and construction vehicles and equipment (except during periods of permitted construction activity and/or deliveries) is prohibited.

    2.   Circulation within a parking lot shall be designed to be as efficient as possible including minimizing the number of curb cuts/access points to a street.

    3.   Aisles with only one inlet/outlet shall provide “back outs” for end spaces.

    4.   A stacked or tandem parking arrangement (where one vehicle parked directly behind another) shall be allowed only for a structure containing two (2) or more dwelling units and the tandem spaces shall be allocated to one unit.

    5.   All required parking spaces (excluding those for single-family, duplexes and rowhomes) shall be outlined by white or yellow stripes not less than four (4) inches wide and painted on the surface area. Where existing parking spaces are not paved or an acceptable alternative surface is used an alternative material or bumper guards/wheel stops approved by the City Engineer shall be used to delineate the parking spaces.

    C.   Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required for Specific Uses.

    1.   Riverfront Mixed-Use (RF-MU).

 

Table 10: RF-MU Off-Street Parking

 

MU-A

MU-B

MU-C

(1st to 5th Streets)

(5th to 11th Streets)

(9th to 11th Streets)

Bed and Breakfast (Section 17.20.031)

N/A

N/A

1/room

Boarding or rooming house (Section 17.20.034)

N/A

1/room

1/room

Childcare Center

1/500 sq ft

1/500 sq ft

1/500 sq ft

Conference and meeting facilities

1/6 seats or rated capacity

1/6 seats of rated capacity

1/6 seats of rated capacity

Dwelling, multi-family

See RF-R

 

 

Eating and drinking establishments

1/200 sq ft

1/200 sq ft

1/200 sq ft

Fitness center

1/300 sq ft

1/300 sq ft

1/300 sq ft

Hotels

1/room

1/room

1/room

Kennel

N/A

1/500 sq ft

1/500 sq ft

Light Industry, limited

N/A

2/3 employees

2/3 employees

Personal services, limited

1/500 sq ft

1/400 sq ft

1/400 sq ft

Professional offices, financial, insurance, real estate, banks

1/500 sq ft

1/400 sq ft

1/400 sq ft

Retail

1/700 sq ft

1/500 sq ft

1/500 sq ft

Medical and dental clinic

1/500 sq ft

1/400 sq ft

1/300 sq ft

Trade or repair shop, limited

N/A

1/400 sq ft

1/400 sq ft

Training facilities, Type I or II

N/A

1/6 seats of rated capacity

1/6 seats of rated capacity

Vocational and business school

N/A

1/4 seats

1/4 seats

Notes:

Up to 75% can be off-site with parking agreement in MU-A

Up to 50% off-site in MU-B and MU-C with parking agreement

 

    2.   Riverfront Residential (RF-R).

 

Table 11: RF-R Off-Street Parking

 

RF-R

 

# of off-street spaces

Dwelling, single-family

2

Dwelling, two-family or rowhome

1

Dwelling, multi-family

 

Studio

0

1 Bedroom

1

2 Bedroom

1

3 + Bedrooms

2

Accessory dwelling unit

0

 

 

    D.  Parking Reductions/Shared Parking.

    1.   On-Street Parking Credit. On-street parking may be counted towards the total parking spaces required pursuant to Section 17.28.080(A).

    2.   Off-Site Parking Credit. The following off-site parking credits are permitted in the RF-MU:

    a.   Distance. Off-site parking ownership or current lease of parking spaces within a one thousand (1,000) foot radius of the site dedicated to the use during its hours of operation shall be considered towards parking requirement.

    b.   Amount. This off-site parking credit shall account for no greater than the following percentage of total required spaces.

    i.    RF-MU-A: up to seventy-five percent (75%).

 

    ii.   RF-MU-B and -C: up to fifty percent (50%).

    c.   Off-site dedicated parking spaces shall be established through a lease/shared parking agreement, if not owned by the same property owner. An off-site shared parking agreement shall not be transferrable from one owner/use to another without the City’s approval. The shared parking agreement must be for a minimum of five (5) years.

    3.   Parking Reductions.

    a.   Shared parking shall comply with Section 17.28.080(B).

    b.   Affordable multi-family provided. A fifty percent (50%) reduction in required parking is permitted for multi­ family affordable units built to provide housing at<= 80% of AMI within the RF-MU-B and C sub-areas. The reduction is to be calculated only for those units deemed affordable.

    c.   Bike racks provided. For every eight (8) bike racks provided for Mixed-Use or Multi-family development over the minimum bike racks required, one parking space can be reduced.

    d.   Car share provided. For every one car share vehicle provided per parcel, a reduction of three (3) parking spaces can occur. The car share parking shall be available twenty-four (24) hours a day/seven (7) days a week to the designated tenants within the parcel. A parking spot shall be reserved and clearly signed for such use. Car share can provide for a reduction up to thirty-five percent (35%) of the required parking.

    E.   Internal Landscaping.

    1.   All off-street parking areas which serve twenty (20) vehicles or more shall be provided with landscape islands within the parking lot totaling not less than five percent (5%) of the surfaced area.

    2.   The minimum size of each landscape island shall be one hundred seventy (170) sq. ft.

    3.   Landscape islands shall consist of trees, shrubs and other low water plantings.

    4.   Any landscape island less than one hundred seventy (170) sq. ft. shall not count towards the requirement.

    5.   One deciduous canopy tree shall be provided for every twelve (12) parking spaces.

    6.   Deciduous canopy trees must be evenly distributed throughout the parking lot. Structurally covered or underground motor vehicle parking spaces are not included in calculating the required number and location of canopy trees.

    F.   Bicycle Parking.

    1.   Multi-family dwellings shall be required to provide one bicycle rack per three (3) units.

    2.   Commercial uses shall be required to provide one bicycle rack per eight (8) vehicular parking spaces. (Ord. 27-2019 § 1)

 

17.18.110 Signs.
    A.  Purpose.

    The purpose of this section is to promote public health, safety and welfare by:

    1.   Providing sign regulations in the riverfront area that support creation of a unique sense of place and character within the City;

    2.   Regulating the number, location, size, type, illumination and other physical characteristics of signs within the riverfront area to promote the public health, safety and welfare of the City; and

    3.   Supporting the City’s strategic prioritizes of economic development and improving the built environment while providing for effective means of communication consistent with constitutional guarantees.

    It is not the purpose or intent of this section to regulate the message displayed on any sign. The content of the message or speech displayed on the sign shall not be reviewed or considered in determining whether to approve or deny a sign.

    B.   Applicability. This subsection shall only apply to the zone districts governed by Chapter 17.18. Except as expressly stated in this section, the regulations in Chapter 17.30 shall not apply to the zone districts governed by this chapter.

    C.   Definitions. The definitions listed in this subsection shall apply only to this Chapter 17.18 and shall have the meanings set forth below. lf a definition is not listed below, then the definition listed in the other sections of Chapter 17.18 shall govern. lf the definition in not listed in this Chapter 17.18, then the definitions in Title 17 shall govern. If there is any conflict between a definition in this subsection and any other part of Title 17, than the definitions in this subsection shall apply. If the term is not found in this Code, the term shall have its common meaning.

    “Alteration” means any change, modification or addition to the structure of any sign, with the exception of a nonmaterial alteration such as simple maintenance and refurbishing of an existing message.

    “Area” means the greatest number of square feet of sign exposed to public view.           “Business” means a commercial establishment with a storefront.

    “Flag” means any fabric, banner or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns or symbols and is attached to a pole and which is intended to be permanently affixed to the ground or attached to a building, but does not include a feather flag sign.

    ‘‘Flagging, streamers and pennants” means a continuous length of cord or other similar material to which long, narrow flags or pennants are attached, for the purpose of attracting attention to a business or location.

    “Height” means the distance from grade to the top of the sign structure, as erected, in a vertical line.

    “Level, ground” means the lowest level of a building in which the majority of the height of that level is exposed above the adjacent street or riverwalk ground elevation.

    “Level, upper” means any other level of a building above the ground level.

    “Multi-tenant building” means a building that provides leased space or condominium ownership to more than one tenant or owner, particularly a building that includes multiple ground level storefronts.

    “Mural” means a painted wall sign that does not contain a business logo, business name or commercial message.

    “Sign” means any display, device, figure, painting, drawing, message, placard, poster, billboard, or any other contrivance designed, intended, or used to promote the interest of any person, or to give information and being in public view.

    “Sign, animated” means any sign or part of a sign which changes physical position by any movement, rotation, or change in lighting.

    “Sign, awning” means any permanent sign printed and attached to the vertical valance or sloped area of an awning that is attached to a building.

    “Sign, directional” means a permanent freestanding sign reasonably necessary for the safe circulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic within a given area and excluding those erected by the U.S. or State of Colorado Department of Transportation.

    “Sign, electronic message” means an automated sign, which may be programmed by computer, using moving illuminated words or graphics.

    “Sign, feather flag” means a temporary freestanding sign typically constructed of a single plastic or metal shaft driven in the ground with an attached pennant that is vertically elongated and attached to the shaft.

    “Sign. flashing” means any directly or indirectly illuminated sign either stationary or animated, which exhibits changing natural or artificial light or color by any means.

    “Sign, flexible banner” means a temporary sign of a flexible material that is mounted to a building, fence or to the ground via more than one structured pole.

    “Sign, freestanding” means a sign that is mounted to the ground and not to any other structure.

    “Sign, inflatable” means any temporary freestanding inflatable shape or figure designed or used to attract attention to an event or location.

    “Sign, monument” means a permanent freestanding sign, that has more than seventy-five (75%) of its bottom edge affixed to and/or touching the ground.

    “Sign, nonconforming” means any sign which does not conform to the requirements of this section, but, on the effective date of this section, was lawfully maintained and had been lawfully erected in accordance with prior applicable sign regulation.

    “Sign, official” means a sign required by law or constructed, placed or maintained by the state, the federal government or the City. The inclusion of “government” in defining such signs does not intend to subject the government to regulation, but instead helps describe the type of sign that falls within the immunities of the government from regulation.

    “Sign, off-premise” means a sign displaying advertising copy that pertains to a business, person, organization, activity, event, place, service or product not principally located or primarily manufactured or sold on the lot on which the sign is located. Also referred to as a billboard.

    “Sign, permanent” means a sign that is designed to be used on a permanent basis. Permanent signs include wall signs, freestanding signs, window signs, awning signs, directional signs, and projecting signs.

    “Sign, portable” means a sign that is constructed in a manner that it can be moved or relocated without involving any structural or support changes.

    “Sign, projecting” means a sign or marquee affixed to and projecting from any building or structure.

    “Sign, rigid banner” means a temporary sign of a rigid material that is mounted to the ground via structured poles.

    “Sign, roof” means any sign which is erected or constructed wholly upon and/or over the roof of any building and supported on the roof of the structure. Freestanding signs which pass through an overhang roof or canopy shall be considered roof signs.

    “Sign, sandwich board” means an A-frame-type sign that is portable and is hinged or unhinged, or is vertical and located on skids or runners and is readily movable. A sandwich board sign does not include a sign attached to or affixed on an individual.

    “Sign, temporary” means a sign that is designed to be used only temporarily and is not intended to be permanently attached to a building wall or sign structure or permanently installed in the ground. Temporary signs expressly include yard signs, feather flag signs inflatable signs flexible banner signs, and rigid banner signs

    “Sign, wall” means a permanent sign which is painted on or fastened to the wall or parapet of a building or structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure or forms the background surface of the sign. A mural shall not be considered a wall sign.

    “Sign, window” means a permanent sign applied or attached to the exterior or interior of storefront glazing with vinyl graphics and meant to be legible from the exterior.

    “Sign, yard” means a temporary sign constructed of paper, vinyl plastic wood, metal or other comparable material that is mounted on a state or frame structure that includes one or more stakes.

    “Storefront” means the ground level primary frontage of a business that is readily accessible and visible to the general public.

    “Storefront glazing” means any glass area encompassed by a frame within the storefront of a business.

    “Structure” means that which is erected or constructed with a fixed location from the ground above grade any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner excluding poles, cables or other transmission or distribution facilities of public utilities.

    “Wall” means, for purposes of this chapter, an exterior surface of a building which has a slope of greater than sixty (60) degrees from the horizontal plane.

    D.  Rules of Measurement.

    The area of a sign shall be measured in conformance with the regulations identified in this section.

    1.   Determination of sign area. The following methods shall be used to determine the sign area of a sign:

 

Table 12: Determination of Sign Area

Wall Sign, Projecting Sign, Directional Sign

§ Structural elements used to attach the sign that do not contribute to the display will not be counted towards the calculation of sign area.



Monument Sign

§  The portion of the base of a monument sign that is eighteen (18) inches or less shall not be counted towards the calculation of sign area.

§ The base will be included in overall height of the monument sign.



 

    2.   Calculation of sign area. The following methods shall be used to determine what constitutes one sign and to calculate the total square footage of any sign:

 

Table 13: Calculation of Sign Area

§  Each area of a sign that can be enclosed by a line or an imaginary line shall be considered one sign. Each side of a two-sided sign shall be used to calculate the maximum allowed sign area.



§  The area of measurement of a sign contained within a cabinet or frame shall include the total area of the cabinet or frame.



§  The area of measurement of a sign that displays individual letters on a wall, awning, or canopy or as pan channel letters shall be determined by encompassing all the letters in a geometric form of no more than eight (8) rectilinear lines at right angles to each other.



§  The total surface area of multiple unit signs includes the vertical and horizontal spacing between signs.



§  The sign area of each sign face of monument, directional, projecting and yard signs that have two faces shall be measured to calculate the maximum allowed sign area.



 

 

    3.   Calculation of total number of signs. The following should be used to determine the number of permanent signs being proposed on a lot:

    a.   Monument and Projecting signs shall be counted as one sign.

    b.   Directional signs shall not be included in the total number of signs.

    c.   Any sign within twelve (12) inches of the interior of a window shall be considered a sign and counted towards the total allowed number of signs and towards the maximum area of sign allowed.

    E.   Sign Standards by Type. Signs types are organized in three categories: Permanent, Portable and Temporary. Please utilize Table 14 for regulations for each type. Refer to Section 17.18.110(E) for sign regulations by zone.

 

Table 14: Sign Standards by Type

Permanent

 

 

 

 

 

 

Maximum Area and/or Dimensions

Maximum Number

Maximum Height

Other Conditions

Permit Required

Y/N

Awning Sign

§     Signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet per awning.

§     Up to two (2) awning signs per business.

§     Sign bands on the vertical valance shall be no greater than eight (8) inches in height.

§     Graphics and/or letters on both the vertical valance and a sloped part of an awning shall count as one sign.

§     No polyester awnings are allowed.

§     Signs shall be professionally applied to awning.

§     Shall not be illuminated.

Y

Directional Sign

§     No sign shall be greater than three (3) square feet per side.

§     No more than one directional sign per driveway entrance to a lot.

§     No more than three (3) per lot.

§     No sign shall have a height greater than three (3) feet above grade.

§     Directional signs shall not impede the vision triangle.

§     Shall be internally illuminated only.

Y

Monument Sign

§     Commercial use or mixed-use: Twenty (20) square feet.

§     Residential use: Four (4) square feet.

§     One per lot.

§     Six (6) feet.

§     Only allowed in the RF-MU-C area

§     Only two (2) sided monument signs are allowed.

§     Shall be externally illuminated only.

Y

Projecting Sign

§     Shall not exceed four (4) feet in width.

§     Shall not exceed four (4) feet in height.

§     Notwithstanding the maximum width or height allowed above, the sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area per side.

§     One per building entry on the primary frontage.

§     Minimum height above grade (clearance) is seven (7) feet six (6) inches. The minimum height shall be measured to the bottom of the projecting sign.

§     Maximum height above grade is 12 feet. The height shall be measured to the top of the projecting sign.

§     Shall comply with other applicable regulations if projecting into a right-of-way.

§     Only two-sided projecting signs allowed.

§     For multi-tenant buildings projecting signs shall:

§     Be no less than twenty-five (25) feet apart.

§     Be placed consistently at each entrance on a primary façade.

§     Shall be externally illuminated only.

Y

Wall Sign

§     Upper level: The maximum wall sign area for each lot shall not exceed .5 square foot of sign area for each linear foot of primary street frontage of the building.

§     Ground level: The maximum wall sign area shall be.30 square feet of sign area for each linear foot of storefront.

§     Upper level: No more than two (2) wall signs per building.

§     Ground level: One per storefront.

§     Upper level: No taller than the roof plane of the building. (i.e. does not include parapet, nor the roof plane of any rooftop access)

§     Ground level: No taller than the ground level of the building.

§     Shall be externally illuminated only.

Y

Window Sign

§     Shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the storefront glazing in which the sign is placed.

§     Up to three (3) per storefront glazing.

§     Anywhere within the storefront glazing.

§     Only vinyl professionally manufactured window signs are permitted and shall be applied solely to the storefront glazing.

§     No painted on window signs are allowed.

§     Shall not be illuminated.

Y

Mural

§     Forty percent (40%) of wall may be covered.

§     One per lot.

§     The height of the wall

§     Not allowed on key frontage, primary frontage, or a street front, if the street is opposite a key frontage.

§     Shall not be illuminated.

§     If proposed to be on a designed historic structure, must be approved by the Historic Preservation Commission.

§     Permits may only be issued to an arts district, a governmental entity involved in a public art project, a special district, or other registered neighborhood organization.

 

 

 

 

 

Portable

 

 

 

 

 

 

Maximum Area and/or Dimensions

Maximum Number

Maximum Height

Other Conditions

Permit Required

Y/N

Flag

§     When hung from a building: three (3) feet by five (5) feet.

§     When hung from a pole mounted to the ground: five (5) feet by seven (7) feet.

§     In single use lots: Up to two (2) flags allowed per lot.

§     In multi-tenant buildings on a lot: One flag allowed per storefront.

§     When hung from a building: at or below the tallest point on a building.

§     When hung from a pole mounted to the ground:

§     RF-MU: no taller than the tallest point on the building, or no more than thirty-five (35) feet, whichever is lower.

§     RF-R: no taller than fifteen (15) feet.

§     Flags shall be affixed to permanent flagpoles, whether or not such flagpole is freestanding or attached to a building.

§     A minim um pedestrian clearance of seven (7) feet six (6) inches shall be maintained for any flag hanging above a sidewalk or walkway.

§     Shall be externally illuminated only.

N

Sandwich Board

§     Six (6) square feet per frame.

§     One per business.

§     Four (4) feet.

§     If in the public right- of-way, must be placed within an amenity zone or placed to maintain a minimum forty-eight (48) inches pedestrian clear zone.

§     Sandwich boards shall not be within two (2) feet of the face of a curb of a street.

§     Sandwich boards shall be placed within the storefront width of the business in a multi-tenant building, or within fifteen (15) feet of the front door of a business, whichever is more restrictive.

§     Shall only be displayed during hours of operation.

§     Shall be constructed and placed to withstand normal weather conditions.

§     Shall not be illuminated.

N

 

 

 

Temporary

 

 

 

 

 

 

Maximum Area and/or Dimensions

Maximum Number*

Maximum Height

Other Conditions

Permit Required Y/N

Feather Flag Sign

§      Eight (8) feet by two (2) feet

§     In single use lots: One per lot.

§      In multi-tenant buildings on a lot: One per ground level storefront.

§     Eight (8) feet

§     Are only allowed to be displayed during hours of operation.

§     Must be located within fifteen (15) feet of the entrance to the storefront located on the same lot.

§     If in the public right- of-way must be placed within an amenity zone or placed to maintain a minimum forty-eight (48) inches pedestrian clear zone.

§     Are allowed for no more than consecutive fourteen

§     (14) days and no more than five (5) times in a calendar year.

§     Shall not be placed within two (2) feet from face of curb.

§     Shall not impede vision triangle.

§     Shall not be illuminated.

N

Flagging, Streamers and Pennants

§     In single use lots: No more than two (2) times the linear feet of building.

§      In multi-tenant buildings on a lot: No more than two (2) times the linear feet of a storefront.

§     None

§     No taller than the storefront.

§     Allowed for no more than consecutive fourteen (14) days and no more than five (5) times in a calendar year.

§     Shall be located within ten (10) feet of the storefront.

§     Shall be confined to the storefront width of the applicable store in a multi-tenant building.

§     Shall not be illuminated.

N

Flexible Banner Sign

§     Twenty (20) square feet total for all signs.

§     One per business.

§     Fence mounted: no taller than fence.

§     Wall mounted: Eight (8) feet.

§     Allowed for no more than consecutive fourteen ( 14) days and no more than five (5) times in a calendar year.

§     Flexible banner signs can be approved to be utilized continuously for more than fourteen (14) days if approved as part of a floodplain, grading or building permit. The sign shall be removed within fourteen (14) days of the issuance of Certificate of Occupancy.

§     Shall not be illuminated.

Y

Inflatable Sign

§     No more than one hundred forty-four (144) cubic feet.

§     One per lot or storefront.

§     Twelve (12) feet.

§     Allowed only during hours of operation.

§     No electrical cords shall cross a pedestrian passage way.

§     Allowed for no more than fourteen (14) consecutive days and no more than five (5) times in a calendar year.

§     Location to be approved as part of sign permit.

§     Shall not be illuminated.

Y

Rigid Banner Sign

§     Twenty-four (24) square feet total for all signs.

§     One per street front.

§     Freestanding: Eight (8) feet.

§     Fence mounted: No taller than fence.

§     Wall mounted: Within the ground level.

§     If freestanding, sign posts must have a structure made from wood, PVC, or metal that is durable.

§     If not freestanding, must be property secured to fence or wall.

§     Allowed for no more than consecutive fourteen (14) days and no more than five (5) times in a calendar year.

§     Rigid banner signs can be approved to be utilized continuously for more than fourteen (14) days if approved as part of a floodplain, grading or building permit. The sign shall be removed within fourteen (14) days of the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.

Y

§     Yard Sign

§     Commercial use or mixed-use: Thirty-two (32) square feet.

§     Residential use: Twenty-four (24) square feet.

§     Commercial use or mixed: One sign per lot or storefront in a multi-tenant building.

§     Residential use: No maximum provided the total area is not exceeded.

§     Commercial use or mixed-use:

·    freestanding: eight (8) feet.

·    wall mounted: within storefront.

§     Residential use: four (4) feet.

§     Prohibited in the public right-of-way.

§     Shall be placed at least eighteen ( 18) inches from the lot side of a sidewalk if freestanding.

§     Shall not impede vision triangle.

§     Allowed for no more than sixty (60) consecutive days prior to an election but must be removed ten (10) days after the conclusion of an election.

§     Allowed during the period of a property is for sale or lease, but must be removed from a lot three (3) days after the sale or lease of property.

N

 

    F.   Sign Standards by District.

    1.   RF-MU District Regulations.

 

Table 15: RF-MU Permitted Signs

Permitted Signs

Category

Type

Maximum Area

Maximum Number

Illumination

General Conditions

Permanent

§     Awning

§     Directional

§     Monument in RF-MU-C only

§     Projecting

§     Wall

§     Window

§     Maximum sign area in square feet allowed for a lot shall not exceed 1.25 times the linear square footage of the primary frontage of a building.

§     In buildings with multi- tenant ground level storefronts, the maximum sign area in square feet allowed shall not be more than 1.25 linear feet per storefront. The In buildings with multi-tenant ground level storefronts, the maximum sign area in square feet allowed shall not be more than 1.25 linear feet per storefront. The total signage for the building shall not exceed 1.5 linear feet.

§     If a business has no street footage on the ground level in a multi- tenant building, the maximum sign area of the lot may be increased by .25 times the linear footage of that businesses ' storefront.

§     Each lot may have up to six (6) signs.

§     Each lot with a multi- tenant building are allowed three (3) upper level wall and/or monument signs (complying with other regulations) plus four (4) signs per tenant storefront, of which one cannot be larger than three (3) square feet. Tenant inclusion in a monument sign shall not be counted towards the maximum number of signs or maximum sign area for a tenant.

§     Of those sign types allowed to be illuminated, the sign shall not flash, blink, or fluctuate.

§     Only external indirect illumination is allowed, except for directional signs.

§     Only downlighting of external illumination of signs is allowed.

§      Illumination shall not go beyond the property limits of the property.

§     All permanent signs require a permit.

§     Permanent signs shall not be on more than three (3) elevations of a building.

Portable

§     Flag

§     Sandwich Board

§     Refer to Sign Standards by Type

Temporary

§     Feather Flag

§     Flaggers, streamers and pennants

§     Inflatable

§     Rigid banner sign

§     Yard sign

§     Refer to Sign Standards by Type

Mural

§     Refer to Sign Standards by Type

 

 

Table 16: RF-MU Prohibited Signs

Prohibited Signs

Category

Type

Prohibited

§  Roof sign

§  Off premises sign

§  Signs painted on a fence

§  Flashing, blinking or fluctuating signs

§  Electronic message signs on vehicles

§  Any other signs not explicitly allowed

 

    2.   RF-R District Regulations.

 

Table 18: RF-R Permitted Signs

Permitted Signs

Category

Type

Maximum Area

Maximum Number

Illumination

General Conditions

Permanent

§  Monument

§  Wall

§  Window

§  Shall not exceed four (4) square feet in size per lot.

§  Each lot may have One sign.

§  Illumination not allowed.

§  To be placed no closer than two (2) feet from back side of sidewalk.

§  Not to impede vision triangle.

Portable

§  Flag

§  Refer to Sign Standards by Type

Temporary

§  Feather flag sign

§  Yard sign

§  Refer to Sign Standards by Type

 

 

Table 19: RF-R Prohibited Signs

Prohibited Signs

Category

Type

Prohibited

§  Awning sign

§  Directional sign

§  Projecting sign

§  Sandwich board sign

§  Flexible banner sign

§  Inflatable sign

§  Rigid banner sign

§  Roof sign

§  Off-premises sign

§  Signs pained on a building or fence

§  Mural

§  Flashing, blinking or fluctuating signs

§  Electronic message signs on vehicles

§  Any other signs not explicitly allowed

 

 

    G.  General Sign Regulations for all Districts.

    1.   Maintenance.

    a.   Every sign shall be maintained in good condition at all times. A sign in good condition shall meet the following criteria:

    i.    Signs shall be rust free.

    ii.   Plastic, acrylic and other similar materials shall not be broken, cracked, torn or faded.

    iii.  Banners, awnings, flags and feather flags shall not be torn, faded or in disrepair.

    iv.  All lighting, where permitted, must be functional and no exposed light sources are permitted unless approved with the permit.

    b.   The City shall have the authority to inspect signs to ensure adequate maintenance and compliance with this section.

    c.   If upon inspection, staff determines a sign to be in violation of this section or a safety hazard, the staff may order the sign to be maintained or removed by the property owner.

    2.   Nonconforming signs.

    a.   Continuance. Subject to the termination hereinafter provided, any nonconforming sign may be continued in operation and be maintained after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section or any amendment thereto; provided, however, that no such sign shall be modified in any manner that increases the nonconformity of such sign.

    b.   Termination of a nonconforming sign shall take place upon:

     i.      Structural change to any nonconforming sign.

     ii.     Structural alteration to prolong the life of the sign, except to meet safety requirements.

    iii.  Alteration or expansion in any manner which increases the degree of nonconformity.

    iv.  Damage or destruction if the estimated cost of reconstruction exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the value of the sign structure prior to being damaged.

    v.   Any violation of this section shall terminate immediately the right to maintain such sign.

    3.   Official signs, danger signs, emergency signs and legal notices may be placed by responsible persons upon approval of the City Administrator.

    4.   No sign shall be erected, constructed, maintained or altered within the City in violation of the Code of Cañon City, including but not limited to this Section.

    5.   Proper vision clearance shall be provided at all times.

    6.   No sign of any type shall be erected or placed so as to obstruct any necessary egress in case of fire.

    7.   All exterior signs shall be designed and constructed to resist the wind effects determined in accordance with applicable requirements of the duly adopted International Building Code.

    H.  Applicability of Chapter 17.30.

    The following sections of Chapter 17.30 are applicable to the signs within the RF-MU and RF-R zone districts to the extent no conflict exists between this section and the following sections:

    1.   17.30.030;

    2.   17.30.100;

    3.   17.30.110;

    4.   17.30.140;

    5.   17.30.180.

    I.    Violation-Penalty. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, maintain, replace or alter any sign in the City, or permit the same in violation of any of the provisions of this section. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be punishable in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.44.050 of the Code. (Ord. 27-2019 § 1)

Chapter 17.20 SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS AND DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
17.20.010 Maintenance of minimum requirements.
    No lot area, yard or other open space, or required off-street parking or loading area existing on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, shall be reduced in area, dimension or size below the minimum required by this title, nor shall any lot area, yard or other open space or off-street parking or loading area which is required by this title for one use be used as the lot area, yard or other open space or off-street parking or loading area requirement for any other use, except that a valid lease determined to be of adequate length by City Council be filed at the office of the City Clerk, Planning Administrator and City Engineer’s office. (Prior code § 17.16.030)

 

17.20.020 Access to street.
    All lots shall abut a street other than alley for a width of at least forty (40) feet. (Prior code § 17.16.170)

 

17.20.025 Agriculture.
    Agriculture shall be a permitted use in an R-L Zone District provided:

    A.  No offensive odors or excessive dust be created; and

    B.   No agricultural products be sold on the property which are not produced on said property. (Ord. 34-1992)

 

17.20.028 Animal boarding.
    Animal boarding may be permitted as a conditional use in the R-L, R-1, C and I zone districts, upon the issuance of a conditional use permit, according to the policies and procedures set forth in Chapter 17.23, Conditional Uses, and subject to the following conditions:

    A.  Every animal boarding facility shall, at all times, be licensed as a Pet Animal Care Facility with the Colorado Department of Agriculture;

    B.   Such facilities shall be maintained with regular and frequent cleaning to minimize the possibility of unhealthy or unsafe conditions. All manure, bedding, spillage and leftovers from feedings shall be removed and disposed of to prevent fly and rodent propagation or odor at least weekly;

    C.   Any structure used for the boarding of animals shall be located at least twenty (20) feet from any side or rear property line;

    D.  The boarding of animals shall, to the extent applicable, comply with the terms, conditions and limitations that apply to the keeping of livestock, as set forth in Section 17.20.114 of this title. (Ord. 2-2013 § 4)

 

17.20.029 Backyard chickens.
    Backyard chickens may be permitted in the R-1 and R-2 zone districts as an accessory use, and on properties used for residential purposes in the C and I zone districts upon the issuance of a conditional use permit according to the policies and procedures set forth in Chapter 17.23, Conditional Uses, and subject to the following conditions:

    A.  No more than eight (8) chicken hens shall be allowed on any property, unless the property meets the minimum area requirement for livestock, according to Section 17.20.114 of this title;

    B.   The ownership and keeping of roosters over six (6) months old is prohibited;

    C.   Chicken hens must be provided with a covered enclosure that is predator-resistant, properly ventilated, and easily accessed for cleaning and maintenance, and that provides not less than four (4) square feet per chicken;

    D.  During daylight hours, chicken hens must be provided access to an outside enclosure that is adequately fenced to prevent the escape of the chickens and to provide protection from predators. The outside enclosure must provide a minimum of ten (10) square feet of permeable space per chicken, and may be either attached to the covered enclosure or portable. A fully fenced backyard may be deemed to meet this requirement;

 

    E.   The chickens must be placed in the covered enclosure between the hours of dusk and dawn to provide protection from predators;

    F.   Setbacks:

    1.   Any enclosure for backyard chickens must be located in the backyard of the property, measured from the rear wall of the residential dwelling. The Zoning Administrator may allow exceptions to this requirement in cases of lots having unusual site dimensions, terrain limitations or other unique characteristics;

    2.   No covered enclosure may be located less than eight (8) feet from any abutting property line or less than thirty (30) feet from any residential dwelling on any adjoining lot;

    G.  The covered enclosure must be cleaned so that odors due to excessive dirt, waste, excrement, or old feed do not become a nuisance, safety hazard or health problem to adjoining property or uses;

    H.  The on-site slaughtering of backyard chickens is prohibited. (Ord. 2-2013 § 4)

 

17.20.031 Bed and breakfast.
    A bed and breakfast may be permitted as a conditional use upon the issuance of a conditional use permit, according to the policies and procedures set forth in Chapter 17.23, Conditional Uses, and subject to the following conditions:

    A.  Off-street parking shall be provided at the rate of one space for the dwelling owner and/or operator and one space for each lodging room;

    B.   Off-street parking areas shall be designed to provide safe ingress and egress;

    C.   In residential zone districts, landscaping and screening shall be provided to maintain the residential character of the building and preserve the right of neighboring residents to enjoy a peaceful occupancy of their homes;

    D.  Any outdoor lighting shall be shielded to minimize light shining onto adjacent properties;

    E.   All signage must comply with applicable provisions of Chapter 17.30, Signs, of this title;

    F.   The property used for a bed and breakfast facility shall also serve as the primary residence of the owner or manager;

    G.  Bed and breakfast facilities in residential districts may have no more than two (2) on-duty employees at any given time who do not reside in the bed and breakfast residence. (Ord. 2-2013 § 4)

 

17.20.032 Beekeeping.
    Domestic non-commercial beekeeping may be permitted as an accessory use in the R-L, R-1 and R-2 zone districts only, subject to the following conditions:

    A.  Hives. All bee colonies shall be kept in hives with removable combs, which shall be kept in sound and usable condition;

    B.   Setbacks. All hives shall be located in a side or rear yard only, and at least five (5) feet from any adjoining property, with the back of the hive facing the nearest adjoining property;

    C.   Colony Densities.

    1.   It is unlawful to keep more than the following number of colonies on any tract within the City, based upon the size or configuration of the tract on which the apiary is situated:

    a.   One-quarter (1/4) acre or less tract size—two (2) colonies;

    b.   More than one-quarter (1/4) acre but less than one-half (1/2) acre tract size—four (4) colonies;

    c.   More than one-half (1/2) acre but less than one (1) acre tract size—six (6) colonies;

    d.   One (1) acre or larger tract size—eight (8) colonies; and

    e.   Regardless of tract size, where all hives are situated at least two hundred (200) feet in any direction from all property lines of the tract on which the apiary is situated, there shall be no limit to the number of colonies;

    2.   For each two (2) colonies authorized under colony densities, there may be maintained upon the same tract one nucleus colony in a hive structure not exceeding one standard nine and five-eighths inch (9⅝″) depth ten (10) frame hive body with no supers attached as required from time to time for management of swarms. Each such nucleus colony shall be disposed of or combined with an authorized colony within thirty (30) days after the date it is acquired;

    D.  Fencing of Flyways. In each instance in which any colony is situated within twenty-five (25) feet of a property line of a developed public or private tract, as measured from the nearest point on the hive to the property line, the beekeeper shall establish and maintain a flyway barrier at least six feet (6′) in height consisting of a hedge, solid wall or fence parallel to the property line and extending ten feet (10′) beyond the colony in each direction so that all bees are forced to fly at an elevation of at least six feet (6′) above ground level over the property lines in the vicinity of the apiary;

    E.   Water. Each property owner or beekeeper shall ensure that a convenient source of water is available at all times to the bees so that the bees will not congregate at swimming pools, water spigots, pet water bowls, birdbaths or other water sources where they may cause human, bird or domestic pet contact. The water shall be maintained so as not to become stagnant;

    F.   Maintenance. Each property owner or beekeeper shall ensure that no bee comb or other materials that might encourage robbing are left upon the grounds of the apiary site. Upon their removal from the hive, all such materials shall promptly be disposed of in a sealed container or placed within a building or other bee proof enclosure;

    G.  Queens. In any instance in which a colony exhibits unusually aggressive characteristics by stinging or attempting to sting without due provocation or exhibits an unusual disposition towards swarming, it shall be the duty of the beekeeper to re-queen the colony. Queens shall be selected from stock bred for gentleness and non-swarming characteristics;

    H.  Prohibited. The keeping by any person of bee colonies in the City not in strict compliance with this section is prohibited. Any bee colony not residing in a hive structure intended for beekeeping, or any swarm of bees, or any colony residing in a standard or homemade hive which, by virtue of its condition, has obviously been abandoned by the beekeeper, is unlawful and may be summarily destroyed or removed from the City by the Code Enforcement Officer or Animal Control Officer. (Ord. 2-2013 § 4)

 

17.20.034 Boarding or rooming house.
    A boarding or rooming house may be permitted as a conditional use upon the issuance of a conditional use permit, according to the policies and procedures set forth in Chapter 17.23, Conditional Uses, and subject to the following conditions:

    A.  One off-street parking space shall be provided for each lodging room, plus one space for each on-duty employee;

    B.   Meals shall be prepared and served only to residents in a common eating area;

    C.   No individual kitchen facilities shall be provided in the lodging rooms;

    D.  The operator of a boarding or rooming house shall keep a complete record of the names of all persons residing therein, and shall make such record available for inspection to all appropriate agencies whose duties necessitate acquisition. (Ord. 2-2013 § 4)

 

17.20.040 Building height limitation exceptions.
    The following type of structures or structural parts are not subject to the building height limitations of this title: chimneys, tanks, church spires, belfries, domes, monuments, fire and hose towers, observation towers, transmission towers, flagpoles, radio and television towers, masts, aerials, cooling towers, elevator shafts, ranch and farm accessory uses, and other similar vertical projections. (Prior code § 17.16.060)

 

17.20.050 Buildings on the same lot.
    A.  Except in the case of commercial self-storage facilities and storage warehouses that are built to include more than one building, and except as provided in Subsection B of this section, only one principal building shall be permitted on any lot unless approved as part of a planned unit development under Chapter 17.16 of this title.

    B.   The establishment or use of additional principal buildings in the CB, Central Business, C, General Commercial or I, Industrial zone districts may be approved as a conditional use by the Zoning Administrator according to the policies and procedures set forth in Chapter 17.23, Conditional Uses, and subject to the following conditions and limitations:

    1.   Any additional principal buildings and uses shall, collectively, comply with all requirements of the zone district, and may require site plan approval; and

    2.   All buildings shall remain in common ownership; and

    3.   An off-street parking area adequate to accommodate the needs of the users of all principal buildings and uses, according to the requirements of Chapter 17.28, Off-Street Parking and Loading, of this title shall be provided; and

    4.   All signage for all buildings and uses shall conform to the provisions and limitations of Chapter 17.30, Signs, of this title. (Ord. 2-2013 § 5; Ord. 17-2011 § 17)

 

17.20.053 Community marijuana cultivation facility.
    Requirements and Restrictions. In zone districts where community marijuana cultivation facility is a use by special review, each such community marijuana cultivation facility, in addition to being subject to the general requirements and restrictions applicable to the use by special review process set forth in Chapter 17.24, shall be subject to the requirements and restrictions set forth in Chapter 5.67 of this Code. (Ord. 1-2017 § 3)

 

17.20.054 Design Requirements in the CBD, Central Business District.
    Portions of the Central Business District contain historic areas that should be preserved and where consideration should be given to the historic architectural styles of the commercial buildings in the area. The following regulations pertain to specific areas in the Central Business District:

    A.  Between 3rd and 8th Streets, any building situated on any lot that is adjacent to Main Street shall not exceed three (3) stories. A fourth (4th) or more stories may be authorized through the Special Review process. (Ord. 25-2014 § 3)

 

17.20.055 Discontinuance of certain sales activities.
    A.  Except as provided in Subsections B and C of this section, as of March 7, 2009, sales of new and/or used motor vehicles, boats, furniture or major appliances that are excluded from the definition of “outdoor retail sales” as set forth in Section 17.08.010, shall be prohibited on any lot or parcel listed in Section 17.24.050.

    B.   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to prohibit sales of new and used motor vehicles, boats, furniture, and/or major appliances from permanent locations where such goods are regularly offered for sale on a year-round basis as a part of the stock-in-trade of the person owning, leasing or otherwise controlling such location, provided that such sales are conducted in conformity with the requirements of all other federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations.

    C.   Sales of new and/or used motor vehicles, boats, furniture and major appliances that were specifically authorized on certain lots and parcels pursuant to City Council’s adoption of a special review ordinance authorizing such sales, among others, as sales permitted by special review shall be subject to the termination provisions, if any, set forth in such ordinance and if no provision for termination was provided for in such ordinance, such sales shall be treated as nonconforming property uses that shall be discontinued in accordance with applicable provisions in Chapter 17.32.

    D.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the sale of any items or articles of personal property included in the definition of outdoor retail sales, as clarified in Ordinance No. 4, Series of 2009, from lots or parcels authorized to conduct outdoor retail sales; provided that such sales are conducted in accordance with the requirements of applicable law. (Ord. 28-2010 § 10; Ord. 4-2009 § 4)

 

17.20.060 Building projections.
    Cornices, eaves, canopies, sunshades, gutters, chimneys, flues, beltcourses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features and other similar architectural features may project not more than three (3) feet into a required yard or into required open space, as established by coverage standards and in no case shall any feature of any structure project beyond the property line. Carports are not allowed to infringe upon the setback requirement building lines, whether attached or freestanding. (Ord. 25-1991 § 4)

 

17.20.070 Building setback lines.
    All building setback requirements for property lines abutting a public right-of-way are based upon the assumption that said right-of-way meets the standards set forth in the comprehensive plan. If the ROW does not meet the width standard called for, the building setback requirement shall be increased by the distance necessary to accommodate the required right-of-way. Said distance shall be found by measuring from the center line of the right-of-way, half the width required by the comprehensive plan to find the point from which the setback shall be measured. (Ord. 25-1991 § 6)

 

17.20.072 Stormwater and drainage easements.
    When a building, subject to the adopted building code, is located on property traversed by a drainage way including, but not limited to, a watercourse, swale, channel, irrigation ditch, or stream, the owner, prior to obtaining a certificate of occupancy, shall execute an easement agreement for stormwater and/or drainage purpose(s) for the benefit of the City. The easement shall conform substantially to the banks of the drainage way with such width as will be necessary to fulfill the purpose(s) of the easement, as determined by the City, and the agreement shall grant the City the right to access adjacent property to perform any necessary acts related to the easement. If necessary, the City may require a survey of the easement and the costs of such survey shall be paid by the applicant. Wherever possible, it is desirable that the drainage be maintained by an open channel with stabilized banks and adequate width for the one percent annual chance historic flow. (Ord. 7-2019 § 3)

 

17.20.075 Exotic animals.
    A.  No person shall own, keep, traffic in or sell, for any reason, any exotic animal unless that person first obtains a conditional use permit, according to the policies and procedures set forth in Chapter 17.23, Conditional Uses, which permit shall be subject to the following conditions and limitations:

    1.   The keeping or sheltering of exotic animals shall be in a manner as to not constitute a nuisance or health hazard under any ordinance of the City, or under any statute or case law of the state;

    2.   A conditional use permit for an exotic animal may be denied or revoked by the Zoning Administrator or designee if:

    a.   The permit holder is convicted of a violation of Subsection B of this section;

    b.   The applicant or permit holder fails to first obtain, and to keep in effect at all times during which the exotic animal is being kept, all applicable state and federal licenses or permits that may be required to keep the animal;

    c.   The applicant is found to have made any materially false or misleading statement in the application or has concealed relevant information;

    d.   The applicant has obtained the exotic animal through illegal means;

    e.   The applicant is not qualified to possess an exotic animal, does not have adequate facilities to keep the animal or proposes to keep the animal in an unsuitable location; or

    f.    The public health, safety and welfare justify the denial or revocation of the application;

    3.   No use of the property or structure thereon resulting from the issuing of this conditional use permit shall convey any right to future permits;

    B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, have custody of, sell, or traffic in any poisonous or dangerous animal;

    C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any wildlife as a pet;

    D.  Nothing herein shall prohibit the keeping of wildlife by any person or organization holding a valid license for educational live possession, falconry, scientific collection or wildlife rehabilitation from the Colorado Division of Wildlife, so long as such licensee also complies with all applicable Municipal Code requirements. (Ord. 2-2013 § 4)

 

17.20.076 Farm stand.
    A farm stand may be permitted in the R-L, R-1, R-2 and I zone districts as a conditional use according to the policies and procedures set forth in Chapter 17.23, Conditional Uses, and subject to the following additional conditions:

    A.  A sketch plan showing the proposed size and location of the stand and the location of any other existing structures, as well as activity areas such as parking, loading, waste disposal, and storage, with sufficient detail to permit the Zoning Administrator to determine their appropriateness and potential impact on surrounding properties shall accompany an application for conditional use;

    B.   Agricultural products sold must have been raised on the land on which the stand is located;

    C.   The farm stand shall not exceed three hundred (300) square feet in area or ten (10) feet in height;

    D.  The farm stand shall meet the setback requirements applicable for an accessory structure in the zone district in which it is located;

    E.   Signs on farm stands shall be limited to two (2) unlighted signs, which may be wall-mounted or freestanding. No sign shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area and eight (8) feet in height, and must be located at least ten (10) feet from any public right-of-way and at least five (5) feet from any interior lot line;

    F.   The area of the farm stand shall be kept clear of litter, debris, spoiled fruits or vegetables, garden waste, and material from cider operations at all times;

    G.  Any lighting used shall be indirect and shielded to avoid light intrusion onto adjacent residential properties. (Ord. 20-2017 § 2; Ord. 2-2013 § 4)

 

17.20.077 Farmers’ market and flea market.
    A farmers’ market or flea market may be approved as a conditional use in the C and CB zone districts according to the policies and procedures set forth in Chapter 17.23, Conditional Uses, and subject to the following additional conditions:

    A.  Off-street parking shall be provided at the rate of one and one-half (1.5) spaces per vendor stall, unless the farmers’ market or flea market is located in an area adjacent to public parking that is adequate to accommodate the needs of the farmers’ market or flea market in addition to the needs of the general public.

    B.   A plan shall be in place for the disposal of trash and other debris.

    C.   The owner/operator of a flea market or a farmers’ market must obtain and maintain all required City, county and state sales tax or other business licenses at all times. (Ord. 16-2014 § 9; Ord. 2-2013 § 4)

 

17.20.080 Fences, walls and hedges.
    A.  Fences, walls and hedges may be permitted in any required setback area or along the property line in residential districts, provided that within the front yard setback they do not exceed thirty (30) inches or, if the fence is at least fifty percent (50%) open, it may be constructed to a maximum height of forty-eight (48) inches, except as provided for below. Fences, walls and hedges erected in other than the required front yard setback in residential districts may not exceed seventy-two (72) inches in height.

    Fence height may extend up to seventy-two (72) inches within the front yard setback where the front yard setback is greater than fifteen (15) feet and where a dwelling is located within the required front yard setback under the following conditions: 1) the fence may not extend into the front yard setback beyond the main structural part of the dwelling (attached porches, open entryways and the like do not count towards this exception); 2) regardless of the placement of the residential structure on the lot or parcel, the fence may not be constructed any closer to the front property line than fifteen (15) feet; and 3) notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, the fence may not create a vision clearance hazard.

    B.   Fences and walls erected in the industrial, general commercial and central business districts shall be reviewed and may be approved by the City Engineer only if the engineer has determined that the structure will not create a visual clearance or traffic hazard. In making such determination, the City Engineer shall give due consideration to applicable sections of this title, including but not limited to Sections 17.20.170 and 17.20.200.

    C.   Fences and walls erected in any zone district for purposes of public safety, health and welfare shall be reviewed and approved or disapproved by the City Engineer and the City Administrator. (Ord. 24-2014 § 1; Ord. 22-1996 § 1; Ord. 9-1990; Ord. 13-1989)

 

17.20.085 Food carts or trucks (stand-alone).
    A.  A stand-alone food cart or truck whether motorized or non-motorized may be set up on a regular, semi-regular or one-time basis in the C, CB, and I zone districts and in the R-L, R-1, R-1A, R-2, and R-3 zone districts as specified herein through the issuance of a temporary use permit (application fee required) as authorized by the City Administrator so long as the applicant complies with each of the following criteria, which are established as the minimum criteria for food carts or trucks:

    1.   Food carts or trucks must be inspected and licensed as mobile retail food establishments by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment (CDPHE). A copy of the CDPHE license shall accompany the temporary use permit application.

    2.   The owner or operator of the food cart or truck must obtain and maintain all required City, County and State sales tax licenses at all times.

    3.   The owner or operator of such food cart or truck, shall provide, with the temporary use permit application, certificates evidencing the existence of general liability insurance coverage for such food cart or kiosk in amounts equal to or greater than the maximum amounts that may be recovered from a public entity under the Colorado Governmental Immunity Act and naming the City as an additional insured. Cancellation or reduction in coverage below such standards shall automatically void an approved permit.

    4.   The temporary use permit authorized in this section shall be permanently displayed to the public in a visible location on the food cart or truck.

    5.   Operations shall not obstruct parking lot circulation or block access to a public street, alley or sidewalk.

    6.   The operation of the food cart or truck shall not infringe on or upon the ability of pedestrians to negotiate the sidewalks or other common public areas, or cause damage to any improvements within the public right-of-way.

    7.   Operations of any food cart or truck shall be at least one hundred (100) feet from any eating and drinking establishment lawfully existing at the time the permit or renewal permit was issued and is open for business, unless written permission is granted by the eating or drinking establishment located within that distance.

    8.   No food cart or truck shall be set up on any privately owned lot or parcel without written permission of the property owner.

    9.   Trash receptacles shall be provided and the owner/operator shall be responsible for keeping the area surrounding the food cart or truck clear of any litter and properly cleaned.

    10. Signs must be permanently affixed to or painted on the food cart or truck. Each food cart or truck may have one sandwich board sign which may not be located in any right-of-way or impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic and must be within twenty-five (25) feet of the food cart or truck.

    11. Canopies, umbrellas, and outdoor tables and chairs may not be placed in any location that infringes upon the ability of pedestrians to use the sidewalk or other public area, or creates a visual obstruction to traffic.

    12. Food carts or trucks may locate on the same lot or parcel so long as each vendor has the property owner’s written permission and all other provisions contained herein can be met.

    13. No food cart or truck shall be located within fifty (50) feet of the established outer boundary of any City-permitted or licensed event where the sale of merchandise and food has been allowed.

    14. When not in operation, a food cart or truck shall be stored on private property.

    15. If located in a City right-of-way: (a) no merchandise shall be offered, displayed or sold and no customers served except from the sidewalk, (b) only non­motorized carts may be located on sidewalks, (c) carts or trucks must be located at least twenty-five (25) feet from any intersection (measured from the edge of sidewalk to the cart or truck) and fifteen (15) feet from any driveway, (d) in the CB zone district, food carts or trucks are not allowed on Main Street between 2nd and 8th Streets, but may locate on side numbered streets as long as all other provisions contained herein can be met, (e) food carts or trucks shall comply with all traffic and parking ordinances of the City, as they may be amended, (f) food carts or trucks may not cater private events from either the sidewalk or road right­of-way without an approved street closure permit. In addition, any location in a City right-of-way, including sidewalks, may be subject to temporary suspension or revocation without cause, but for reasons that may include construction, repairs, maintenance or emergencies as determined by the City.

    16. In residential zone districts a food cart or truck may locate on Cañon City Fremont RE-1 School District property and Cañon City Area Recreation and Park District property with written permission from the property owner. Food carts or trucks may also locate in the right-of-way adjacent to Fremont RE-1 School District property, Cañon City Area Recreation and Park District property and City park property. No permit is required for a private, catered event occurring on private property (private parties, reunions, weddings and the like) or for a mobile vendor pursuant to Subsection B below.

    17. In City parks and plazas, food carts or trucks may be allowed. A separate park permit application is required and may be date and time specific.

    18. All permit requests, including locations in City parks and/or plazas, shall be processed by the City Planning Department. The City Administrator shall have the discretion to impose such other requirements and restrictions as are deemed appropriate and which are intended to provide for the health, safety, comfort and convenience of the City and its inhabitants.

    B.   Mobile food trucks, food carts and other mobile vendors that operate on a motor route and/or do not conduct business in any single location for longer than one hour are required to be licensed to operate in the public right-of-way in accordance with the provisions of applicable law and are not subject to these permit requirements.

    C.   These permit requirements do not apply to food carts or trucks that are: (1) part of a City-permitted event; or (2) for a private, catered event occurring on private property (private parties, reunions, weddings and the like) in any zone district.

    D.  A street closure permit may be required in order to locate on any city street or right-of-way where the provisions contained herein cannot be met.

    E.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any minor-operated business. (Ord. 2-2020 § 12; Ord. 23-2016 § 1)

 

17.20.090 Garages, detached.
    The front yard setback requirement for detached garages in zone districts R-1, R-2 and R-3 shall be twenty-five (25) feet from the front property line and in the R-1A zone district detached garages shall be fifteen (15) feet from the front property line. (Ord. 15-2016 § 7; Ord. 25-1991 § 7)

 

17.20.100 Home occupations.
    Within residentially zoned districts, home occupations shall be allowed as permitted accessory use governed by the following regulations and limitations:

    A.  “Home occupation” means an occupation carried on in the dwelling or accessory building by members of the family occupying the dwelling, with no servant, employee or other person being engaged, provided the residential character of the building is maintained and the occupation is conducted in such a manner as not to give an outward appearance nor manifest any characteristic of a business in the ordinary meaning of the term, nor infringe upon the right of neighboring residents to enjoy a peaceful occupancy of their homes.

    B.   Home occupations must be clearly secondary to the use of the building, and shall not occupy more than twenty percent (20%) of the total floor area of the main building or, if located in an accessory building, shall not occupy more than ten percent (10%) of the total lot area.

    C.   Home occupations shall be operated entirely from an enclosed structure with no exterior storage of materials, equipment or products.

    D.  A home occupation shall be entitled to one unlighted wall sign with sign area of two (2) square foot installed on the wall of the principal or the accessory building, but not on both buildings.

    E.   The operation shall not generate objectionable traffic in the area, and off-street parking must be provided to accommodate all needs created by the home occupation.

    F.   The operation shall not be objectionable due to odor, dust, smoke, noise, vibration or other similar causes. (Ord. 20-2017 § 3; prior code § 17.16.010)

 

17.20.102 Household pets.
    Household pets may be permitted as an accessory use in any zone district on property used for residential purposes, subject to the following conditions and limitations:

    A.  Household pets may not be used to supplement food supplies, or for any commercial purpose whatsoever other than the offering for sale of one litter, brood or offspring of a household pet domiciled on the premises;

    B.   Household pets which are customarily let outdoors for exercise or elimination or are kept outdoors or in an accessory structure, may number no more than four (4) per household;

    C.   Animals that are poisonous, vicious, or known to attack are prohibited within the city limits;

    D.  The premises upon or within which any animal is kept within the city limits shall at all times be maintained with regular and frequent cleaning to minimize the possibility of unhealthy or unsafe conditions;

    E.   The keeping or sheltering of household pets shall be in a manner so as to not constitute a nuisance or health hazard under any ordinance of the City, or under any statute or case law of the state;

    F.   All dogs shall be kept in compliance with the requirements and limitations contained in Chapter 6.08, Dogs, of the Municipal Code. (Ord. 2-2013 § 4)

 

17.20.105 All industrial uses.
    In addition to all other applicable provisions of this Code, all uses, including but not limited to permitted uses, in any I District shall be subject to the following standards:

    A.  Light fixtures on buildings and in parking areas shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height and shall be oriented in such a way as to not shine into residential areas. Downward facing and shielded lighting is recommended.

    B.   Outdoor storage, equipment and refuse areas, as allowed, shall be concealed from view from abutting rights-of-way and from adjoining residential streets.

    C.   Travel and parking portions of any lot(s) shall be surfaced and maintained as required in Section 17.28.070, Parking lot layout standards.

    D.  If available, access to the use shall be provided from an arterial or collector street.

    E.   Reasonable steps shall be taken to confine dust, fumes, odors, smoke, vapor and noise to the site. (Ord. 1-2015 § 2)

 

17.20.107 Intermodal shipping containers.
    Intermodal shipping containers are permitted as an accessory structure (as a garage or storage shed, not as a habitable structure) in all zone districts and are subject to the following conditions:

    A.  Such container shall not be located in the front yard or side yard along a street, and shall otherwise meet all setback requirements for accessory structures in the zone district in which it is located.

    B.   Such container shall be painted, and may also be enclosed or architecturally altered to be compatible with the appearance of the on-site principal structure and surrounding neighborhood. Such enclosure or alteration(s) may require a building permit.

    C.   Stacking of containers is not allowed. (Ord. 3-2018 § 5)

 

17.20.110 Junkyards.
    A.  It is unlawful to establish or maintain a junkyard within any residential zone district and junkyards on residential property are hereby declared to be prohibited, a nuisance and detrimental to the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Cañon City.

    B.   It is the intent and purpose of this section to discourage, prohibit and abate certain conditions affecting the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City, particularly the children, which pose a danger because of broken glass, sharp protrusions, insecure objects, or further create habitat for rodents, insects and other pests or further constitute a blighting influence upon the area in which they are located which causes a loss of value to surrounding property. (Ord. 3-2011 § 3; Ord. 25-1991 § 8; Ord. 11-1991 § 3)

 

17.20.111 Kennels.
    A kennel may be approved as a conditional use in the R-L, C, and I zone districts, according to the policies and procedures set forth in Chapter 17.23, Conditional Uses, and subject to the following additional conditions:

    A.  Every kennel shall, at all times, be licensed as a Pet Animal Care Facility with the Colorado Department of Agriculture;

    B.   Any kennel established within the City limits shall also be licensed pursuant to the requirements and provisions of Section 6.08.040, Kennel license requirements, of the Municipal Code;

    C.   All structures used to house the animals, including dog runs and outdoor exercise areas, shall meet a minimum twenty-five (25) foot setback from all property lines;

    D.  Any outdoor area where animals are confined shall be fenced to prevent the animals from escaping;

    E.   Any outdoor area where animals are confined shall be graded and surfaced to provide proper drainage of stormwater and to prevent runoff from entering nearby ditches or other watercourses or neighboring property;

    F.   All animal waste shall be properly disposed of on a daily basis to prevent offensive odors, minimize disease hazards, and prevent vermin infestation. (Ord. 2-2013 § 4)

 

17.20.114 Livestock.
    A.  Livestock may be kept in the R-1, R-2 and R-3 zone districts only on a contiguous tract of land which is in excess of one acre in area. Livestock may be kept in the R-L zone district only on a contiguous tract of land which is in excess of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. Such area shall be controlled by the owner of such livestock through ownership or by lease or similar agreement.

    B.   No more than one hoofed animal shall be kept per half acre of land provided in the R-1, R-2 and R-3 zone districts. No more than one hoofed animal shall be kept per every fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet of land provided in the R-L zone district, and, thereafter, every portion of land that calculates into more than one-half animal unit allowed on the property will be considered as one for determining total number of animals in the R-L zone district only.

    C.   All manure, bedding, spillage and leftovers from feedings shall be removed and disposed of to prevent fly and rodent propagation or odor at least weekly.

    D.  Fencing of the lot where livestock are kept must be constructed and maintained so that the animals are kept twenty-five (25) feet from a residence on an adjoining lot. Where animals and livestock are restricted to a smaller portion of the total lot area by corral, pen, sty or any type enclosure, said enclosure shall be located the furthest reasonable distance possible from any residence on any adjoining lot taking into account the surrounding adjacent uses and the size and shape of the lot on which the enclosure is situated. All fencing must be constructed and maintained in a manner that prevents the enclosed animals from damaging crops, structures or objects on any adjoining lot.

    E.   The keeping or sheltering of livestock shall be conducted in a manner that does not constitute a nuisance or health hazard under any ordinance of the City, or applicable law of the state. (Ord. 2-2013 § 4)

 

17.20.120 Materials recovery facilities (recyclables processing).
    A.  Type 1 facility: All recyclable commodities shall be of the clean, single- or dual-stream type so long as the commodities are not processed as part of a mixed waste stream. Clean commodities have been separated from municipal solid waste before arriving at the recovery facility. All recyclable commodities, pre- and post-processing, must be stored within an enclosed building.

    B.   Type 2 facility: Any type of materials recovery that is not Type 1 shall be considered Type 2 and shall be required to be reviewed and approved through the Special Review Use process. (Ord. 1-2015 § 3)

 

17.20.125 Medical marijuana facility, licensed.
    A.  Requirements and Restrictions. In zone districts where a licensed medical marijuana facility is a permitted use, each such licensed medical marijuana facility, in addition to being subject to the general requirements and restrictions applicable within such zone district, shall be subject to the requirements and restrictions set forth in Chapter 5.56 of this Code, and applicable provisions of Colorado law, including, but not limited to, the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code.

    B.   Nothing in this section shall permit or be construed to permit any act, activity or omission that is illegal under the laws of the State of Colorado. (Ord. 2-2013 § 4)

 

17.20.127 Minor-operated businesses.
    A.  Minor-operated businesses may be set up on a regular, semi-regular or one-time basis in the R-L, R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3, MH-1, and MH-2 zone districts as specified herein so long as the applicant complies with each of the following criteria, which are established as the minimum criteria for minor-operated businesses:

    1.   Operations of any minor-operated business shall not take place in any public park, open space, or right-of-way and cannot infringe upon or block motor or pedestrian access to any public street, alley or sidewalk.

    2.   Operations of any minor-operated business shall be at least one hundred (100) feet from any lawfully existing eating and drinking establishment or other licensed business in the City, unless written permission is granted by the licensed business located within that distance.

    3.   Operations of any minor-operated business shall be at least fifty (50) feet from the established outer boundary of any City-permitted or licensed event where the sale of merchandise and food has been allowed.

    4.   Trash receptacles shall be provided by the minor-operated business and the owner/operator shall be responsible for keeping the area surrounding the business clear of any litter and properly cleaned.

    5.   Operations of any minor-operated business shall only be conducted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.

    B.   Minor-operated businesses are prohibited in the C, CB, I, OPR, and DR zone districts, and may not be allowed in those districts under any temporary or conditional use permit or by any other permit or license issued under this Code, unless the minor-operated business is part of a permitted public local event. (Ord. 2-2020 § 13)

 

17.20.128 Mobile home models and sales office in new mobile home parks or mobile home subdivisions.
    A.  In order to provide the owner of a new mobile home park or a new mobile home subdivision a temporary means of displaying and offering mobile home models for sale and location only within the park or subdivision and provide for the owner’s establishment of a temporary office to facilitate sales of such models, and to assure reasonable standards for the operation of mobile home sales offices which will accommodate the needs of the shopping public, while protecting the quiet and peaceable enjoyment of the residents of the mobile home park or mobile home subdivision, the owner of a new mobile home park or a new mobile home subdivision may apply for and receive authorization to establish a temporary mobile home sales office as a conditional use according to the process and approval criteria set forth in Chapter 17.23, Conditional Uses. Any mobile home sales office permitted as a conditional use shall be subject to the following additional restrictions and limitations:

    1.   Time Limits.

    a.   No mobile home sales office shall be operated for a period that is longer than two (2) years, beginning on the date the mobile home sales office is approved as a special review use.

    b.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, any mobile home sales office use authorized hereunder will terminate earlier than the expiration date of the two (2) year period provided for in Subsection (A)(1)(a) of this section if the mobile home park or mobile home subdivision in which such use was authorized is at least ninety percent (90%) occupied on a date that is earlier than the expiration date. In the case of a mobile home park, ninety percent (90%) occupancy will be achieved when at least ninety percent (90%) of the available spaces in that park are occupied by mobile homes which are occupied by residents. In the case of a mobile home subdivision, ninety percent (90%) occupancy will be achieved when at least ninety percent (90%) of the lots platted in the subdivision are occupied by mobile homes which are occupied by residents.

    2.   Number of Model Homes. The owner of a mobile home park or subdivision may establish, maintain, offer for sale or permit others to establish, maintain and offer for sale model mobile homes within such owner’s park or subdivision. The number of model homes within a mobile home park or mobile home subdivision, including any mobile home used as a sales office, shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the total number of spaces or lots in the park or subdivision. Model homes are mobile homes set up in the park or subdivision which are offered for sale and location only in the park or subdivision.

    3.   Location of Sales Office. A mobile home sales office may be established either in a model mobile home or in a permitted accessory building located within the park or subdivision.

    4.   Compliance with All Applicable Codes and Regulations. Any mobile home used as either a mobile home sales office or a model home must be installed in complete accordance with the requirements of Subsection 17.20.135(D), Standards for Mobile Home Installation and Placement, and shall be connected to all utilities before it may be used for such purpose. Any applicable setbacks or separation standards established for the park or subdivision shall be met when placing any mobile home. The owner shall also be responsible for compliance with all other applicable City, County and State laws, codes and regulations. No model home shall be established in any mobile home park or mobile home subdivision, and no mobile home sales office shall be open for business of any sort, until all infrastructure improvements required to be established within such mobile home park or mobile home subdivision have first been constructed and approved by the City Engineer and, where appropriate, dedicated to and accepted by the City.

    5.   Handicap Accessibility. Any structure used as a mobile home sales office, whether it is an accessory building or a model mobile home, shall meet the standards for handicap accessibility, as set forth in the most current version of the International Building Code adopted by the City.

    6.   Hours of Operation. In order to protect the peaceable enjoyment of the residents of the park or subdivision, the hours of operation of any mobile home sales office within any park or subdivision shall be limited to from eight a.m. to eight p.m.

    7.   Limitation on Location of Mobile Homes After Sale. Any approval of a mobile home sales office within a mobile home park or mobile home subdivision shall be for the limited purpose of permitting a means for the owner to fill available spaces or lots within a new park or new subdivision where the sales office is located. It is unlawful for any person, who occupies, uses or conducts business in a mobile home sales office, or who is authorized to occupy, use or conduct business in a mobile home sales office, to sell, offer for sale, or to take or receive orders for the sale or purchase of any mobile home, including but not limited to model mobile homes, that will be delivered or placed anywhere other than in the mobile home park or mobile home subdivision where the mobile home sales office is located. For purposes of this section, “person” means and includes, but is not limited to, owners of mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions and their employees, agents, licensees and invitees.

    8.   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to issue orders for the immediate closure of any mobile home sales office that is or was used or otherwise operated in violation of Subsection (A)(7) of this section or that is being used by any person who has violated Subsection (A)(7) of this section. It is unlawful for any person to continue operating or to allow the continued operation of a mobile home sales office following the Zoning Administrator’s issuance of an order pursuant to this Subsection (A)(8), but the owner of any mobile home park or mobile home subdivision who is affected by any such order shall have the right to a hearing before the board of adjustment, if such hearing is requested in writing within ten (10) days following the date the Zoning Administrator’s order was served upon such owner. Service shall be in any manner permitted by the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. Any hearing requested pursuant to this section shall be conducted at a regular or special meeting of the Board of Adjustment. The sole issue at any hearing conducted pursuant to this subsection shall be whether the restrictions of Subsection 17.20.128(A)(7) were violated. It shall not be a defense that the owner of the mobile home park or mobile home subdivision did not know or was otherwise unaware that Subsection (A)(7) of this section had been or was being violated. Following any such hearing, the Board of Adjustment may direct the Zoning Administrator to rescind the closure order only if the applicant has proven by a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing that a violation of Subsection 17.20.128(A)(7) did not occur or is satisfied that a subsequent violation is not likely to occur.

    9.   Signs. The following signs shall be permitted in conjunction with the lawful operation of a mobile homes sales office within a mobile home park or subdivision:

    a.   Mobile Home Sales Office. One sign, not exceeding ten (10) square feet in area and five (5) feet in height, and mounted on the wall of the structure or within ten (10) feet of the structure and at least five (5) feet from any interior roadway;

    b.   Model Mobile Homes. One sign per model unit, not exceeding five (5) square feet in area and five (5) feet in height, and mounted on the wall of the structure or within ten (10) feet of the structure and at least five (5) feet from any interior roadway;

    c.   No sign shall be permitted in any mobile home park or mobile home subdivision which is found to create a vision clearance obstruction in violation of Subsection A of Section 17.20.200, Vision clearance.

    B.   No owner of a new mobile home park or mobile home subdivision shall have a right to open, use, authorize the use of or otherwise operate a mobile home sales office within that owner’s park or subdivision unless and until such owner has been permitted to do so pursuant to this section.

    C.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize any owner of any mobile home park to establish a mobile home sales office or place mobile homes within a new mobile home park until such mobile home park is authorized to open by the Zoning Administrator in accordance with all other applicable requirements of Title 17 of the Cañon City Municipal Code. (Ord. 2-2013 § 6; Ord. 17-2011 § 4; Ord. 4-2002 § 2; Ord. 1-1998 § 11; Ord. 4-1997 § 3)

 

17.20.130 Mobile homes and recreational vehicles (RVs)—Storage and temporary use.
    A.  Except as provided for in Subsections B, C, and D of this section, no mobile home shall be parked or stored on any lot within any residential zone district within the City, except in a mobile home park or mobile home subdivision in compliance with applicable setback requirements. No mobile home or recreational vehicle shall be used as an accessory building in any residential zone district. Mobile homes may be parked or stored in the C, General Commercial or I, Class 1 Industrial zone districts, but may not be used for sleeping or housekeeping purposes, or for the conducting of any business, profession, occupation or trade therein or therefrom other than as a sales office for a mobile home dealer which has been approved as a conditional use pursuant to Chapter 17.23, Conditional Uses, of this title and Section 17.20.128 of this chapter.

    B.   One mobile home or one recreational vehicle (RV) may be used in any residential district within the City on a temporary basis for occupancy, for a period of time not to exceed six (6) months, only during the construction of a permanent home on the lot upon which the mobile home or recreational vehicle is to be placed, upon approval of the Building Official and upon the issuance of a conditional use permit by the Zoning Administrator, according to the policies and procedures set forth in Chapter 17.23, Conditional Uses, which permit shall be subject to the following terms and conditions:

    1.   Hookup to permanent utility services is required for any mobile home used as a temporary dwelling;

    2.   Any recreational vehicle used as a temporary dwelling must be entirely self-contained, unless hookup to permanent utility services is available on the site;

    3.   All setbacks otherwise required for the zoning district in question shall be met;

    4.   Installation and skirting shall be required for any mobile home used as a temporary dwelling, as provided for in Section 17.20.135(C);

    5.   The placement of the mobile home shall not violate the provisions of the floodplain regulations of the City;

    6.   The Building Official may grant an extension of time if, in his or her opinion, the construction is being diligently pursued to completion and the request for an extension of time is reasonable. The mobile home or recreational vehicle shall be removed immediately upon the completion of construction of the permanent residence or upon the expiration of the time period allowed herein or the specific period of time allowed under an extension granted by the Building Official.

    C.   A mobile home may be used for educational purposes for a period of time not to exceed two (2) years, in conjunction with an existing educational facility, upon the approval of the Building Official and subject to the terms and conditions set forth in Subsection B of this section.

    D.  A mobile home and/or construction trailer may be used exclusively as a sales center for residential housing in approved PDD and/or PUD zone districts, provided that said mobile home and/or construction trailer complies with the following:

    1.   The allowed time period shall not exceed twenty-four (24) months;

    2.   The sales center shall only be located on a vacant lot, and must be relocated if construction of a permanent structure begins on said lot;

    3.   Such structure shall meet all necessary building code requirements; and

    4.   The home builder/developer and/or representative shall be required to submit a Building Permit Application with Site Plan to obtain a building permit prior to installation of the structure.

    E.   In commercial and industrial zone districts one mobile home or one recreational vehicle (RV) may be used as a temporary on-site construction trailer/office only through approval of the Building Official and only for such reasonable period of time as determined by the official. The mobile office or recreational vehicle shall be removed immediately upon the completion of the project or upon the expiration of the time period allowed herein or the specific period of time allowed under an extension granted by the Building Official.

    F.   In commercial and industrial zone districts one mobile home or one recreational vehicle (RV) may be used on a temporary basis for occupancy during the construction of an approved Watchman’s Quarters, for a period of time not to exceed six (6) months and upon the approval of the Building Official. The Building Official may grant an extension of time if, in his or her opinion, the construction is being diligently pursued to completion and the request for an extension of time is reasonable. The mobile home or recreational vehicle shall be removed immediately upon the completion of construction of the Watchman’s Quarters or upon the expiration of the time period allowed herein or the specific period of time allowed under an extension granted by the Building Official. (Ord. 2-2019 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 15-2013 § 6; Ord. 2-2013 § 7; Ord. 4-2002 § 3; Ord. 1-1998 § 8; Ord. 25-1991 §§ 10, 14)

 

17.20.135 Mobile home parks.
    It is intended that the requirements for a mobile home park shall be such that the quality of an adjoining neighborhood is not detrimentally affected by the adjacent location of a mobile home park. A complete and comprehensive site and development plan shall be submitted detailing all aspects of the proposed mobile home park, including, but not limited to, improvement plans for streets, vehicle parking, sidewalks, utilities and drainage of the site, location of each rental pad, with maximum size mobile it will accommodate noted, and location of all permanent structures and common facilities. These plans must be approved by the appropriate City staff. No mobile home shall be placed in any new park under development or extension of existing park under development until all required improvements are in place. All additions to and extensions of existing as well as new parks within the city shall be governed by the following regulations.

    A.  Application Requirements and Procedures. Any person wishing to establish a mobile home park, or expand an existing park, shall make application to do so, on forms provided in the office of Planning and Zoning, and shall pay a fee as set forth in Section 17.44.040, Schedule of fees. Such application shall include a plat of the proposed mobile home park, along with all required supporting documentation. It is unlawful for any property owner or developer to place, or allow to be placed, any mobile home on any parcel of land to be developed as a mobile home park unless and until the application, plat, and other accompanying documents have been approved, and the plat has been recorded in the office of the Clerk and Recorder of Fremont County and the required infrastructure has been installed and approved.

    1.   The plat of a mobile home park shall contain the following items:

    a.   Detailed layout, drawn to a scale of one inch equals one hundred (100) feet, unless larger scale is necessary, illustrating the location of all rental spaces, public and private roadways and driveways, sidewalks, parking areas, permanent structures, accessory buildings, open space and other features;

    b.   A typical mobile home rental space layout, illustrating the placement location of the mobile home, mobile home rental pad, building setbacks, location and size of off-street parking pad, accessory buildings and utility placement;

    c.   Name of mobile home park in letters one inch or more in height;

    d.   Subheading, showing the location of the property (lot, block and subdivision or quarter section, section, township and range), in Cañon City, Fremont County, Colorado;

    e.   Legal description, including acreage;

    f.    A separate statement of setback requirements;

    g.   Signature blocks for City Engineer, City Planner and owner;

    h.   Notary blocks for acknowledgment of signature of owner;

    i.    Statement of recordation of plat by the Fremont County Clerk and Recorder;

    j.    Vicinity map drawn to a scale of one inch equals one thousand (1,000) feet or one inch equals five thousand (5,000) feet;

    k.   Scale and north arrow;

    l.    Location and principal dimensions of all existing or proposed easements, water course boundaries, public utilities, monuments, pins, benchmarks, one hundred (100) year floodplain and other significant features; and

    m.  Surveyor’s statement, signature and seal.

 

    2.   Supporting documentation shall consist of the following:

    a.   A current policy of title insurance, showing the name of the owner of the land and all other persons who have an interest in, or an encumbrance on the property described on the plat;

    b.   Existing topography of site, at two (2) foot contours;

    c.   An overlot grading and drainage plan;

    d.   A utility plan, showing the existing and proposed location of water, sewer, natural gas, electricity, telephone and cable television;

    e.   A plan and profile drawing of all interior private and/or abutting public street and sidewalk layout and design, showing typical street cross sections;

    f.    The design and proposed surface treatment of all mobile home rental pads;

    g.   Stormwater runoff computations and detention basin design;

    h.   Compliance with all floodplain development regulations, if applicable;

    i.    Landscaping, screening and fencing plans;

    j.    Fire protection plan.

    B.   Design Standards for Mobile Home Parks.

    1.   Mobile Home Rental Spaces. Rental spaces within a mobile home park shall be clearly delineated, and shall include a rental pad for the placement of a single-wide or double-wide mobile home, and areas for required parking spaces, walkways, patios and open yard area. Rental spaces shall be designed as single-wide or double-wide spaces. All mobile home rental spaces shall be equipped with hookups for utilities to include domestic water, sanitary sewer, electricity, natural gas, telephone and cable television (optional). At least one outside water spigot shall be provided on each rental space.

    2.   Mobile Home Rental Pads. A rental pad shall be provided on each mobile home rental space. Rental pads shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the maximum length and width of the mobile home to be placed upon it, and shall be so located within the rental space to allow compliance with all setback requirements, especially in relation to the placement of porches, decks, carports, garages or other additions. Surfacing of the rental pad shall be a minimum of: (a) twelve (12) inches of gravel compacted to ninety-five percent (95%) standard proctor density; (b) eight (8) inches of compacted gravel under two (2) inches of asphalt mat; or (c) five (5) inches of concrete on compacted native material. The use of asphalt or concrete as the surfacing material shall require the approval of the City Engineer. The cost of providing compaction tests shall be payable by the developer. The rental pad shall be constructed in conformance with the approved grading plan. The hookups for utilities (domestic water, sanitary sewer, electricity, natural gas, telephone and cable television) shall be permanently installed within the rental pad area to facilitate an orderly connect/disconnect of the utilities to/from the mobile home unit.

    3.   Yard and Bulk Requirements. Yard and bulk requirements for mobile homes, extensions and additions thereto, porches, decks, patios, carports and garages, and accessory structures shall be as outlined in Subsection 17.12.110(C)(1) of this title.

    4.   Streets, Roadways and Parking Areas. Improvements to abutting public rights-of-way and neighboring off-site rights-of-way shall be as required during the review process for the mobile home park. These improvements may include, but not be limited to, street surfacing, sidewalks, curb and gutter, water mains, sewer mains, and drainage structures. Interior streets within the mobile home park shall be considered private streets, and shall have at least one direct access to an abutting public right-of-way. Parks with more than fifty (50) rental spaces shall have one or more additional access points to an abutting public right-of-way. The following street widths and associated off-street parking space requirements shall be provided for any interior street:

    a.   Parking both sides: thirty-six (36) feet (one off-street parking space per rental space);

    b.   Parking one side: thirty (30) feet (two (2) off-street parking spaces per rental space);

    c.   No on-street parking: twenty-four (24) feet (two (2) off-street parking spaces per rental space, plus one space per two (2) rental spaces for visitors);

    Parking spaces within a mobile home park shall meet the standards as set forth in Section 17.28.060, Dimensional standards, of this title. The surface of interior streets and parking spaces shall comply with the surfacing requirements as set forth in Subsection 17.28.070(A) of this title.

    5.   Recreational Vehicle and Equipment Storage. Recreational vehicle and equipment storage space shall be provided at the rate of one hundred (100) square feet per mobile home rental space and in such a manner as to not distract from the orderly appearance of the residential atmosphere.

    6.   Sidewalks. Sidewalks, a minimum width of three (3) feet, shall be provided adjacent to all interior streets. The sidewalk may be so constructed as to provide a curb alongside the street surfacing or may be placed adjacent to a standard curb and gutter. Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete, four (4) inches minimum thickness, over a four (4) inch thick compacted granular material base.

    7.   Water System. Water main improvements in abutting public rights-of-way shall be as required during the review process for the mobile home park and shall be installed in compliance with applicable City specifications. A master meter generally located in the public right-of-way at the property line shall serve the water system inside the mobile home park. In situations where a six (6) inch water main is installed to serve fire hydrants located within the park, a smaller private water main may be connected to the six (6) inch fire main to provide the domestic water to the mobile home rental spaces. A master meter shall be installed where the smaller main is connected to the larger main. Private meters for the individual services are optional, but may be used only after obtaining City Council approval.

    8.   Sanitary Sewer System. Sanitary sewer service must be connected to a Fremont Sanitation District public sewer main. The interior sewer system to serve each mobile home rental space shall be approved by the Fremont Sanitation District.

    9.   Stormwater Management. A stormwater management plan shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer to address the stormwater runoff from the mobile home park. In most cases, an on-site stormwater detention facility will be required. An overlot grading plan must be submitted to show that each rental pad will be adequately drained.

    10. Area Lighting. Lighting shall be provided with a minimum of 0.3 footcandles on all driveways and walks. Street lights shall be provided as required during the review process.

    11. Addressing. Each mobile home park shall have a designated street address, which shall appear on the sign identifying the park (see Section 17.30.070, Signs in residential districts). Within the park, each mobile home rental space shall be clearly identified with space numbers placed on the manufactured home. Such numbers shall be not less than two and one-half (2 1/2) inches in height and shall be so marked as to be distinctly and easily read from the abutting street.

    12. Refuse Disposal. The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in a mobile home park shall be so conducted as to control odors, rodents, insects, accidents, fire hazard, air pollution or other nuisance conditions.

    a.   Durable, washable and nonabsorbent metal or plastic containers with tight-fitting lids shall be provided at each mobile home rental space or at a central storage area conveniently located not more than two hundred (200) feet from any mobile home rental space. Refuse containers shall be provided at a rate of at least one thirty (30) gallon (four (4) cubic feet) container for each mobile home rental space or an equivalent storage capacity in centralized storage facilities. Any such centralized facility shall be screened from the public view.

    b.   The number of containers used and the frequency of collection shall be sufficient to prevent overfilled containers. Refuse shall be routinely collected and removed from the premises not less than once weekly. Refuse shall be disposed of at a lawful disposal site in accordance with the requirements of the Colorado Solid Waste Disposal Sites and Facilities Act.

    C.   Licensing, Management and Operation.

    1.   Licensing Requirements. No person shall operate or maintain within the city any mobile home park without first securing from the City Clerk a license for the same according to the provisions set forth in Chapter 5.34, Mobile Home Parks, of the Municipal Code.

    2.   Management and Operation.

    a.   Each mobile home park shall be under the direct management of the owner or lessee, or his or her agent or representative. Such person shall operate the park from an office located on the grounds, in which office shall be maintained all registration records and in which there shall be displayed the license for such mobile home park.

    b.   It shall be the duty of the manager of each mobile home park:

    i.    To prohibit the placing or storage of unsightly materials or vehicles of any kind on the premises;

    ii.   To provide a registration book and keep a complete daily record of the names and addresses of the occupants of each mobile home admitted to the park and the mobile home serial number, and shall furnish copies thereof to the Chief of Police upon demand, and the same shall be subject to inspection by any State, County, City Police or Code Enforcement Officer;

    iii.  To take such other measures as may be deemed necessary by the Administrator to preserve the health, comfort and safety of all persons in the park and of the general public.

    3.   Inspection Authority — License Revocation. All proper officers of the City shall have access to each mobile home park at all reasonable times to inspect the same and ascertain whether this chapter is being complied with. If any person operating a mobile home park shall fail to maintain the same in a safe and sanitary condition, or maintains and operates it contrary to the requirements and regulations set forth in the ordinances of the City, or contrary to the requirements and regulations herein set forth, it shall be the duty of the City Administrator, with approval of the City Council, to revoke such mobile home park license.

    D.  Standards for Mobile Home Installation and Placement.

    1.   A Mobile Home Placement and Skirting Permit shall be obtained prior to, or upon delivery of, any mobile home. The fee for such permit shall be as set forth in Section 17.44.040 of this title.

    2.   All mobile homes shall be installed and anchored in accordance with applicable state law. (See the State of Colorado Mobile Home Installation Program, Part 31 of Article 32, Title 24, Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended, and Resolution No. 37 of the Colorado State Housing Board.)

    3.   The frame, axles, wheels, crawl space, storage area and utility connections of all mobile homes shall be concealed from view by skirting. Skirting shall be of durable all-weather construction as manufactured specifically for the purpose of covering the under-carriage area of the mobile home; or as required by the FHA-VA agencies when that type of financing is in place; or as approved by the Code Enforcement Officer as equal to or better than above. All skirting shall have adequate ventilation provided.

    4.   Mobile home park owners and managers shall notify the City prior to any mobile home placement within their facility.

    5.   The owner of a mobile home shall request a placement inspection at the time of the installation of the mobile home, and a skirting inspection within sixty (60) days of the placement of the unit, and shall be responsible for compliance with all other applicable City, State and County laws, codes and regulations. (Ord. 17-2011 § 18; Ord. 4-2002 § 4; Ord. 1-1998 § 9)

 

17.20.140 Outdoor retail sales.
    A.  “Outdoor retail sales” is defined at Section 17.08.010 of this Code.

    B.   Outdoor retail sales may be sales from nonpermanent structures, including motor vehicles, trailer coaches, carts and other temporary sales structures, as well as sidewalk sales in the one hundred (100) foot right-of-way of Main Street conducted by established businesses.

    C.   The use of outdoor retail sales shall be specifically limited by the zoning action of the City Council to identify the maximum number of temporary sales structures or vehicles or total square footage of the subject property which may properly be used for outdoor retail sales.

    D.  There shall be no more than one temporary sales structure or vehicle per two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of vacant lot area.

    E.   The Council shall consider the nature of the property and proposed use which is the subject of the request for outdoor retail sales, which consideration shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

    1.   The nature of surrounding uses;

    2.   Provisions regarding safe and adequate vehicular and pedestrian traffic flow and parking;

    3.   Any appropriate limitation as to hours of operation or days of operation;

    4.   Any regulations regarding signage;

    5.   Any necessary actions required of the applicant to minimize the effects of dust or noise on adjacent properties.

    F.   Existing retail establishments may conduct outdoor sales no more than one hundred fifty (150) days per year in conjunction with the current use of the properties without receiving special review, providing the existing conditions (lot area, parking and access, etc.) comply with the special criteria outlined in this section and a permit is obtained through the office of the City Administrator, excluding the provisions of Subsections (G)(1) and (G)(2) of this section.

    G.  The City Administrator is authorized to issue permits for the right to conduct outdoor retail sales on property which has been zoned to permit such activity so long as the application complies with each of the following criteria, which are established as the minimum criteria for outdoor retail sales:

    1.   Each permit shall be valid for thirty (30) days;

    2.   The maximum time limit for outdoor retail sales for any individual applicant during the permit period shall not exceed fifteen (15) days;

    3.   The special use permit granted pursuant to this section shall only be issued three (3) times in a calendar year to the same applicant;

    4.   A plan to address reasonably anticipated debris or litter problems;

    5.   The permit issued pursuant to this subsection shall be prominently displayed by the applicant on the sales structure or vehicle;

    6.   The applicant shall present proof of his or her acquisition of requisite sales tax licenses;

    7.   The permit issued by the City Administrator pursuant to this section shall be subject to revocation or nuisance abatement should the applicant fail to fully comply with the terms and conditions established as a basis of the approval of the temporary use, and shall be set forth in the application and ordinance authorizing the use.

    H.  Sidewalk sales in the central business district shall be authorized by the City Administrator based on the same criteria as other outdoor retail sales, insofar as the same are applicable. (Ord. 28-2010 § 11; Ord. 4-2009 § 3; Ord. 25-1991 §§ 11, 22)

 

17.20.145 Recreational vehicle (RV) parks.
    This use is intended to provide commercial rental parking spaces and sites for recreational vehicles (RVs), including motor homes, travel trailers, pick-up campers and tent trailers; to provide goods and services customarily needed by occupants of the park; and to assure reasonable standards for the development of facilities for the occupancy of recreational vehicles on a temporary basis, ranging from short overnight stops to longer destination-type stays of several days to weeks. All recreational vehicle (RV) parks within the City of Cañon City shall be governed by the following regulations:

    A.  Design Standards for Recreational Vehicle (RV) Parks.

    1.   Minimum Park Area. The minimum size of an RV park shall be three (3) acres.

    2.   Rental Space Size. Minimum rental space size for those spaces having utility hookups shall be one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet. Minimum rental space size for those spaces not having hookups shall be nine hundred (900) square feet. Minimum rental space size shall not include any area required for access roads, off-street parking, service buildings, recreation areas, office and similar RV park needs.

    3.   Rental Pads. A minimum of eighty percent (80%) of all spaces shall be equipped with a surfaced area of not less than ten (10) feet by forty (40) feet, containing hookups for water, sewer and electricity. Surfacing shall consist of gravel, asphalt or concrete. Where gravel surfacing is used, the design of the gravel pad shall be approved by the City Engineer to maintain proper drainage and minimize dust. Where provided, each RV unit shall be parked entirely on the surfaced area so that no part thereof obstructs any roadway or walkway within the RV park. Those spaces not equipped with such a surfaced area, intended for occupancy by recreational vehicles not having self-contained toilet, lavatory or bathing facilities, shall be equipped with a gravel pad, the design of which shall be approved by the City Engineer, of not less than ten (10) feet by twenty-five (25) feet for RV unit parking and a hookup for water. Spaces equipped with such a gravel pad shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total number of spaces in the RV park.

    4.   Setback Requirements. Each rental space shall meet the following setback requirements:

    a.   Fifty (50) feet when abutting a State or Federal highway or designated major arterial;

    b.   Twenty-five (25) feet when abutting a public right-of-way other than a above;

    c.   Fifteen (15) feet when abutting any property line other than a or b above;

    d.   There shall be a minimum distance of ten (10) feet provided between RV units parked side by side;

    e.   There shall be a minimum distance of ten (10) feet between RV units parked end to end;

    f.    There shall be a minimum distance of twenty (20) feet between any RV space and any building.

    5.   Streets. Streets or roadways and parking areas within the RV park shall be designed to provide safe and convenient access to all spaces and to facilities for common use by park occupants, and shall be constructed and maintained to allow free movement of emergency and service vehicles at all times, and shall be graded to drain and surfaced with gravel, asphalt or concrete, the design of which shall be approved by the City Engineer, to maintain proper drainage and minimize dust. All interior roadways shall be at least thirty-two (32) feet in width for two-way traffic, and at least eighteen (18) feet in width for one-way traffic. A forty-five (45) foot turning radius shall be required on all curves, to allow access by emergency vehicles. Any bridges within the development shall have a capacity of at least sixteen (16) tons, to allow access by emergency vehicles. Road grades shall not exceed six (6) percent. Access into the park from a public street shall meet the same design standards as those of the public street, for a distance of forty (40) feet from the property line into the development. All roadways and walkways within the park shall be adequately lighted at night, to provide safe access.

    6.   Frontage. All spaces shall have a minimum frontage of twenty (20) feet along an interior roadway.

    7.   Sanitary facilities. Every RV park shall be provided with one or more service buildings equipped with flush toilets, lavatories, showers and laundry facilities meeting minimum state Health Department standards. Such facilities shall be conveniently located at a distance of not more than three hundred (300) feet from any RV served. Such facilities shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in good working order. All such facilities shall be adequately lighted at all times of the day and night and shall be well ventilated. Portable fire extinguishers of a type approved by the Cañon City Fire Protection District shall be kept in the service buildings and at all locations designed by the fire district and shall be maintained in operating condition.

    8.   Sanitary disposal stations. Every RV park shall contain at least one sanitary disposal station for the sole purpose of removing and disposing of wastes from holding tanks in a clean, efficient and convenient manner.

    a.   Each sanitary station shall consist of a drainage basin constructed of impervious material, containing a disposal hatch and self-closing cover, and related washing facilities.

    b.   The disposal hatch of sanitary station units shall be connected to the sewage disposal system. Related facilities required to wash holding tanks and the general area of the sanitary station shall be connected to the RV park water supply system.

    c.   Each sanitary station shall have a sign posted stating “Danger—Not to be used for drinking or domestic purposes.”

    d.   Sanitary stations shall be approved by the state Department of Health.

    9.   Utilities. All utilities shall be placed underground.

    a.   Water supply. An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of water under pressure shall be provided in every RV park. The water supply system shall be designed, constructed and maintained in compliance with the state Health Department standards and applicable city, standards. All plans and specifications shall be submitted with the zoning or rezoning request. Each rental space equipped with sewer and electrical hookups shall also be equipped with two water outlets, to provide connection for the RV and a garden hose. All other rental spaces shall be equipped with one water outlet.

    b.   Sanitary sewer. A minimum of eighty percent (80%) of all rental spaces shall be equipped with a hookup to a public sewage system by way of a branch line and riser pipe at least four (4) inches inside diameter. The riser pipe shall be capped with a watertight cap or plug when not in use. Sanitary sewage systems shall be installed in compliance with the state Health Department standards and the rules and regulations of the Fremont Sanitation District or other such governing authority. All plumbing in the RV park shall comply with state and local plumbing laws and regulations.

    c.   Electricity. A minimum of eighty percent (80%) of all rental spaces shall be equipped with an electrical outlet supplying at least 110 volts, or 110/220 volts, installed in accordance with applicable state electrical codes.

    10. Refuse disposal. The storage, collection and disposal of refuse shall be performed so as to minimize accidents, fire hazards, air pollution, odors, insects, rodents or other nuisance conditions. All refuse shall be stored in durable, washable and nonabsorbent metal or plastic containers with tight-fitting lids. Such containers shall be provided at the rate of at least one thirty (30) gallon container, secured in a rack or holder, for each rental space, or an equivalent storage capacity in centralized storage facilities. Adequate refuse collection and removal shall be the responsibility of the park owner.

    11. Landscaping. A landscape plan, to be approved by the Superintendent of Parks and forestry of the City of Cañon City, shall be required for all RV parks. Landscaping shall be designed to perform the following functions:

    a.   Screen the RV park visually and audibly from adjacent properties as completely as possible;

    b.   Provide an attractive entrance and street frontage;

    c.   Provide dust and erosion control;

    d.   Provide a neat, attractive and aesthetically pleasing appearance.

    Grass and ornamental landscaping shall be required in all RV parks, together with adequate water outlets to maintain all landscaping. The RV park shall be screened from adjacent properties by means of fences or walls, six (6) feet in height, or by means of hedges or other landscaping.

    12. Open space. Open space for common areas, playgrounds and other recreational uses shall be provided at the rate of at least ten percent (10%) of the gross area of the RV park, and shall be of sufficient size and distribution as to be a functional part of the entire development plan. Open space shall not include any area designated as a roadway, RV rental space, storage area, swimming pool, yard area surrounding the caretakers or manager’s residence, or any area required for setbacks as set forth in Subsection (A)(4) of these regulations.

    13. Fire Protection. Fire hydrants shall be installed throughout all RV parks in accordance with the specifications of the Cañon City Fire Protection District. There shall be one hydrant at the entrance to the development, and additional hydrants at a distance not to exceed three hundred (300) feet between hydrants. All buildings within the RV park shall be equipped with fire extinguishing equipment in good working order of such type, size and number as prescribed by the fire district.

    14. Structural Additions. Temporary structures such as canvas awnings, screened enclosures, or platforms, which are normal camping equipment, may be erected but must be removed when the rental space is vacated. No other structural additions shall be built onto or become a part of any RV.

    15. Storage Sheds. No storage sheds shall be allowed within an RV rental space.

    16. Fires. Fires shall be made only in stoves and other equipment intended for such purposes and placed in safe and convenient locations, where they will not constitute fire hazards to vegetation, undergrowth, trees and RVs. No open fires are allowed.

    17. Tents. Tents shall be permitted, and their number shall be limited to one tent per rental space. Areas for group tent camping may be established, with the following provisions:

    a.   The area set aside for such group use is not a part of any designated open space;

    b.   An adequate number of parking spaces is provided;

    c.   The area is served by one or more water outlets; and

    d.   The area is located no further than three hundred (300) feet from a service building.

    18. Registration of Occupants. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or manager of the RV park to keep a current record of the names and addresses of the owners and/or occupants of each RV space, the make, model, year and license number of each RV and motor vehicle by which it is towed, the state, territory or country issuing such licenses, and the arrival and departure dates of each occupant. This record must be made available for inspection to all appropriate agencies whose duties necessitate acquisition.

    19. Swimming Pools. Swimming pools and natural swimming areas shall be operated, maintained and used in compliance with recommendations and requirements of the Colorado Department of Health’s Regulations and Standards Governing Swimming Pools and Swimming Areas.

    B.   Where Established. A recreational vehicle (RV) park may be established on any tract of land held in single ownership or unified control provided that the applicant shall show, and the Planning Commission and the City Council shall find:

    1.   That the site is in conformance with sound planning principles and the land use plan for that area, as set forth in the comprehensive plan;

    2.   That the site has an acceptable relationship to the major thoroughfare plan of the City, and is accessible to recreational vehicles without causing disruption to residential areas; and

    3.   That the proposed recreational vehicle park will not overload utility and drainage facilities.

    C.   Application Requirements and Procedures. The proponent of a recreational vehicle park, or an expansion thereof, shall make written application for special review for a recreational vehicle (RV) park, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.24, Uses Permitted by Special Review, and the following shall also be submitted with such application to the Planning Commission and City Council:

    1.   A complete and comprehensive development plan, including the following:

    a.   Detailed land use plan, drawn to a scale of 1″=100′, unless larger scale is necessary, including the dimensions and location of each RV rental space, service buildings, common and recreation areas, surrounding land uses and zoning districts;

    b.   Typical street cross sections;

    c.   Location and widths of roadways, sidewalks and pedestrian ways;

    d.   Topography of site, at two (2) foot contours;

    e.   Grading and drainage plans;

    f.    Utility plans;

    g.   Legal description of property, including acreage;

    h.   Copy of title commitment;

    i.    Landscaping, screening and fencing plans;

    j.    Fire protection plan;

    k.   Location and description of all permanent structures and common facilities;

    l.    Acreage and percentage of land to be set aside as open space;

    m.  Density of RV rental spaces per acre;

    n.   Vicinity map drawn to a scale of 1″=1,000′ or 1″=5,000′;

    o.   Location of all areas subject to inundation or storm water overflow and the location, area and direction of flow of all water courses, including the 100-year floodplain boundaries;

    p.   Location and principal dimensions of all existing or proposed easements, water course boundaries, public utilities, monuments, pins, benchmarks and other significant features;

    q.   Proposed surface treatment and design of all interior roadways and rental pads.

    2.   A listing of all names and addresses of all owners of property located, in whole or in part, within three hundred (300) feet of the property line;

    3.   A time schedule for development;

    4.   Information regarding abutting properties and land uses;

    5.   An application fee for special review, as set forth in Section 17.44.040 of this title;

    6.   A fee for establishing or expanding a recreational vehicle park, which shall be the same as that for expanding or establishing a mobile home park, as set forth in Section 17.44.040 of this title. (Ord. 2-1994)

 

17.20.146 Recyclables and donations collection station.
    A recyclable and donations collection station is a permitted use in the I zone district or may be approved in the C zone district as a conditional use, according to the policies and procedures set forth in Chapter 17.23, Conditional Uses. Such use, in either district, is subject to the following additional conditions:

 

    A.  A suitable receptacle of adequate size shall be provided for disposal of unusable items or trash and/or other debris.

    B.   The collection station shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, with all trash, broken glass, litter and other debris picked up and removed at least once weekly, or more frequently if necessary, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.

    C.   The collection station may be manned or unmanned. In either case, a sign shall be posted indicating contact information for the person or entity responsible for the collection station.

    D.  Bins, trucks or trailers used for collection of items shall be situated to provide convenient and safe access and maneuvering areas for motorists and others using the facility.

    E.   When bins, trucks or trailers become filled with donated items, they shall be promptly removed and/or emptied to prevent the overflow of donated items from becoming a nuisance, or a safety or health hazard, as determined by the Zoning Administrator. (Ord. 1-2015 § 4; Ord. 2-2013 § 4)

 

17.20.150 Renting of rooms.
    The renting of rooms to one person not a member of the family residing in the same dwelling unit may be permitted as an accessory use, provided the following conditions are met:

    A.  Quarters used by the roomers must not be more than one-third the total floor area of the dwelling units; and

    B.   The dwelling unit must have only one meter for each utility. (Ord. 25-1991 § 12)

 

17.20.160 Residences for elderly or developmentally disabled.
    Up to eight (8) person elderly homes and up to eight (8) person developmentally disabled homes shall be considered in terms of the stipulations in Colorado Revised Statutes 1973, Section 31-23-303(a) and (b). (Ord. 25-1991 § 13)

 

17.20.162 Sexually oriented business.
    All sexually oriented businesses shall be subject to the requirements and restrictions set forth in Chapter 5.42 of this Code, and applicable provisions of Colorado law. (Ord. 2-2013 § 4)

 

17.20.165 Shelter.
    Within general commercial and industrial zone districts, shelters shall be permitted only through Special Review. In addition to the approval criteria for Special Review set forth in Section 17.24.030, the applicant shall have the burden of proof to demonstrate that a probable need exists for the shelter in that portion of the city where the location is proposed. (Ord. 36-1992)

 

17.20.170 Screening.
    A.  In order to provide a transition between incompatible uses and to screen undesirable views, all commercial or industrial exterior service areas and outdoor storage yards, that are adjacent to existing or proposed residential property, the Highway 50, Highway 115 or Arkansas River corridors or where these activities are located adjacent to designated open space, shall be screened so as to provide visual and aural separation between these uses and the adjacent properties as described herein. Screening may include plant materials, earth berms, solid fencing or combinations thereof to achieve the desired result.

    B.   Salvage yards, where permitted, shall be screened with an opaque solid fence or earth berm to a height determined by the City Engineer as necessary to provide visual and aural separation between such use and adjacent areas.

    C.   All extractive industries, if and where permitted pursuant to this Code, adjacent to existing or proposed residential property, shall be screened by means of plant materials, earth mounding, or solid fencing at least eight (8) feet high to provide visual and aural separation between such use and adjacent areas.

    D.  Display lots which are used exclusively for storage of commercial goods intended for immediate retail sale or rent, including, but not limited to, the display lot of automobile, mobile home and farm implement dealers, landscaping stock and rental centers which display vehicles, equipment and product immediately able to perform the function or purpose for which it was originally intended, shall be exempt from screening requirements. All display lots shall be maintained free of weeds, debris, junk and trash. (Ord. 3-2018 §§ 3, 4; Ord. 3-2011 § 4; Ord. 25-1991 § 14; Ord. 11-1991 § 2)

 

17.20.180 Special events.
    A.  Special events to be conducted in whole or in part within the boundaries of the city, such as carnivals, street fairs, circuses, festivals, parades or similar events which shall be open for participation to the inhabitants of the City may be authorized and allowed in any zone district by the City Administrator.

    B.   The City Administrator shall authorize such special events by issuing a special events permit which shall contain at least the following:

    1.   A general description of the special event;

    2.   A description of the portions of the city where the special event is authorized to take place;

    3.   A designation of the group or organization to which the permit is issued;

    4.   A designation of the dates, times and hours during or upon which the special event is authorized;

    5.   A description of the street closures, if any, authorized by the City Administrator in connection with the special event and other provisions deemed appropriate with respect to the provision for safe and adequate vehicular and pedestrian traffic flow and parking associated with the conduct of the special event;

    6.   Such restrictions on signage as may be deemed appropriate by the City Administrator pursuant to the regulations in Chapter 17.30 of this Code;

    7.   The City’s requirements as to the cleanup within the city of litter and debris generated by the event;

    8.   Such other restrictions as are deemed necessary by the City Administrator in order to minimize any impact the event might have upon the inhabitants of the city and the neighborhoods within the city situated in proximity to the special event;

    9.   Such requirements as the City Administrator may deem appropriate regarding sales tax licenses for vendors who may be associated with the special event;

 

    10. Proof of general liability insurance in amounts deemed appropriate by the City Administrator;

    11. Requirements as to such cash, surety or other bond deemed necessary and appropriate by the City Administrator to ensure that property of the City affected by the special event will be cleaned to the reasonable satisfaction of the City and that damage associated with the conduct of the special event may be repaired and remedied without cost to the City;

    12. Such other requirements and restrictions as are deemed appropriate by the City Administrator which are intended to provide for the health, safety, comfort and convenience of the City and its inhabitants.

    C.   Applications for the special events permits described in the foregoing section shall be made on forms prescribed by the City Administrator which shall be made available at the City Administrator’s office.

    D.  The City Administrator shall have the discretion to refuse any application for a special event permit which is not made on the form prescribed by the City or which is made later than thirty (30) days prior to the date upon which the special event is to take place, and no application shall be considered complete unless all information required in the application is on such application at the time it is filed.

    E.   The City Administrator shall have the discretion in processing any application for a special event permit to request and consider the review and comments of the City Engineer, the Parks Director, the Chief of Police, the Director of Finance and the City Attorney. (Ord. 20-2017 § 4; Ord. 25-1991 § 15)

 

17.20.190 Swimming pools.
    A swimming pool may be permitted in any district as an accessory use, subject to the requirements of the current edition of the City-adopted building code, including, but not limited to, fencing and gate latches and the following requirements:

    A.  No public or private swimming pool may be located in any required front yard or side yard (setback area) abutting a street. (Ord. 15-2016 § 8)

 

17.20.200 Vision clearance.
    Vision clearance areas shall be provided with the following distance establishing the size of the vision clearance area:

    A.  In a residential district, at the intersection of two (2) streets the minimum distance shall be twenty-five (25) feet, or at the intersection of a street and an alley, ten (10) feet.

    B.   In all other districts, at the intersection of two (2) streets the minimum distance shall be fifteen (15) feet; or, at the intersection of a street and an alley, ten (10) feet; except, when the angle of intersection between streets is less than sixty (60) degrees, the distance shall be twenty-five (25) feet.

    C.   The planting, trimming, spraying, removal or destruction of street trees shall be handled in accordance with Chapter 5.52 of the Municipal Code. The need for and the extent of trimming or removal of bushes, trees or other plant growth within vision clearance zones is to be determined by the Police Department or Traffic Engineer on the basis of the obstruction creating a traffic hazard. (Ord. 15-2016 § 9)

 

17.20.205 Watchman’s quarters.
    A watchman’s quarters may be permitted as a conditional use upon issuance of a conditional use permit, according to the policies and procedures set forth in Chapter 17.23, Conditional Uses, and subject to the following condition:

    A.  Off-street parking shall be provided based on the parking requirements for a single-family dwelling, as contained herein. (Ord. 20-2014 § 5)

 

17.20.210 Yard exceptions.
    The following exception to the front yard requirements for dwellings abutting local streets, not including collector or arterial streets, is authorized for a lot in any district. If there are dwellings on both abutting lots with front yards of less than the required depth for the district, the front yard for the lot need not exceed the average front yard of the abutting dwellings. If there is a dwelling on one abutting lot with a front yard of less than the required depth for the district, the front yard for the lot need not exceed a depth one-half way between the depth of the abutting lot and the required front yard depth. (Ord. 25-1991 § 18)

 

17.20.220 Yard sales.
    A.  Definitions.

    1.   “Yard sale” shall have the meaning given to such term in Chapter 17.08.

    2.   “Residential premises,” for purposes of this section, means a lot or parcel, or contiguous group of lots or parcels containing, as the principal use thereon, one-unit, two (2)-unit or multiple unit dwellings, and includes all yards and structures on such lot, parcel or contiguous group of lots or parcels.

    3.   “Person” means and includes individuals, partnerships, voluntary associations, and corporations.

    B.   Limitations Applicable to Yard Sales. It is unlawful:

    l.    For any natural person to conduct a yard sale from any residential premises other than a residential premises owned or occupied by such natural person as his or her primary place of residence;

    2.   For any person that is not a natural person to conduct a yard sale from or on a residential premises unless such person shall have the prior written permission of the owner of the residential premises to conduct such yard sale;

    3.   For any residential premises to be used for more than three (3) yard sales in any calendar year;

    4.   For any yard sale to end later than forty-eight (48) consecutive hours after it began;

    5.   For any yard sale to be conducted at a time earlier than seven a.m. or later than six p.m.;

    6.   For any person conducting a yard sale to place or store any goods offered for sale or any item used to display any goods offered for sale on or within a public right-of-way or upon the real property of any person who is not conducting the yard sale without such person’s prior written consent;

    7.   For any sign associated with any yard sale to be displayed earlier than twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the beginning of the yard sale, or later than six p.m. on the final day of the yard sale.

    C.   Persons and Sales Excepted. The provisions of this section shall not apply to or affect the following persons or sales:

    1.   Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction;

    2.   Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials;

    3.   Any person selling or advertising for sale an item or items of personal property which are specifically named or described in the advertisement and which separate items do not exceed five (5) in number.

    D.  Other Lawful Sales Not Prohibited. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit any person who has obtained and maintains a valid sales tax license from the City from conducting sales and other business operations from any location in the city, provided that such sales and other business operations are conducted in conformity with all requirements of Title 17 of this Code and all other requirements of applicable law.

    E.   Violations—Penalties.

    1.   Any person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in an amount that is not less than fifty dollars ($50.00), nor more than the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010.

    2.   Whenever a violation occurs, it shall be appropriate to charge any violation of this section against the owner or owners of the residential premises upon and from which a yard sale is being conducted and to charge a person conducting a yard sale who is not an owner of the residential premises for the same violation when circumstances warrant. (Ord. 20-2017 § 5; Ord. 17-2013 § 59; Ord. 2-2013 § 8; Ord. 5-2002 § 3)

Chapter 17.23 CONDITIONAL USES
17.23.010 Intent and purpose.
    In order to provide flexibility and to help diversify uses within a zoning district, specified uses are permitted in certain districts subject to the granting of a conditional use permit. Because of their unusual or special characteristics, conditional uses require review and evaluation so that they may be located properly with respect to their effects on surrounding properties. The review process set forth in this chapter is intended to assure compatibility and harmonious development between conditional uses, surrounding properties and the City at large.

    Conditional uses are permitted within the zone district where designated when they comply with specific conditions and limitations as set forth herein to ensure that the location and operation of the conditional uses will be in accordance with the conditional use criteria. The scope and elements of any conditional use may be limited or qualified by the conditions applicable to the specific property. A listed conditional use that cannot meet the specific conditions and limitations set forth herein shall not be allowed under a conditional use permit. (Ord. 2-2013 § 1)

 

17.23.020 Approval authority.
    The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to hear and decide applications for conditional use permits for only such uses as this title allows, subject to the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2-2013 § 1)

 

17.23.030 Application and review procedure.
    A.  Pre-Application Conference. The applicant for a conditional use permit is advised to meet with the City Planner prior to submitting an application to discuss the submittal requirements and review process.

    B.   Application Submittal Requirements. An application for approval of a conditional use permit may by filed by any person having an interest in the property for which the conditional use is requested. The application must include:

    1.   Conditional use application form;

    2.   A map showing information deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator to determine compliance with the conditions and limits set forth herein, which might include the proposed development of the site, topography, building locations, parking, traffic circulation, usable open space, landscaped area, utilities, easements, drainage features, information regarding adjacent land uses, or other details necessary to demonstrate that the proposed use and site will conform with all applicable criteria, regulations and standards of the zone district in which they are located;

 

    3.   A written statement describing the precise nature of the proposed use and its operating characteristics and outlining how all conditional use review criteria will be satisfied;

    4.   A narrative description of the nature of the surrounding land uses and the general characteristics of the area as may be necessary to evaluate the proposed use;

    5.   Proof of ownership in the form of the most current deed or recent (dated not more than thirty (30) days prior to the submittal date) title insurance commitment or policy. If the applicant is not the property owner, a written statement signed by the owner that specifically authorizes the applicant to make the application shall also be provided;

    6.   A time schedule for development;

    7.   An application fee, as set forth in the schedule of fees in Section 17.44.040 of this title; and

    8.   Such other information as the Zoning Administrator may require to evaluate the request.

    C.   Application Certification of Completion. Within a reasonable period of time, the City Planner shall either certify the application is complete and in compliance with all submittal requirements or reject it as incomplete and notify the applicant of any deficiencies. Once an application has been certified to be complete, the applicant will be vested in the process, according to Section 17.04.090, Process Vesting, of this title.

    D.  Notice to Area Property Owners. The City Planner shall send information about the application to surrounding property owners within three hundred (300) feet of any boundary of the property covered by the application, utility companies and ditch companies, as may be applicable. At the City Planner’s discretion, other parties of interest and Fremont County may be notified. Those receiving notice shall be given a period of fifteen (15) days from the date of the notice to submit their written comments and/or concerns to the City Planner. All written comments will be addressed in the findings and decision of the Zoning Administrator.

    E.   Zoning Administrator Review. Following the expiration of the time afforded for neighboring property owners and others who receive notice of the request for conditional use permit to respond with comments, the City Planner shall prepare and submit a report to the Zoning Administrator explaining how the application is or is not consistent with the conditional use review criteria and attach to such report all written comments received by the City Planner prior to the delivery of the report to the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator will review the application, report and attachments and the established approval criteria and determine whether to issue the permit, with or without conditions, or deny the application. Such review may include a site visit by the City Planner and/or the Zoning Administrator.

    F.   Issuance of Conditional Use Permit. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the requested conditional use satisfies the approval criteria; complies with the applicable conditions and limitations set forth herein; and also complies with all other applicable standards for the applicable zone district, as set forth in Chapters 17.12 and 17.20 of this title, the Zoning Administrator shall issue the conditional use permit. The permit shall contain findings addressing all written comments received during the review process. The permit shall be denied if the Zoning Administrator determines that the requested conditional use does not comply with or otherwise satisfy the approval criteria set forth in this chapter, and that conditions and/or limitations cannot be imposed through the permit to ensure compliance. If an application for a conditional use permit is denied by the Zoning Administrator, such denial shall be in writing, and shall enumerate the grounds upon which the denial was based.

    G.  Appeals. Decisions of the Zoning Administrator granting, granting with conditions or denying conditional use permits may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment according to the process for the appeal of an administrative decision set forth in Chapter 17.36 of this title by any applicant or by any property owner or entity to whom notice pursuant to Subsection D was sent if that property owner submitted timely written comments before the Zoning Administrator’s decision was made. (Ord. 2-2013 § 1)

 

17.23.040 Approval criteria.
    A.  General Criteria. The conditional use permit shall be approved upon a finding by the Zoning Administrator that the following general criteria have been met, to the extent they may be applicable:

    1.   The site, building(s) and use meet all criteria specified for the use and all applicable regulations and development standards as specified in this title and for the zone district in which the use is located; however, nonconforming sites and/or buildings must be brought into conformance if required to do so pursuant to Chapter 17.32, Nonconforming Uses, Structures and Lots, of this title;

    2.   The proposed use will not substantially alter the basic character of the zone district in which it is located, or jeopardize the development or redevelopment potential of property within the zone district;

    3.   The proposed use will not have a significant adverse impact on the adjacent uses or properties, or result in hazardous conditions for pedestrians or vehicles within or in close proximity to the site;

    4.   The proposed use will conform with or further the goals, objectives and strategies of the City’s Comprehensive Plan;

    5.   The proposed use will be adequately served with public utilities, services and facilities and not impose an undue burden above and beyond those of the permitted uses of the zone district in which it is located;

    6.   Potential negative impacts of the conditional use on the surrounding properties have been or may be mitigated through specific setbacks, architecture, screen walls, landscaping, site arrangement or other methods required in the permit as conditions and/or limitations of permit approval. The applicant shall satisfactorily address each of the following impacts:

    a.   Traffic;

    b.   Activity levels;

    c.   Light;

    d.   Noise;

    e.   Odor;

    f.    Building type, style and scale;

    g.   Hours of operation;

    h.   Dust; and

    i.    Erosion control.

    B.   Use-Specific Criteria. In addition to the general criteria for approval of a conditional use permit listed above, certain uses, due to their unique characteristics, must also comply with the special provisions specific to those uses contained in Chapter 17.20, Supplementary Provisions and Design Requirements of this title. (Ord. 2-2013 § 1)

 

17.23.050 Conditions.
    Upon approval of the application, the Zoning Administrator may impose such conditions as may be necessary to assure compliance with the approval criteria. Conditions may include, but shall not be limited to, requirements for special setbacks, open spaces, fences or walls, landscaping or screening, right-of-way dedication and improvement, regulation of vehicular access and parking, signs, illumination, hours and methods of operation, control of potential nuisances, prescription of standards for maintenance of buildings and grounds, and prescription of development schedules. (Ord. 2-2013 § 1)

 

17.23.060 Permit transferability.
    A conditional use permit may be transferred to any other person to operate the same use on the same property and/or within the same building according to the same terms of the permit. A conditional use permit may not be transferred to any other property or other building. The transfer of a conditional use permit shall be in writing to the new owner or operator of the use, using a form provided or approved by the Zoning Administrator. Such transfer shall not be complete until a counterpart of the transfer document has been filed with the Zoning Administrator. (Ord. 2-2013 § 1)

 

17.23.070 Duration.
    A.  A conditional use permit shall remain in full force and effect as long as the use for which the permit was granted continues, or for the term specified on the permit.

    B.   The duration of a conditional use permit may be limited to a specific period of time if deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator to ensure that the proposed use will meet the purposes in Section 17.04.020 of this title for protection of the public health, safety and welfare or to meet the purposes of the zone district in which the conditional use is to be located. (Ord. 2-2013 § 1)

 

17.23.080 Revocation of permit.
    A.  The Zoning Administrator may revoke a conditional use permit upon finding that:

    1.   The use, building or site for which the permit was issued violates any of the approval criteria; or

    2.   The use, building or site for which the permit was issued violates any condition of approval set forth in the permit, as issued; or

    3.   The use established is materially different from that which was represented in the application and approved by the Zoning Administrator.

    B.   Prior to revoking any conditional use permit the Zoning Administrator shall issue a Notice of Pending Revocation to the permit holder. The notice shall:

    1.   State the grounds upon which the permit could be revoked;

    2.   Direct the permit holder to appear at a hearing before the Zoning Administrator to show cause why the permit should not be revoked;

    3.   State the date, time and place for the show cause hearing, which date shall be not sooner than ten (10) days from the date the notice is mailed to or otherwise served upon the permit holder in any manner permitted under the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure;

    4.   Advise the permit holder that the permit will be revoked if the permit holder fails to appear for the hearing or if the permit holder appears for the hearing but fails to show cause why the permit should not be revoked.

    C.   Following the conclusion of any hearing set pursuant to the provisions of this Section 17.23.080, the Zoning Administrator shall issue the Zoning Administrator’s written findings and decision and mail to or otherwise serve a copy of such findings and decision upon the permit holder.

    D.  The permit holder will have thirty (30) days from the date of mailing or other service of such written findings and decision to appeal a decision revoking the permit to the Board of Adjustment as an appeal of an administrative decision. (Ord. 2-2013 § 1)

 

17.23.090 Termination.
    A conditional use permit shall automatically terminate without any further action by the City under the following circumstances:

    A.  The use for which the permit was granted has not been established at the approved location within a period of one year from the date the permit was issued;

    B.   The use for which the permit was issued has been discontinued for a period of one year or longer;

    C.   The term for which the permit was issued has expired. (Ord. 2-2013 § 1)

Chapter 17.24 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL REVIEW
17.24.010 Purpose.
    Although each zoning district is primarily intended for a predominant type of use (such as dwellings in residential districts), there are a number of uses which may or may not be appropriate in a particular district depending upon, for example, the location, nature of the proposed use, character of surrounding development, traffic capacities of adjacent streets, and potential environmental effects. These factors may dictate that the circumstances of development should be individually reviewed. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide review of such uses so that the community is assured that they are compatible with their locations and surrounding land uses and will further the purposes of this title. (Prior code § 17.12.010)

 

17.24.020 Application—Contents and processing.
    A.  An application for approval of a special review use may be filed by a person having an interest in the property for which the special review use is requested. The application must include:

    1.   A complete site plan showing the major details of the proposed development, consisting of the following: Location of buildings and structures, off-street parking areas, off-street loading areas, service and refuse areas, means of ingress and egress, major landscaping or screening proposals, and pedestrian areas;

    2.   A time schedule for development;

    3.   Such other information as the Planning Commission shall by written rule require;

    4.   Pertinent information about abutting property and uses needed in evaluating the proposed use;

    5.   Any other information the applicant believes will support his or her request; and

    6.   An application fee, as set forth in the schedule of fees in section 17.44.040 of this Code.

    B.   The City Planner will notify owners of properties located within three hundred (300) feet of the subject property line by regular mail that a special review use application has been filed and that they may review the application at the office of the City Planner during regular office hours. Such written notice also shall advise such owners of the fact that a public hearing will be held before the City Council at a later date. Additional notice of the public hearing before City Council shall be given in accordance with the requirements of Subsection (F) of this section.

    C.   The Planning Commission shall review the application and submit an advisory report to the City Council within thirty (30) days of the filing of a complete application. The applicant will be furnished a copy of such report. The date of filing shall be deemed to mean the date on which the application is first brought before the Planning Commission in open meeting following receipt of same by the planning staff.

    D.  The advisory report provided for in this chapter shall contain the recommendation of the Planning Commission that the application be granted in whole or in part, with or without modifications or conditions, or denied. The report shall set forth conclusions and findings of fact related to the specific proposal and shall set forth with specificity in what respects the special review use is or is not consistent with the standards and criteria of Section 17.24.030.

    E.   On all special review uses referred to the City Council, the Council, after giving notice, shall hold a public hearing. The Council shall, within forty-five (45) days of the public hearing, or within such time as is mutually agreed by the City Council and the applicant, either grant the application, in whole or in part, with or without modifications and conditions, or deny the application. The decision of the City Council shall consist of a written report setting forth conclusions and findings of fact related to the specific proposal and shall set forth with specificity in what respects the special review use is or is not consistent with the standards and criteria of Section 17.24.030. A copy of such report shall be furnished to the applicant without delay and additional copies shall be made available at the City Clerk’s office for other interested persons.

    F.   Whenever notice is required for a public hearing before the City Council for the purpose of considering a special review use application, such notice shall be posted on a sign provided by the City at a prominent location on the property for a period beginning at least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing and ending on the day following the public hearing. Notice also shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the City at least fifteen (15) days prior to such public hearing. Such posted and published notices shall indicate the time, date and place of the hearing and shall identify the proposed special review use and its proposed location.

    G.  Any person applying to the courts for a review of any decision made under the terms of this section shall apply for review within thirty days after the date of decision and shall be required to pay the cost of preparing a transcript of proceedings and the application for review shall be in the nature of certiorari under Rule 106(a)(4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. (Ord. 15-2016 § 10; Ord. 23-2007 §§ 1, 2; prior code § 17.12.030)

 

17.24.030 Approval criteria.
    A.  No special review use application shall be approved unless the City Council finds that the application:

    1.   Complies with all requirements imposed by this chapter and with all applicable written rules and by the Planning Commission;

    2.   Is consistent with the purposes of this title as declared in Section 17.04.020; and

    3.   Is designed to be compatible with surrounding land uses and the area of its location.

    B.   In considering an application for a special review use, the City Council shall consider and may impose modifications or conditions concerning, by way of illustration, the following development features to the extent such modifications or conditions are deemed necessary:

    1.   Size and location of site;

    2.   Internal traffic circulation and access to adjoining public streets;

    3.   Location and amount of off-street parking;

    4.   Fencing, screening and landscaped separations, including open space;

    5.   Building bulk and location; and

    6.   Noise, vibration, air pollution and other environmental influences.

    C.   In addition to the findings required in Subsection A of this section, and the considerations specified in Subsection B of this section, no recreational vehicle (RV) park shall be permitted pursuant to this chapter unless the requirements of Section 17.20.145 have also been complied with. (Ord. 4-1994; Ord. 2-1994; Ord. 25-1991 § 1)

 

17.24.040 Combining uses.
    Permitted uses and uses permitted by special review may be located in the same building or on the same lot. (Ord. 25-1991 § 21)

 

17.24.050 Property subject to special restrictions.
    Certain areas of the city, designated on the official zone map of Cañon City by an asterisk (*), are subject to special restrictions on use in addition to the regulations which apply to the zone district in which such areas are classified. Special area restrictions have been set either at the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter or subsequently through the special review process and are identified as follows in Table 17.24.050.

 

Table 17.24.050

Special Area Restrictions

Legal Description of Property

Zoning District Designation

Restrictions

A. The north 411.40 ft. of Block 7, Plat of South Cañon and S. 137 ft. of Block 7, Plat of South Cañon.

C, general commercial

All provisions of the general commercial district shall apply except that uses are restricted as follows:

Uses prohibited:

Retail businesses or personal services, including manufacturing as incidental to the preparation of articles to be sold on the premises (only where more than five persons are to be employed).

Tourist or cottage camp, public garage or motor vehicle repair shop, filling station.

B. Lots 11, 12 & 13, Block 8, Fairpark Subdivision, Sec. 5.

R-3, medium-high density residential (3 to 6 units per structure)

All other requirements apply except that permitted use is restricted to townhouse development.

C. A tract of land described as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the S. ROW (right-of-way) line of Bauer Lane with the W. ROW line of N. 15th St.; thence S. 120′; thence W. 430′; thence N 120′; thence E. 430′ to the point of beginning.

C, general commercial

All restrictions of the general commercial district apply except that permitted uses are restricted to medical-related commercial uses.

D. A tract of land described as follows: Beginning at a point 120′ S. of the intersection of the S. ROW line of Bauer Lane with the W. ROW line of N. 15th. St.; thence S. 77′; thence W. 430′; thence N. 77′; thence E. 430′ to the point of beginning.

C, general commercial

All restriction of the general commercial district apply except that permitted uses are restricted to medical-related commercial uses.

E. Lots 24 through 30, Block 1 and all of Block 9, Odd Fellows Subdivision; and the following tracts described by metes and bounds as follows: A tract of land in the NW¼ of Section 28, Township 18 South, Range 70 West of the 6th. PM; Beginning at a point 230 feet west and 650 feet south of the NE corner of the SE¼ NW¼ of said Section 28; thence N 0°47′00″ W, a distance of 203 feet; thence S 89°24′00″ W, a distance of 640.7 feet; thence S 0°47′00″ E, a distance of 203 feet; thence N 89°24′00″ E, a distance of 640.7 feet to the point of beginning. And a tract of land in the NW¼ of Section 28, Township 18 South, Range 70 West of the 6th. PM; Beginning at a point which is the intersection of the north ROW line of Phay Ave. and the west ROW line of 15th. St., said point being 650 feet south and 30 feet west of the NE corner of the SE¼ NW¼ of said Section 28; thence Westerly, along the north ROW line of Phay Ave., a distance of 200 feet; thence Northerly, parallel to the west ROW line of 15th. St., a distance of 203 feet; thence Easterly, parallel to the north ROW line of Phay Ave., a distance of 200 feet, to the west ROW line of 15th. St., thence southerly, along said west ROW line of 15th. St., a distance of 203 feet, more or less, to the point of beginning.

C, general commercial

All other requirement of the general commercial district apply except that permitted uses are restricted to medical-related commercial uses.

 

F. A tract of land in the NW¼ of Section 28, Township 18 South, Range 70 West of the 6th. PM; Beginning at the SE corner of Lot 28, Block 1, Oddfellows Subdivision; thence N 0º40′45″ W a distance of 251.75 feet to the NE corner of Lot 27, Block 1, Oddfellows Subdivision; thence along the south right-of-way line of Buckingham Circle, N 89°20′00″E, a distance of 150.0 feet; thence S 0°40′45″E, a distance of 251.75 feet to the north right-of-way line of Phay Ave.; thence S 89°24′00″ W a distance of 150.0 feet to the point of beginning.

C, general commercial

All other requirements apply except that permitted use is restricted to townhouse development.

 

G. Lots 22 and 23, Block 1, Chapman’s Addition to Cañon City.

C, general commercial

All requirements of the general commercial district apply except that permitted uses are restricted to personal services or professional offices.

 

H. All of that portion of Lot 7, Block 42, Fruitland Subdivision lying Westerly of Drake Drive and Southerly of Elizabeth Street.

C, general commercial

All provisions of the general commercial district shall apply, except that the users are to allow only mini storage and convenience stores, provided that there shall be no fuel sales.

 

I. The south 20 feet of Lot 6, all Lots 7 and 8, Block 5 and Lots 1 through 7, Block 8, Fairpark Subdivision, Section No. 3.

C, general commercial

Allowed uses shall be restricted to city, county, state and federal facilities, uses and buildings.

Construction of additions or alterations to any existing structure thereon shall be restricted as follows:

Minimum lot per principal structure—7000 square feet; Maximum lot coverage—40 percent; Maximum building height—40 feet; Minimum front setback—25 feet; Minimum side and rear setback—15 feet.

Parking and screening requirements shall be met as provided for in Chapter 17.28 of the Code of Cañon City.

 

J. See Schedule A set out below.

C, general commercial

All restrictions of the general commercial district apply except that permitted uses are restricted to medical-related commercial uses.

 

Schedule A

Beginning at a point on the West line of 15th. Street, said point being 650 feet South of, and 30 feet West of the Northeast corner of the SE¼ of the NW¼ of Section 28, Township 18 South of Range 70 West of the 6th. P.M.; thence South 00°47′ East along the said West line of 15th. Street a distance of 113.70 feet; thence South 16°43′ West along the said West line of l5th. Street a distance of 130.95 feet to a point on the Northerly right-of-way line of the Cañon City Hydraulic and Irrigation Ditch Company’s Ditch; thence along the said Northerly right-of-way line along the following six courses:

1. thence South 84°34′ West a distance of 72.20 feet;

2. thence South 74°17′ West a distance of 429.85 feet;

3. thence North 82°14′ West a distance of 166.43 feet;

4. thence South 78°44′ West a distance of 123.65 feet;

5. thence South 52°24′ West a distance of 516.60 feet;

6. thence South 74°44′ West a distance of 138.20 feet;

thence North 01º01′ West a distance of 29.00 feet; thence North 85°31′ East a distance of 59.00 feet to the Southwest corner of the said SE¼ of the NW¼; thence North 00°44′30″ West along the West line of the said SE¼ NW¼ a distance of 670.08 feet; thence North 89°24′ East a distance of 1298.75 feet to the point of beginning. Reserving, however, a uniform strip of ground 60 feet in width off, along and parallel to the North line of the aforesaid described premises for a roadway. Further reserving a uniform strip of ground 3 feet in width off, along and parallel to the North line of the aforesaid described roadway reservation for an irrigation ditch.

 

K. A tract of land in the SE¼ NW¼ of Section 28, T18S, R70W of the 6th. P.M., described as follows: Beginning at a point 330 feet West of the NE corner, thence South 200 feet, thence West 100 feet, thence North 200 feet, thence East 100 feet to the point of beginning.

C, general commercial

All restrictions of the general commercial district apply except that permitted uses are restricted to medical-related commercial uses.

 

L. A tract of land in the SE¼ NW¼ of Section 28, T18S, R70W of the 6th. P.M., described as follows: Beginning at a point 230 feet West of the NE corner, thence South 200 feet, thence West 100 feet, thence North 200 feet, thence East 100 feet to the point of beginning.

C, general commercial

All restrictions of the general commercial district apply except that permitted uses are restricted to medical-related commercial uses.

 

M. Lot 22, Block 30, Fruitmere Subdivision.

C, general commercial

Uses are limited to a vehicle parking lot or vehicle parking garage and all uses permitted in the R-2 zone district.

 

N. Beginning at the Southeast corner of S. Second Street and East Douglas Avenue, thence Easterly 247 feet; thence Southerly 200 feet; thence Westerly 247 feet; thence Northerly 200 feet to the point of beginning, in Section 32, Township 18 South, Range 70 West of the 6th P.M. (202 E. Douglas Avenue)

R-3, High Density Residential

The existing structure shall be converted into no more than four residential units.

 

 

Properties with Uses Permitted by Special Review

Legal Description of Property

Zoning District Designation

Uses Permitted by Special Review

1. All of Lots 7 and 9, Block 2, T. Macon’s Addition to the City of Cañon City.

R-3

Paved parking lot

2. Lots 10, 11, 12 and 13 in Catlin’s Addition to South Cañon.

R-2

School district bus maintenance garage

3. Beginning at the intersection of the West right-of-way line of 9th. Street and the North right-of-way line of Floral Avenue, thence North 120 feet, thence West 76 feet, thence South 120 feet, thence East 76 feet to the point of beginning.

R-2

Child care facility for applicant only

4. Lot 14, Harrison’s Subdivision of Cañon Gardens.

Commercial

Community bed facility

5. Beginning at a point 205.82 feet South and 3.00 feet East of the NW corner of Lot 1, Colorado Coal and Iron Company’s Cañon Gardens; thence South along the East line of 15th. Street, 100 feet to a point; thence East and parallel to the North line of said Lot 1, 134.84 feet to the Southerly extension of the centerline of a Common Wall between the existing garage and shed; thence North along the Southerly extension of the center of said Common Wall, the center of the Common Wall, and the Northerly extension of the centerline of the Common Wall, 100 feet to a point; thence West 134.16 feet, more or less, to the point of beginning.

Commercial

Up to eight-person elderly home

6. Lots numbered One (1), Two (2), Three (3), Four (4), Five (5), Six (6), Seven (7) Eight (8), Nine (9), Ten (10), Eleven (11), Twelve (12) and Thirteen (13), in Block numbered fifty-one (51), in H. and A. Rudd’s Addition to Cañon City, as shown on a plat of said addition on file and of record in the office of the County Clerk and Recorder of Fremont County, State of Colorado, except that portion of said lots numbered Eight (8) and Nine (9) conveyed to the City of Cañon City for the extension of 6th. Street by Deed recorded in Book 125 at page 274 of the Fremont County record, and all of the Southeast Quarter (SE¼) of the Southwest Quarter (SW¼) of the Southeast Quarter (SE¼) of Section Twenty-nine (29) in Township Eighteen (18) South, Range Seventy (70) West of the Sixth (6th.) P.M., excepting:

(i) a strip of land Two Hundred (200) feet wide throughout taken off of the east side thereof;

(ii) a strip of land Forty (40) feet wide throughout taken off of the north side thereof; and

(iii) a strip of land Forty (40) feet wide throughout taken off of the west side thereof.

R-2

Junior and senior high schools, including the boarding of students

7. Lot 5, Block 34, plat of the Town of Cañon City.

R-2

Paved parking lot

8. Lots I and 2, Sheridan’s Addition No. 5 to the City of Cañon City.

R-2

Preschool, not to exceed ten students

9. Lots 13, 14, and the West 19 feet of Lot 15, Block 7, Virginia Park Addition to the City of Cañon City (1010 North 10th. Street, Cañon City, Colorado).

R-2

An infant/toddler day care nursery

10. Lots 13, 15 and 17, Block 28, Fruitmere Subdivision.

Commercial

Addition of hallway, bedroom and family room onto private residence

11. Lots 7 and 8, Block 20, Cañon City.

Central business district

Two-story, four-unit apartment building, on 10,560 square feet

12. Lot 7, Block A, Replat No. 2, Odd Fellows Subdivision, Cañon City.

R-4

Fire station

13. Lots numbered One (1), Two (2), Three (3), Four (4), Five (5), Six (6), Seven (7), Eight (8), Nine (9), Ten (10), Eleven (11), Twelve (12) and Thirteen (13), in Block numbered fifty-one (51), in H. and A. Rudd’s Addition to Cañon City, as shown on a plat of said addition on file and of record in the office of the County Clerk and Recorder of Fremont County, State of Colorado, except that portion of said lots numbered Eight (8) and Nine (9) conveyed to the City of Cañon City for the extension of 6th. Street by Deed recorded in Book 125 at page 274 of the Fremont County record, and all of the Southeast Quarter (SE¼) of the Southwest Quarter (SW¼) of the Southeast Quarter (SE¼) of Section Twenty-nine (29) in Township Eighteen (18) South, Range Seventy (70) West of the Sixth (6th.) P.M., excepting:

(i) A strip of land Two Hundred (200) feet wide throughout taken off of the east side thereof;

(ii) A strip of land Forty (40) feet wide throughout taken off of the north side thereof; and

(iii) A strip of land Forty (40) feet wide throughout taken off of the west side thereof.

R-2

A preschool

14. Lots 9, 10 and 11, Block 7, Thomas Macon’s Addition to Cañon City, Fremont County, Colorado.

R-2

A preschool

15. Lots 24, 25 and 26, Block 5, Harding’s 1st. Addition to Cañon City, Fremont County, Colorado.

R-1

 A preschool

16. All of Blocks 3 and 4 of the Virginia Park Addition.

R-2

A preschool

17. Lots 22, 23 and 24, Block 8, Kellenberger and Gray’s Addition to Cañon City, and Lots 16, 17 and 18, Block 8, Platt’s Addition to Cañon City.

R-1

A daycare center, subject to the following conditions:

1. The installation of a six (6) foot wooden fence between the existing garage and the residential structure;

2. Outside play activity shall be confined to the East of the wooden fence;

3. Playground equipment shall be removed from the West side of the wooden fence;

4. Outside play shall be scheduled after 9:00 a.m.;

5. A policy shall be adopted and enforced restricting the loading and unloading of children and complying with traffic ordinances of the City.

18. See Schedule A set out below.

Commercial

The residential structure located on the same lot as the commercial structure may remain as a nonconforming use.

Schedule A

A portion of the NW¼. NW¼ of Section 4, Township 19 South, Range 70 West of the 6th P.M., Fremont County, Colorado, more particularly described as follows:

Commencing at the North one quarter corner of Section 4, Township 19 South, Range 70 West of the 6th P.M.; thence Westerly along the North line of said Section 4 a distance of 1359.36 feet to a point, said point being 33.00 feet Westerly of the Northeast corner of the NW¼ NW¼ of said Section 4; thence angle left 90°09′08″ Southerly parallel to the East line of said NW¼ NW¼, a distance of 247.00 feet to the point of beginning of the tract to be described, said point of beginning being on the South line of the South Cañon Ditch as now constructed; thence continue Southerly parallel to the East line of said NW¼ NW¼ a distance of 124.00 feet to the Southeast corner of a tract of land recorded in Book 337, Page 153 of the records of Fremont County, Colorado; thence angle right 90°09′08″ Westerly along the South line of said tract recorded in Book 337 at Page 153 of said Fremont County records, a distance of 370.00 feet to a point on the Easterly right-of-way line of the P. & AV Railroad Co. (now A.T. & S.F. Railroad); thence angle right 89°50′52″ Northerly along the West line of said tract recorded in Book 337 at Page 153, which is also the Easterly right-of-way of said railroad, a distance of 43.95 feet to a point; thence angle right 76°40′20″ Northeasterly a distance of 193.40 feet to a point; thence angle right 02°26′39″ Northeasterly a distance of 185.11 feet, more or less, to the point of beginning. EXCEPT the most Easterly 30 feet deeded to the City of Cañon City for water and sewer lines recorded June 8, 1970, in Book 524, Page 240 (Reception No. 382180).

Beginning 403 feet West of the Northeast corner of the NW¼ NW¼ of Section 4, Township 19 South, Range 70 West of the 6th P.M.; running thence east along the North line of said Quarter Quarter Section, 20 feet; thence South and parallel to the East line of said Quarter Quarter Section 371 feet; thence West and parallel to the North line of said Quarter Quarter Section, 20 feet; thence North and parallel to the East line of said Quarter Quarter Section, 371 feet to the place of beginning.

19. All of Block 3, Skyline Meadows Addition.

R-1

Use of a mobile classroom

20. See Schedule A set out below.

R-3

Medical offices

Schedule A

Beginning at the Southeast corner of Lot Sixteen (16) in Block Twenty-two (22), in the town (now City) of Cañon City, Colorado, according to the plat thereof by Howard Schuyler on file and of record in the office of the County Clerk and Recorder of Fremont County, Colorado;

thence Westerly along the Southerly line of Lot 16, 15 and 14, in said Block 22, to a point which is 10 feet Westerly of the Southeasterly corner of said Lot 14;

thence Northerly and parallel with the Easterly line of said Lot 14 a distance of 40 feet;

thence Easterly and parallel with the Southerly line of said Lots 14 and 15 a distance of 48.55 feet;

thence North 36 degrees East 17.3 feet;

thence Easterly to a point on the Easterly line of said Lot 16 which is 46.7 feet Northerly from the point of beginning;

thence Southerly along the Easterly line of said Lot 16 to the point of beginning, the above described tract being that portion of said Lots 14, 15 and 16 owned by Raynor E. Holmes, Sr. and Perline S. Holmes after the conveyance of a portion thereof by that certain warranty deed recorded in Book 275 at Page 361 in the office of the County Clerk and Recorder of Fremont County, Colorado.

21. Lot 9 plus West 4 feet of Lot 10, Block 13, Cañon City; Lot 10 less West 4 feet, Block 13, Cañon City.

CBD

Up to sixteen multi-family residences

22. Outlot 7, Cañon City Plat and vacated alley together with a tract 38 feet by 256 feet East of Outlot 7, Block 1, Thomas Macon’s Addition.

CBD

To allow the addition of a chapel 44 by 24 feet to the southeast corner of the church presently located on the property.

23. Beginning at the intersection of the Southerly line of the right-of-way of the Cañon City and Oil Creek Ditch and the Easterly line of Lot 3, Helms Subdivision; thence Westerly along the Southerly line of said Oil Creek Ditch 248.41 feet to a point; thence South 684.00 feet to a point on the South line of said Lot 3; thence East along the South line of said Lot 3, 245.31 feet to the East line of Lot 3; thence North along the East line of Lot 3 to the centerline of the former right-of-way of the Cañon City and Cripple Creek Railroad; thence North 88° 57’ East along said centerline 314.55 feet more or less to a point on the East line of Lot 2, Helms Subdivision; thence North along the East line of said Lot 2 a distance of 160.00 feet; thence West and parallel with the South line of said Lot 2 to a point on the East line of Lot 3, Helms Subdivision; thence North along the East line of Lot 3 to the point of beginning.

R-1

A recreational and social facility

24. West 200 feet of Lots 11, 13, 15 and 17 and the W 200 feet of the N 2 feet of Lot 9; W 160 feet of Lot 7; W 160 feet of the S 48 feet of Lot 9; W 160 feet of the N 25 feet of Lot 5, Block 30, Fruitmere Subdivision.

Commercial

Outdoor retail sales

25. Lots 4, 5, 6, 7 & 8, except a strip of Lot 4, Block 1, Augustus Macon Addition.

Commercial

Outdoor retail sales

26. Lot 8, Block 16, Plat of Cañon City.

CBD

Light starter industry cabinet shop, provided that there is no outside storage of raw materials, dust and sawdust must be contained, and in the event the building is removed or destroyed the site shall be used for a use allowed by right in the CBD zone.

27. Lot 5, 6, 7b and 8, Block 8, Cañon City Addition lying south of North line of ditch.

Commercial

Outdoor retail sales

28. Commencing at a point located 356’N of the SW corner of the E½ of the SE¼ of Section 28, T18S, R70W of the 6th P.M.; thence N 433.44 feet; thence E 450 feet; thence S 433.44 feet; thence W 450 feet to the POB; Excepting therefrom lands conveyed to the Colorado State Highway Department by deed recorded in Book 316 at Page 109 of the real estate records of Fremont County, Colorado.

Commercial

Outdoor retail sales

29. All of Block 3 and 4 of the Virginia Park Addition.

R-2

A recreational and social facility

30. A parcel of land in the SW¼ SE¼ of Section 28, T18S, R70W of the 6th P.M., in Cañon City, Colorado, more particularly described as follows: beginning at the intersection of the E line of 16th. St. with the S line of 50.0′ wide Depot St. (extended E and not yet opened); thence S 0°25′ W along the E line of 16th. St. a distance of 256.5′ thence S 30°52′ E a distance of 78.0′ to a point on the NWly line of access road along U.S. Hwy No. 50; thence N 59°10′ E along said NWly line a distance of 103.6′ to a point of curve; thence NEly along said NWIy line on a curve with radius of 2965.0′, the long chord of which bears N 60°31′ E a distance of 141.05′; thence N 0°25′ E a distance of 199.41′ to a point on said S line of Depot St.; thence N 89°39′ W along said S line of Depot St. a distance of 251.1′ to the point of beginning, County of Fremont, State of Colorado.

C, general commercial

Outdoor retail sales

31. Lots 25, 26, 27 and 28, Block 43, Harding’s Second Addition, Cañon City, Colorado.

R-1

A child care center for up to 30 children under 15 years of age.

32. Lots 30, 31 and 32, Block 3, Griffin Add., Cañon City, Colorado.

Commercial

Outdoor retail sales of Christmas trees from Thanksgiving to Christmas.

33. Lot 14, Block 12, Cañon City Plat.

CBD

Up to five apartment units.

34. A tract of land in Lot 7, Raynolds Subdivision, described as follows: Beginning at a point which lies South 89°45′11″ West, 256.24 feet from the southeast corner of Lot 7; thence N 0°09′14″ E, 170 feet; thence S 89°54′11″ W, 207.19 feet; thence S 0°05′l 2″ W, 170 feet; thence N 89°54′11″ E, 206.99 feet to the point of beginning.

R-2

Recreational facility with a sign not to exceed 3 ft. x 6 ft. on the Field Avenue side of the property.

35. Block 47, Harding’s 2nd. Addition

 

and

R-3

Nursing home facility

Lots 25, 26, 27, 28 of Block 47, Harding’s 2nd. Addition.

R-3

Nursing home facility and retirement home, which shall include assisted living facilities, subject to the requirements and restrictions set forth in Ordinance No. 17, Series of 1992.

36. Schedule A, set out below.

C, general commercial

Light starter industry

Schedule A

Parcels A and B as follows:

Parcel A:

A parcel of land being a part of Block 30, as platted in Fruitmere Subdivision recorded in Book of Plats at page 131, of the records of the Fremont County Clerk and Recorder being more particularly described as follows:

Beginning at the Northwest corner of Lot 17, Block 30, Fruitmere Subdivision; thence North 89°51′ East, a distance of 200.00 feet; thence South 00°07′ West, a distance of 100.00 feet; thence South 89°51′ West, a distance of 200.00 feet; thence North 00°07′ East, a distance of 100.00 feet, more or less, to the point of beginning.

Parcel B:

A parcel of land being a part of Block 30, as platted in Fruitmere Subdivision recorded in Book of Plats at page 131, of the records of the Fremont County Clerk and Recorder being more particularly described as follows:

Commencing at the Northwest corner of Lot 17, Block 30, Fruitmere Subdivision; thence South 00°07′ West, along the West line of said Block 30, a distance of 100.00 feet to the point of beginning; thence North 89°51′ East, a distance of 200.00 feet, thence South 00°07′ West, a distance of 103.50 feet; thence South 89°51′ West, a distance of 34.64 feet; thence South 0°07′ West, a distance of 121.50 feet; thence South 89°51′ West, a distance of 165.36 feet to a point on said West line of Block 30; thence North 00°7′ East, along said West line of Block 30, a distance of 225.00 feet, more or less, to the point of beginning.

37. Cañon City Town Center, Lot 1.

C, general commercial

Outdoor retail sales

38. Cañon City Area Metropolitan Park and Recreation District Icabone Pool - 12th. Street & College: Beginning at the SW corner of Block one (1), Royce Park Subdivision to Cañon City, Colorado, according to the plat thereof on file and of record in the office of the County Clerk and Recorder of Fremont County, Colorado; thence N 58°50′ E, 236 feet; thence N 31°10′ W, 25 feet; thence along a curve to the right having a radius of 320.38 feet, a central angel of 31°18′23″, and an arc of 175.06 feet; thence N 0°08′23″ E, 113.94 feet; thence S 58°56′57″ W, 166 feet; thence S 0°08′23″ W, 338.43 feet to the point of beginning.

R-2

Recreational and social facility

39. A tract of land in NW¼ SW¼ Section 33, T18S, R70W, 6th P.M., Commencing at a pt. 190 feet W and 183.5 feet N of the NW corner of Lot 6, Block 4, Griffin Addition to South Cañon; thence N 100 feet; thence E 340 feet; thence S 102 feet; thence W 150 feet; thence N 2 feet, thence W 190 feet to the point of beginning.

C, general commercial

Outdoor retail sales

40. All Block 3, in Skyline Meadows Subdivision.

R-2

Child care facility—preschool

41. See Schedule A set out below.

Commercial

Use of a manufactured structure as a mobile home sales office.

Schedule A

A tract or parcel of land in Cañon City, Colorado in the E½ SE¼, Section 28, T18S, R70W, 6th. P.M. being a part of a parcel of land lying southeasterly of a line 50 feet southeasterly perpendicularly distant and parallel to the centerline of the main track of The Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad, and being a part of a parcel of land conveyed by warranty deed dated September 13, 1878 from William S. Jackson, Trustee, to the Denver and Rio Grande Railway Company, predecessor to the Grantor, recorded in Book 13, page 319, in Fremont County Records, said tract or parcel being bounded as follows:

Commencing at the southwest corner of the E½ SE¼ of said Section 28; thence easterly 660 feet along the south line of said Section 28; thence North 30 feet, more or less, to the north Right-of-Way line of Main Street being the point of beginning; thence westerly and along said north Right-of-Way line of Main Street 600 feet, more or less, to a point being 100 feet south of the centerline of the main track of The Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad as measured northerly perpendicularly from the said north Right-of-Way line of Main Street; thence North 45 feet, more or less, to a point being 50 feet southeasterly perpendicularly distant from said centerline of main track; thence northeasterly along the arc of a curve to the right being 50 feet perpendicularly distant and parallel to said main track centerline to a point being 660 feet easterly of the west line of said E½ SE¼ of Section 28; thence South 258 feet, more or less, to the point of beginning.

42. Lots 5 & 6, Replat No. 2, Odd Fellows Subdivision.

R-4

Professional offices

43. South 50 feet of Lots 15 & 16, Block 25, City of Cañon City.

R-3

Professional offices*

* The right to engage in such use shall at all times be specifically contingent upon the property owner’s provision of adequate off-street parking, either on or off premises, as may be required under the Cañon City Municipal Code, as amended, and as may be amended in the future.

44. See Exhibit A below.

I-1

Waste management facility*

Exhibit A

A parcel of land in the NW¼ NE¼ of Section 8, Township 19 South, Range 70 West of the 6th P.M., more particularly described as follows:

Beginning at a point on the South right-of-way line of Forge Road and the Northwest corner of Tract A, Oro Verde Subdivision (an unrecorded plat) from which the Northeast corner of said Section 8 bears N 74°45′14″ E, a distance of 1984.09 feet; thence along said right-of-way, S 53°46′12″ W, a distance of 844.44 feet to a curve to the left having a delta of 29°23′15″, a radius of 60.01 feet; thence along said curve, an arc distance of 30.90 feet along said South right-of-way; thence on a tangent to the last mentioned curve S 24°22′57″ W, a distance of 240.00 feet along the South right-of-way of Forge Road; thence leaving said right-of-way, N 90°00′00″ E, a distance of 20.00 feet to intersect with the North right-of-way line of the Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe Railroad; thence along said North right-of-way, N 90°00′00″ E, a distance 105.00 feet to a curve to the left having a delta of 33°30′00″, a radius of 670.00 feet; thence along said curve an arc distance of 386.33 feet along said North right-of-way; thence on a tangent to the last mentioned curve on the North line of said railroad right-of-way, N 56°30′00″ E, a distance of 618.79 feet to intersect with the West line of Tract A, Oro Verde Subdivision (an unrecorded plat); thence along said West line N 36°13′ 39″ W, a distance of 357.63 feet to the Northwest corner of said Tract A, also being the point of beginning. Containing 7.29 acres, more or less.

 

* Special Review Use is subject to the following restrictions:

1. An approved plan to accommodate overflow traffic on-site to prevent congestion on Forge Road shall be submitted to and approved by Council;

2. The site shall be enclosed by fencing at a height of at least 6 feet, and bermed and/or landscaped to provide reasonable visual separation from Forge Road;

3. All solid waste handling, with the exception of bins for the collection of recyclable materials, shall be conducted inside an enclosed building, said building not to exceed 6,600 square feet in area; and

4. Diligent efforts shall be made to keep the site free of debris and prevent its spread to surrounding areas; and

5. Any vehicle which is either partially or fully loaded with trash shall not be permitted to remain on-site for any period of time exceeding 48 hours.

45. Lots 1, 2, 3 & 4, Fairpark Subdivision Filing No. 2.

R-3

Nursing home

46. The west 10 feet of Lots 2 & 15, all of Lots 3, 4, 5, 12, 13 & 14, and the east 22 feet of Lots 6 & 11, Block 3, in the Town (now City) of Cañon City, according to the plat thereof made by Howard Schuyler on file and of record in the office of the County Clerk and Recorder of Fremont County, together with the 16 foot alley adjacent to said lots, as shown on said plat.

C, general commercial

Shelter*

* Special Review Use is subject to the condition that the front of the new building shall be of full masonry or stucco construction.

47. Lots 1, 2 & 3, Block 14, Palmer, Greenwood and Mellen’s Addition to Cañon City.

R-2

Bed and breakfast

48. Lot 11, Block 12, Original Town (now city) of Cañon City.

CB, central business

Training facility

49. Lot 9-B, Justice Center Administrative Subdivision Waiver Plat.

C, general commercial

Shelter

50. Certain portions of certain tracts of land identified as parcels 1 and 2 described in Exhibit “A” to that certain the quitclaim deed from the Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe Railway Company to the City of Cañon City, dated December 5,1994 and recorded December 15, 1994 at Book 1205, Page 262, Reception No. 626915, Fremont County, Colorado records, and certain portions of that tract of land described in Exhibit “A” to that certain quitclaim deed between the same parties, date October 18, 1995, and recorded November 9, 1995, at Book 1231 Page 464, Reception No. 639847, Fremont County, Colorado records; said portions being those portions of such tracts that are leased by the City of Cañon City to the Cañon City and Royal Gorge Railroad, L.L.C. (or its lawful assigns and other successors in interest) by written lease. Said written lease shall include the former Santa Fe depot and surrounding land and facilities. All of said property hereinafter sometimes shall be collectively called the “site.”

C, general commercial

“Rail services and facilities,” as described at Section 17.08.421 of the Cañon City Municipal Code, to include at least following specific uses and activities: parking, ticket sales, gift shop, food service and loading and unloading of excursion trains to run from the site through the Royal Gorge to Parkdale, Colorado and back, subject to those certain limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions set forth at Section 2 of the ordinance codified in this section.

51. Lot 1, River Runners Subdivision.

R-2

The use permitted by special review is a “rafting takeout facility” use of the property by the holder of a valid rafting takeout facility permit issued pursuant to Section 17.24.060, as amended, in strict accordance with all the limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions set forth in such rafting takeout facility permit and in Section 17.24.060, as amended.

52. A strip of land of the uniform width of 102.43 feet off and along the East end of Lot 27, and a strip of land of the uniform width of 120 feet off and along the West end of the North 100 feet of Lot 28, Block 28, Fruitmere Subdivision.

C, General Commercial

“Animal hospital,” as described in Subsection 17.08.010(C), subject to those certain limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions set forth as follows:

A. An easement shall be executed which irrevocably provides for the shared use of the existing and proposed driveways serving the animal hospital with the owners of adjoining properties to the east and south;

B. The building shall be construed using soundproofing materials; and

C. Front yard setback requirements for the animal hospital shall be those allowed under any variance granted by the board of adjustment that is valid at the time a building permit for the animal hospital is issued or, in the absence of a valid variance, those provided for under applicable provisions of Subsection 17.12.130(C).

53. The ground floor of the west half of the building situated on Lot 3, Block 1, Harrison, Rockafellow and Macon’s Addition to Cañon City, known and numbered as 710 Main Street.

CB, Central Business

A. Training facility (martial arts instruction).

B.  Conditions. The special review use permitted hereunder shall expire automatically if the subject premises ceases to be used as a training facility, within which the operator’s primary business and function is providing instruction in martial arts, for a period of one year, or if Samurai Martial Arts Corporation, doing business as Bendell Karate, or any successor in interest to Samurai Martial Arts Corporation ceases to use and operate the subject premises as a training facility, within which the operator’s primary business and function is providing instruction in martial arts.

54. All of Lots 2 and 3, the South 1/2 of Lot 7, the South 3/5 of Lot 6 and the northern 60 feet of Lot 4, Block 12, Park Center Subdivision; Except that portion of Lot 3 conveyed by Deed in Book 247 at Page 439 in the records of the Clerk and Recorder of Fremont County, Colorado, described as follows: That part of said Lot 3 lying South of the Fruitland Ditch and East of Orchard Avenue and North of South Street in said subdivision.

R-2, Low-Medium Density Residential

“Recreational facility,” as described in Subsection 17.08.010(C), subject to those certain limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions set forth at Section 2 of the ordinance codified in this subsection.

55. A portion of the NW 1/4 of Section 8, and a portion of the NE 1/4 of Section 7, Township 19 South, Range 70 West of the 6th P.M., being more particularly described as follows:

Commencing at the NW corner of said Section 8; thence North 87°36′54″ East, 200 feet to the point of beginning; thence North 87°36′54″ East along said North line of Section 8, 1,168.983 feet; thence North 87°36′51″ East along said North section line, 535.449 feet; thence South 00°28′51″ East, 149.397 feet to the PC of a curve to the right having a central angle of 77°50′40″ and a radius of 496.153 feet; thence along said curve an arc distance of 674.094 feet; thence South 77°21′49″ West, 1084.988 feet to the PC of a curve to the right, having a central angle of 09°22′03″, and a radius of 2,441.125 feet; thence along said curve an arc distance of 399.109 feet; thence South 86°43′51″ West, 135.0 feet; thence North 00°16′09″ West, 335.0 feet; thence North 16°46′09″ West, 335.0 feet; thence North 60°13′56″ East, 426.046 feet to the point of beginning. Except: any portion of the following described parcels that lie within the above described property:

1. Right-of-way for public road purposes conveyed by document recorded February 20, 1987 in Book 808, at Page 47 more particularly described as follows:

A uniform strip of land 40 feet in width lying adjacent to and Westerly and Northerly of the following described line: A parcel of land located in the NW 1/4 of Section 8, Township 19 South, Range 70 West of the 6th p.m.; Commencing on the North line of said Section 8 at a point located 1,904.057 feet East of the Northwest corner of said Section 8; thence South 00º28′51″ East, 149.245 feet; thence on a curve to the right, having a delta of 77º50′40″, a radius of 496.153 feet, and an arc length of 674.094 feet; thence South 77º21′49″ West, 1084.988 feet; thence on a curve to the right with a delta of 9º22′03″, a radius of 2441.125, and an arc length of 399.109 feet now known as Mariposa Road.

2. Right-of-way conveyed to the City of Cañon City by quit claim deed recorded April 30, 1999 in Book 1367, at Page 608, under Reception No. 696911 more particularly described as follows:

A uniform strip of land 20 feet in width lying adjacent to and Easterly and Southerly of the following described line: A parcel of land located in the NW¼ of Section 8, Township 19 South, Range 70 West of the 6th P.M.; Commencing on the North line said Section 8 at a point located 1844.03 feet East of the Northwest corner of said Section 8; thence S 00º28′51″ E a distance of 147.26 feet; thence around a curve to the right through a central angle of 77º50′40″ an arc distance of 592.57 feet, a radius of 436.15 feet a chord bearing of S 38º26′29″ W a distance of 548.04 feet; thence S 77º21′49″ W a distance of 1084.99 feet; thence around a curve to the right through a central angle of 09º22′03″ an arc distance of 389.30 a radius of 2381.13 feet a chord bearing of S 82º02′51″ W a distance of 388.87 feet.

C, General Commercial

“Recreational facility,” as described at Subsection 17.08.010(C), subject to those certain limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions set forth at Section 2 of the ordinance codified in this subsection.

56. Lot 1, Wal-Mart Towne Center Subdivision.

C, General Commercial

A. ”Outdoor retail sales,” as described at Section 17.20.140 of this Code, subject to those certain limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions set forth at Subsection B.

B. The special review use permitted under this subsection is specifically subject to the following limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions:

1. The area to be devoted to outdoor retail sales shall not exceed 5,000 square feet;

2. The conducting of outdoor retail sales shall not disrupt the flow of traffic, impede ingress or egress, or block any vision clearance areas at the intersections of parking aisles.

57. Two parcels of land situated in the City of Cañon City, County of Fremont, State of Colorado lying in the Southwest Quarter (SW¼) of Section 33, Township 18 South, Range 70 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian, described as follows:

 

Parcel 1

 

All of Block Six (6) in the Sell’s Addition to the Town of South Cañon as shown on the Plat of said Town of South Cañon and described first in deed dated July 30, 1887 from Ernst Sell to the Pueblo and Arkansas Valley Railroad Company (predecessor in interest to the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway Company) recorded October 15, 1887 in Book 30 at Page 382.

 

Also, that certain parcel of land described second in said deed dated July 30, 1887 described for reference as follows:

 

“Also, all of that certain tract of parcel of land triangular in shape, bounded on the East by Block One (1) in Sell’s Addition to South Cañon, on the North by the North line of the Southwest Quarter of Section (33), Township 18 South of Range 70 West, said Northern boundary line being in the Arkansas River and bounded on the Southwest by a straight line drawn along the East side of South Ninth Street, from the intersection of said East side of South Ninth Street with said Northern boundary line, to the Southwest corner of Block One (1) in said Sell’s Addition to South Cañon.”

 

Parcel II

 

All Block Number One (1) of Sell’s Addition to the Town of South Cañon as shown on the Plat of said Town of South Cañon and described in deed dated July 7, 1887 from William H. McClure to the Pueblo and Arkansas Valley Railroad Company (predecessor in interest to the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway Company) recorded October 15, 1887 in Book 30 at Page 379.

 

Together with the following public rights-of-way vacated by the City of Cañon City by Ordinance No. 1, Series of 2000, described as follows:

 

That portion of South 10th Street (formerly known as Maple Avenue) lying between Block 1 and Block 6; the alley lying between Lots 4 and 5, Block 1; and the alley lying East of Lot 4, Block 6, all as shown on the plat of Sell’s Addition to the Town of South Cañon, in the City of Cañon City, Colorado. Excepting therefrom a parcel deeded to the City of Cañon City for the right-of-way of Sell Avenue, said deed recorded on January 31, 2000 at Reception No. 709810, described as follows:

 

Beginning at the Southeast corner of Block Six (6) of Sell’s Addition to South Cañon, as recorded in the records of the Fremont County Clerk and Recorder; thence S 90°00′00″ W along the South line of said Block Six (6) for 395.61 feet; thence N 77°10′37″ E, 20 feet Northerly of and parallel to the centerline of an existing gravel roadway for 405.73 feet to a point on the East line of said Sell’s Addition; thence S 00°00′00″ E along said East line for 90.05 feet; thence S 90°00′00″ W for 20.00 feet to the point of beginning, containing 0.41 acres, more or less.

C, General Commercial

A. “Outdoor retail sales,” as described at Section 17.20.140 of this Code, subject to those certain limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions set forth at Subsection B.

B. The special review use permitted under this subsection is specifically subject to the following limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions:

1. The area to be devoted to outdoor retail sales shall be limited to the parking lot located west of the building only;

2. Outdoor retail sales shall be allowed only when they do not coincide with another major event taking place at the VFW facility;

3. No more than 2 vendors shall be permitted to conduct outdoor retail sales at the same time, except in the case of a coordinated sales event involving several dealers, such as with automobiles; and

4. No vendor shall be allowed to stay on the premises overnight.

58. Lot 14, Block 15, City of Cañon City.

CB, Central Business

A. Sale of motorcycles, subject to those certain limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions set forth at Subsection B.

B. The special review use permitted under this subsection is specifically subject to the following limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions:

1. No more than 2 motorcycles may be displayed outside at any one time.

2. No motorcycle may be started on the premises, except in the case where it is to be moved to another location.

3. The Zoning Administrator shall have the right to require a review by City Council of the special review use permitted under this ordinance when he or she determines that the special review use is or may be having adverse impacts upon the neighborhood where the special review use is occurring that were not evident or anticipated when this ordinance was adopted. Any such review shall be preceded by not fewer than 15 days prior written notice mailed to the premises where the special review use is permitted and published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. When the Zoning Administrator requests a review pursuant to this paragraph, City Council shall conduct a public hearing and thereafter, by ordinance, may revoke its permission for the special review use to continue beyond a date certain specified in the ordinance, or modify the limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions applicable to the special review use. The standards applicable to such review shall be those set forth in Section 17.24.030. The Zoning Administrator shall not request a review more frequently than once annually.

59. Lots 1 through 13, inclusive, Block 2, and Lots 1 through 13, inclusive, Block 3, together with the vacated portions of Commerce Street and Enterprise Street adjacent to said lots and blocks, Ritzman’s Addition.

C, General Commercial

A. Recreational facility.

B. The special review use permitted under this subsection is specifically subject to the following limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions:

1. A minimum of 89 off-street parking spaces shall be provided, and all parking spaces, driveways and maneuvering areas shall be paved with asphalt or concrete and properly striped, according to Chapter 17.28 of this Code.

2. A grading and drainage plan shall be submitted to, and approved by, the City Engineer, to identify how stormwater runoff will be directed to 2 existing stormwater sewer inlet grates located along the property frontage on the north side of Industrial Street.

3. The owner of the subject property shall execute an agreement for the performance of certain improvements to ensure his or her participation in a public improvement district, if and when such a district is created, for the purpose of installing pavement, curb and gutter, and sidewalk along the property frontages of either South Tenth Street or Industrial Street, or both such frontages. Such an agreement shall be binding upon and enforceable against the owner, his or her heirs, devisees, personal representatives, assigns, transferees and other successors in interest.

4. The exterior of the building shall contain a private lighting system, properly designed to ensure that the light does not extend beyond the property boundaries, either vertically or horizontally.

5. Landscaping shall be installed and maintained substantially as presented in the site plan submitted with the application for special review.

6. The Zoning Administrator shall have the right to require a review by City Council of the special review use permitted under this subsection when he or she determines that the special review use is or may be having adverse impacts upon the neighborhood where the special review use is occurring that were not evident or anticipated when this ordinance was adopted. Any such review shall be preceded by not fewer than 15 days prior written notice mailed to the premises where the special review use is permitted and published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. When the Zoning Administrator requests a review pursuant to this paragraph, City Council shall conduct a public hearing and thereafter, by ordinance, may revoke its permission for the special review use to continue beyond a date certain specified in the ordinance, or modify the limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions applicable to the special review use. The standards applicable to such review shall be those set forth in Section 17.24.030. The Zoning Administrator shall not request a review more frequently than once annually.

60. Lot 2, Family Crisis Subdivision.

C, General Commercial

A. Shelter.

B. The special review use permitted under this subsection is specifically subject to the following limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions: a minimum of 12 paved off-street parking spaces shall be provided.

61. A portion of Lot 11, Harrison Subdivision of Section 27, more particularly described as follows:

Beginning at the Southeast corner of Lot 12, Harrison Subdivision of Section 27; thence North, a distance of 173.43 feet to the true point of beginning; thence West, a distance of 156.90 feet; thence South, a distances of 25.00 feet; thence West, a distance of 45.67 feet; thence North, a distance of 180.00 feet; thence East, a distance of 202.57 feet; thence South, a distance of 155.00 feet to the point of beginning; together with an 8 foot strip of alley on the Westerly side vacated as recorded in Book 1058, Page 159, Fremont County, Colorado.

R-4, High-Density Residential

A. Child care center, subject to those certain limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions set forth at Subsection B.

B. The special review use permitted under this subsection is specifically subject to the following limitations, restrictions and conditions:

1. The hours of operation shall be limited to from 6:30 a.m. to midnight.

2. Any exterior lighting shall be shielded so that the light only shines downward.

62. Lot 14, Block 15, Cañon City, according to the recorded plat thereof in the Office of the Fremont County Clerk and Recorder.

CB, Central Business

Training facility

63. Beginning at the NE corner of Lot 4, Block 6, Park Center Subdivision; thence South along the East line of Lot 4, 127 feet; thence West and parallel with the North line of Lot 4, 127 feet; thence North parallel with the East line of Lot 4, 127 feet; thence East along the North line of Lot 4, 127 feet to the point of beginning, in Cañon City, Colorado.

R-4, High-Density Residential

Professional office

64. A tract of land consisting of Parcels A and B, as hereinafter described:

Parcel A:

A tract of land in the SE ¼ NW ¼ of Section 28, T18S, R70W of the 6th PM, described as follows: Beginning at a point 330 feet West of the NE corner; thence South 200 feet; thence West 100 feet; thence North 200 feet; thence East 100 feet to the point of beginning.

Parcel B:

A tract of land in the SE ¼ NW ¼ of Section 28, T18S, R70W of the 6th PM, described as follows: Beginning at a point 230 feet West of the NE corner; thence South 200 feet; thence West 100 feet; thence North 200 feet; thence East 100 feet to the point of beginning.

C, General Commercial, with medically-related use restrictions, and with Transitional Mixed-Use Overlay [C(TMU)]

A. Hospital heliport.

B. 1. The hospital heliport permitted under this subsection shall be designed, built, and at all times operated in compliance with all applicable Federal Aviation Administration standards, rules and regulations governing hospital heliports and/or similar facilities.

2. Unless required by applicable federal or state law, rule, or regulation, the hospital heliport shall not be used for training or instructional purposes more often than once every 180 days.

65. Lots 5, 6,7 and 8, Block 17, Cañon City, according to the recorded plat thereof in the Office of the Fremont County Clerk and Recorder.

CB, Central Business

Multi-unit dwelling

66. Lot 4, Block 21, Cañon City, according to the recorded plat thereof in the Office of the Fremont County Clerk and Recorder.

CB, Central Business

Duplex

67. That certain suite of offices, together with adjoining parking and driveway areas, located at 2403 North 9th Street, being the center one-third of the building on the following described tract of land:

That portion of Lot C in Skyline Village Filing No. 1 described as follows: Beginning at the Southeast corner of said Lot C, thence North 89º47′24″ West on the South line of said Lot C 120 feet; thence North 00º29′54″ East and parallel with the East line of said Lot C 100 feet; thence South 89º47′24″ East parallel with the South line of said Lot C 120 feet to the East line of said Lot C; thence South 00º29′54″ West on said East line 100 feet to the point of beginning. (Tract A)

C, General Commercial

A. Animal clinic.

B. The special review use permitted in this subsection is specifically subject to the following limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions:

1. There shall be no boarding of animals on the premises, but the occasional hospitalization of recovering animals that are treated at the animal clinic will be permitted; and

2. The animal clinic shall have a small outdoor enclosed area in the rear portion of the premises (for the use and exercise of animals receiving treatment) which shall at all times be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.

68. West 21 feet of Lot 5 and all of Lot 6, Block 16, Cañon City.

CB, Central Business

Training facility

69. A tract or parcel of land in Cañon City, Colorado in the E ½ SE ¼, Section 28, T18S, R70W, 6th P.M. being a part of a parcel of land lying southeasterly of a line 50 feet southeasterly perpendicularly distant and parallel to the centerline of the main track of The Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad, and being a part of a parcel of land conveyed by warranty deed dated September 13, 1878 from William S. Jackson, Trustee, to The Denver and Rio Grande Railway Company, predecessor to the Grantor, recorded in Book 13, Page 319, in Fremont County Records, said tract or parcel being bounded as follows:

Commencing at the southwest corner of the E ½ SE ¼ of said Section 28; thence easterly 660 feet along the south line of said Section 28; thence North 30 feet, more or less, to the north right-of-way line of Main Street being the Point of Beginning; thence westerly and along said north right-of-way line of Main Street 600 feet, more or less, to a point being 100 feet south of the centerline of the main track of The Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad as measured northerly perpendicularly from the said north right-of-way line of Main Street; thence North 45 feet, more or less, to a point being 50 feet southeasterly perpendicularly distant from said centerline of main track; thence northeasterly along the arc of a curve to the right being 50 feet perpendicularly distant and parallel to said main track centerline to a point being 660 feet easterly of the west line of said E ½ SE ¼ of Section 28; thence South 258 feet, more of less, to the Point of Beginning.

C, General Commercial

A. Outdoor retail sales.

B. The special review use permitted in this subsection is specifically subject to the following limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions:

1. An additional ingress and egress will be added;

2. The approval will be good for an initial period of one year, beginning on the date of the first use of the property for an outdoor retail sales event, after which it will be reviewed by Planning Commission and City Council using the procedure and review criteria set forth in Section 17.24.030 of the Cañon City Municipal Code;

3. Following such review, the City Council shall, by subsequent ordinance: (a) approve the continued use of the property for outdoor retail sales for a definite or indefinite period, with or without imposing conditions respecting such use; or (b) elect to terminate such special review use, effective as of a date set forth in the ordinance. The property may be used for outdoor retail sales events until the ordinance provided for in this paragraph has been adopted;

4. Hours of operation for any event will be from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. only;

5. Use is restricted to retail sales only;

6. One-half of the lot will be reserved for vehicular parking only;

7. One treatment of magnesium chloride will be applied to all unpaved portions of the property before the first event and reapplied if needed as determined by the City Engineer; and

8. The owner will enter into a Future Improvements Agreement with the City of Cañon City for the installation of curb, gutter and sidewalk along the East Main Street frontage of the property prior to any use of the property for an outdoor retail sales event.

70. A tract or parcel of land in Cañon City, Colorado in the E ½ SE ¼, Section 28, T18S, R70W, 6th P.M. being a part of a parcel of land lying southeasterly of a line 50 feet southeasterly perpendicularly distant and parallel to the centerline of the main track of The Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad, and being a part of a parcel of land conveyed by warranty deed dated September 13, 1878 from William S. Jackson, Trustee, to The Denver and Rio Grande Railway Company, predecessor to the Grantor, recorded in Book 13, Page 319, in Fremont County Records, said tract or parcel being bounded as follows:

 

Commencing at the southwest corner of the E ½ SE ¼ of said Section 28; thence easterly 660 feet along the south line of said Section 28; thence North 30 feet, more or less, to the north right-of-way line of Main Street being the Point of Beginning; thence westerly and along said north right-of-way line of Main Street 600 feet, more or less, to a point being 100 feet south of the centerline of the main track of The Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad as measured northerly perpendicularly from the said north right-of-way line of Main Street; thence North 45 feet, more or less, to a point being 50 feet southeasterly perpendicularly distant from said centerline of main track; thence northeasterly along the arc of a curve to the right being 50 feet perpendicularly distant and parallel to said main track centerline to a point being 660 feet easterly of the west line of said E ½ SE ¼ of Section 28; thence South 258 feet, more of less, to the Point of Beginning.

C, General Commercial

A. Recreational facility.

B. The special review use permitted in this subsection is specifically subject to the following limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions:

1. All lighting on the property shall be downward-directed;

2. The owner of the subject property shall cause concrete curb, gutter and sidewalk to be installed in accordance with applicable City standards and specifications within the East Main Street right-of-way along that portion of the property which abuts East Main Street (for a distance of approximately 600 linear feet);

3. The said curb, gutter and sidewalk improvements shall be installed prior to the time the property is used as a recreational facility;

4. Paved parking spaces and appropriate paved driveways connecting parking spaces to a public street, constructed in accordance with applicable City standards and specifications, and also meeting or exceeding the minimum standards for paved parking, as set forth in the Cañon City Municipal Code, shall be installed prior to any use of the property as a recreational facility. Upon establishment of the miniature golf course, a minimum of 20 paved parking spaces shall be provided. Upon establishment of the batting cages, a minimum of an additional 20 paved parking spaces shall be provided;

5. When the property is used as a recreational facility, the lights of the facility must be turned off and all recreational activities ceased no later than 10:00 p.m., Sunday through Thursday, and no later than 11:00 p.m. on Fridays and Saturdays;

6. Miniature golf and batting cages are the only recreational use approved through Ordinance No. 18, Series of 2006. Any additional recreational uses on the property, if any, must be subsequently authorized by City Council through the City’s special review process;

7. After a miniature golf course has been established on the property, no portion of the land, including its required paved parking area, shall be used for outdoor retail sales other than sales conducted by the recreation center operator as a part of the regular and routine business of recreation center operations.

71. Lots 1 and 2, Block 34, Cañon City

R-2, Low-Medium Density Residential

A. Children’s home.

B. The special review use permitted in this subsection is specifically subject to the following limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions:

1. The subject property shall at all times when such use occurs be licensed by the State of Colorado Department of Human Services for the children’s home use permitted in this Subsection 71;

2. The number of children cared for in the children’s home shall not exceed 11;

3. The natural and adopted children of the administrators of the children’s home shall not be included in the maximum of 11 children to be cared for in the children’s home.

72. Beginning at the NE corner of Lot 4, Block 6, Park Center Subdivision; thence South along the East line of Lot 4, 127 feet; thence West and parallel with the North line of Lot 4, 127 feet; thence North parallel with the East line of Lot 4, 127 feet; thence East along the North line of Lot 4, 127 feet to the Point of Beginning.

R-4, High Density

A. Trade and repair shop.

B. The special review use permitted in this subsection is specifically subject to the following limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions:

1. All business activities at this property shall be conducted within the existing structure, as the same may be modified from time to time in accordance with applicable law;

2. No outdoor portion of the property shall be used for the storage of materials or as a repair or fabrication area;

3. The special review use approved for this property shall be limited to the business of Gary DiOrio, d/b/a Bubba’s Sporting Goods, and similar businesses. Bubba’s Sporting Goods may use the property to fabricate, silkscreen and/or embroider sporting apparel and for the wholesale and occasional retail sale of such apparel items and other sporting goods manufactured elsewhere.

73. Lots 1 & 2, Mannino Administrative Subdivision Waiver Plat (121 & 127 Justice Center Road)

C, General Commercial

A. Outdoor retail sales (as defined on the date of Ordinance No. 17, 2009).

B.  Conditions. The special review use permitted in this subsection is specifically subject to the following limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions:

1.  The area to be used for outdoor retail sales shall conform, and shall be restricted, to the area depicted in the applicant’s site plan drawing as submitted in 2007, a copy of which shall be kept on file with the ordinance codified in this section in both the City Clerk’s records and the City Planner’s files;

2.  All vehicles belonging to individual vendors, including cars, trucks, vans and other such vehicles used to transport merchandise, except those used as temporary sales structures, shall be parked in the most westerly parking lot during the sales event;

3.  Subject to the foregoing limitations, outdoor retail sales may be conducted on the property for a period of approximately 5 years, ending August 31, 2014, after which continuation of such use will be reviewed by Planning Commission and City Council, if an application for such review is filed by the owner of the property on or before August 31, 2014;

4.  If such review is requested, Planning Commission and City Council shall use the procedure and review criteria set forth in Section 17.24.030 of the Cañon City Municipal Code;

5.  If no such review is requested, all outdoor retail sales at the property shall be prohibited, effective August 31, 2014; and

6.  Following such review, the City Council shall, by subsequent ordinance: (a) approve the continued use of the property for outdoor retail sales for a definite or indefinite period, with or without imposing conditions respecting such use; or (b) elect to terminate such special review use, effective as of a date set forth in the ordinance. The property may be used for outdoor retail sales events, as permitted in this subsection, until the ordinance provided for in this paragraph has been adopted.

74. Lots 15 and 16 and the East 15 feet of Lot 14, Block 16, Cañon City

CB, Central Business

A. Church.

B. The special review use permitted in this subsection is specifically subject to the following limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions:

1.  The approval herein granted shall extend only to the tenancy of Courtyard Ministries, and will terminate upon its vacation of the building situated on the property;

2.  Emergency housing facilities shall be limited to no more than 6 rooms on the upper level of the building;

3.  The approval granted herein is good for 5 years, beginning on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, after which it will be reviewed once again by the Planning Commission and City Council at no charge to the applicant, using the procedure and review criteria set forth in Section 17.24.030 of the Cañon City Municipal Code; and

4.  Following such review, the City Council shall, by subsequent ordinance: (a) approve the continued use of the property for church purposes for a definite or indefinite period, with or without imposing conditions respecting such use; or (b) elect to terminate such special review use, effective as of a date set forth in the ordinance. The property may be used for church purposes until the ordinance provided for in this paragraph has been adopted.

75. Part of the SE ¼ of Section 28, Township 18 South, Range 70 West of the 6th P.M., consisting of a portion of a shopping center commonly known as Cañon Plaza, with a street address of 304 C North 16th Street, containing approximately 3759 square feet. See Book 641, P. 990, Fremont County Records, for a full legal description of the parcel upon which the said shopping center is situated.

C, Commercial

A. Recreational facility (fitness center).

B. The special review use permitted in this subsection is specifically subject to the following limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions:

1. The approval herein granted shall extend only to the tenancy of “Anytime Fitness” or any successor tenant operating substantially the same type of fitness center business at the location described hereinabove. Anytime Fitness is a national chain of fitness centers that are open 24 hours a day. When Anytime Fitness (or a substantially similar successor business) vacates the property, the approval granted in this subsection will terminate.

76. Lots 3, 4 and 5, Amended Plat of George McCormick Gateway Park

C, Commercial

A. Senior living complex.

B. The special review use permitted in this subsection is specifically subject to the following limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions:

1. The right to use the property as a senior living complex, as permitted in this subsection, shall terminate:

a. If a senior living complex has not been established on the property and opened for business on or before December 31, 2011; or

b. Following December 31, 2011, if the property is not used as a senior living complex for any period of 12 consecutive months.

77. A tract in the Northwest ¼ of the Northwest ¼ of Section 4, Township 19 South, Range 70 West of the 6th P.M., described as follows: Beginning 33 feet West of the Northeast corner, thence South 371 feet; thence West 370 feet; thence North 371 feet; thence East 370 feet to the point of beginning, less the South Cañon Ditch (Book 337, Page 89 and Book 337, Page 153), being 3.15 acres, less.44 acres more or less in the NE corner to C & T Development Co. (Book 489, Page 306) and less one acre more or less to Gary L. & Mary R. Busch (Book 518, Page 240)

C(TMU), General Commercial With Transitional Mixed Use Overlay

A. Elementary school.

B. The special review use permitted in this subsection is specifically subject to the following limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions:

1. The owner of the property shall enter into a Future Improvements Agreement with the City of Cañon City for the installation of curb, gutter and sidewalk along the Bridge Street frontage of the property prior to any use of the property for an elementary school;

2. In order to satisfy the minimum right-of-way requirements set forth in the City’s Major Thoroughfare Plan and prior to the opening of an Elementary School, the owner of the property shall convey by deed to the City a 10-foot-wide strip of land extending the full distance over which the north line of said property abuts the existing Bridge Street right-of-way (a distance of approximately 270 feet);

3. The 2-way traffic flow in the parking lot shall be changed to a one-way flow, with traffic entering the site at the western-most driveway, and exiting the site at the eastern-most driveway, and all pavement markings and signs indicating traffic flow shall be modified accordingly;

4. The right to use the property as an elementary school, as permitted in this subsection, shall automatically terminate:

a. If an elementary school has not been established on the property and opened for business on or before December 31, 2011; or

b. If, following the opening of an elementary school on the property, the property is not used as an elementary school for a period of 12 consecutive months.

78. A parcel of land in the SW ¼ of Section 27, Township 18 South, Range 70 West of the 6th P.M., Fremont County, Colorado, being more particularly described as follows: Beginning at the South ¼ corner of Section 27, Township 18 South, Range 70 West of the 6th P.M., Fremont County, Colorado; thence North 00º28′32″ East a distance of 560.26 feet to the True Point of Beginning; thence North 00º03′12″ West, on the Westerly right-of-way of Field Avenue, a distance of 495.37 feet to intersect the Southerly line of Lot 1, Reed’s Subdivision; thence South 89º53′10″ West on said Southerly line, a distance of 100.00 feet; thence South 00º46′53″ East, leaving said Southerly line, a distance of 12.00 feet; thence South 89º53′10″ West, a distance of 114.00 feet to intersect the Easterly right-of-way line of Greydene Avenue; thence South 00º03′12″ East, on said Easterly line, a distance of 483.37 feet to intersect the Northerly right-of-way of Fremont Drive; thence North 89º53′10″ East, on said Northerly line, a distance of 213.85 feet to the True Point of Beginning.

C(TMU), General Commercial With Transitional Mixed Use Overlay

A. Recreational facility.

B.  Conditions. The special review use permitted in this subsection is specifically subject to the following limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions:

1.  Subject to the following limitations, the property may be used for a recreational facility for an initial period of one year, said time period to begin upon the issuance of a certificate of occupancy to the applicant for the approved use, after which time the adequacy of the off-street parking for the facility will be reviewed by the Planning Commission and City Council, if an application for such review is filed by the owner of the property on or before the one-year anniversary of the start of the use;

2.  If such review is requested, Planning Commission and City Council shall use the procedure and review criteria set forth in Section 17.24.030 of the Cañon City Municipal Code;

3.  If no such review is requested, all use of the property for a recreational facility shall terminate on or before the one-year anniversary date; and

4.  Following the review by Planning Commission, City Council shall consider the testimony and other evidence received at the review hearing it shall conduct, including the recommendations of the Planning Commission, and shall, by subsequent ordinance: (a) approve the continued use of the property for a recreational facility for a definite or indefinite period, with or without imposing conditions respecting such use; or (b) elect to terminate such special review use, effective as of a date set forth in the ordinance. The property may be used for a recreational facility, as permitted in this subsection, until the ordinance codified in this paragraph has been adopted;

5.  A minimum of 6 paved parking spaces located closest to the front door shall be labeled for 15 minute parking, to accommodate drop-offs and pick-ups by parents;

6.  The parallel parking spaces illustrated on the applicant’s site plan drawing shall be eliminated;

7.  The recessed loading area at the northeast corner of the building shall be shielded from traffic by the use of concrete bollards or other means deemed suitable and sufficient by the City Engineer;

8.  The recreational facility use and facilities authorized herein shall comply with all applicable local, State and Federal standards, rules and regulations (site plan, building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, fire, etc.);

9.  A total of 22 off-street paved parking spaces, including 2 handicap accessible spaces, shall be provided;

10.        The recreational facility use authorized herein shall terminate if such use is abandoned. If such use is discontinued for any period longer than 6 months, abandonment shall be presumed.

79. A parcel of land located within the SW ¼ of Section 32, Township 18 South, Range 70 West and the NW ¼ of Section 5, Township 19 South, Range 70 West, of the 6th P.M., Cañon City, Colorado, described as follows: Beginning at a point on the South line of the SW ¼ of said Section 32 from which the Southwest corner, being a found GLO brass cap, bears South 89º32′51″ West 1084.63 feet; thence North 89º32′51″ East 93.26 feet; thence North 06º25′06″ West 348.46 feet to the Southerly right-of-way line of Riverside Drive (assumed to be 30 feet from the centerline); thence along said right-of-way line North 79º51′35″ East 67.98 feet; thence North 72º50′46″ East 62.13 feet; thence departing said right-of-way South 04º55′09″ East 117.88 feet; thence North 84º35′00″ East 68.06 feet; thence South 05º32′56″ East 193.94 feet along the Westerly boundary line of Hall’s Addition to South Cañon; thence North 84º35′31″ East 299.62 feet along said boundary of Hall’s Addition; thence South 15º44′19″ East 344.62 feet to a point on the South Cañon Ditch; thence along the South Cañon Ditch North 73º30′00″ West 593.18 feet; thence North 60º21′03″ West 114.75 feet to the Point of Beginning. (514 Riverside Drive)

R-1, Low Density and R-2, Low-Medium Density

A. Greenhouse/nursery.

B.  Conditions. The special review use permitted in this subsection is specifically subject to the following limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions:

1.  All requirements of site plan approval must be adequately addressed by the applicants within a reasonable period of time;

2.  The greenhouse/nursery use authorized herein shall comply with all applicable local, State and Federal standards, rules and regulations (site plan, building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, fire, etc.);

3.  Truck traffic to and from the site shall be limited to the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. daily;

4.  Operation of truck-mounted refrigeration units on and around the site shall be limited to the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. daily; and

5.  The greenhouse/nursery use authorized herein shall terminate if such use is abandoned. If such use is discontinued for any period longer than 6 months, abandonment shall be presumed.

80. A parcel of land in the SW ¼ of the SW ¼ of Section 32, Township 18 South, Range 70 West of the 6th P.M., Cañon City, Colorado, described as follows: Beginning at a point from which the Northeast corner of Block 2 in Hot Springs Addition to Cañon City, as shown by the recorded plat thereof, bears North 75º44′53″ West, 736.84 feet and the Southeast corner of said SW ¼ SW ¼ bears South 59º18′20″ East, 713.89 feet, assuming the Southerly and Westerly lines in said SW ¼ SW ¼ bear North 89º07′35″ East and North 00º46′07″ West respectively, said point being the Northwesterly corner of the tract herein described; thence South 03º22′ East, 332.28 feet to the Southwesterly corner of the tract herein described; thence along the South Cañon Ditch the following five (5) courses:

1.  North 72º30′ East, 109.66 feet;

2.  South 63º49′ East, 82.31 feet;

3.  North 78º31′ East, 69.38 feet;

4.  South 75º28′ East, 51.23 feet;

5.  South 63º49′ East, 61.24 feet to the Southeasterly corner of the tract herein described; thence North 06º52′30″ West, along an existing fence line for 337.60 feet, to the Northeasterly corner of the tract herein described; thence North 85º30′20″ West, 331.10 feet to the Point of Beginning, containing 2.41 acres more or less, and excepting a strip of land 10 feet in width off and along the West side thereof now occupied by Colburn Lane. (538 Riverside Drive)

R-2, Low-Medium Density

A. Greenhouse/nursery.

B. Conditions. The special review use permitted in this subsection is specifically subject to the following limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions:

1.  All requirements of site plan approval must be adequately addressed by the applicants within a reasonable period of time;

2.  The greenhouse/nursery use authorized herein shall comply with all applicable local, State and Federal standards, rules and regulations (site plan, building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, fire, etc.);

3.  Truck traffic to and from the site shall be limited to the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. daily;

4.  Operation of truck-mounted refrigeration units on and around the site shall be limited to the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. daily; and

5.  The greenhouse/nursery use authorized herein shall terminate if such use is abandoned. If such use is discontinued for any period longer than 6 months, abandonment shall be presumed.

81. A parcel of land in the SW ¼ of the SW ¼ of Section 32, Township 18 South, Range 70 West of the 6th P.M., Cañon City, Colorado, described as follows: Beginning at a point located South 75º15′ East from the Northeast corner of Block 2, Hot Springs Addition; thence South 75º15′ East, 310.2 feet; thence South 01º47′ East to the South Cañon Ditch right-of-way; thence Westerly along the Ditch to Poplar Avenue (now Garden Street); thence North to the point of beginning, containing two (2) acres, more or less. (650 Garden Street)

R-1, Low Density

A. Greenhouse/nursery.

B. Conditions. The special review use permitted in this subsection is specifically subject to the following limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions:

1.  All requirements of site plan approval must be adequately addressed by the applicants within a reasonable period of time;

2.  The greenhouse/nursery use authorized herein shall comply with all applicable local, State and Federal standards, rules and regulations (site plan, building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, fire, etc.);

3.  Truck traffic to and from the site shall be limited to the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. daily;

4.  Operation of truck-mounted refrigeration units on and around the site shall be limited to the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. daily; and

5.  The greenhouse/nursery use authorized herein shall terminate if such use is abandoned. If such use is discontinued for any period longer than 6 months, abandonment shall be presumed.

82. The ground floor of the east half of the building situated on Lot 3, Block 1, Harrison, Rockafellow & Macon’s Addition to Cañon City, known and numbered as 712 Main Street.

CB, Central Business

A. Recreational facility (workout facility).

B. Conditions. The special review use permitted in this subsection is specifically subject to the following limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions:

1.  The approval herein granted shall extend only to the tenancy of “Curves,” a national chain of workout facilities, or any successor tenant operating substantially the same type of workout facility business at the location described hereinabove. If and when Curves (or a substantially similar successor business) vacates the property for a period of time in excess of one year, the approval granted in this subsection will terminate.

83. The ground floor of the west half of the building situated on Lot 3, Block 16, Cañon City, known and numbered as 323 Main Street.

CB, Central Business

A. Training facility (karate studio).

B. Conditions. The special review use permitted in this subsection is specifically subject to the following limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions:

1.  The approval herein granted shall extend only to the tenancy of Rocky Mountain Shito-Ryu Karate-Do or any successor tenant operating substantially the same type of training facility business at the location described hereinabove. If and when Rocky Mountain Shito-Ryu Karate-Do (or a substantially similar successor business) vacates the property for a period of time in excess of one year, the approval granted in this subsection will terminate.

84. Lots 15 and 16 and the east 15 feet of Lot 14, Block 16, Cañon City.

CB, Central Business

A. Social and recreational facility.

B. Conditions. The special review use permitted in this subsection is specifically subject to the following limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions:

1. The approval herein granted shall extend only to the tenancy of the Boys & Girls Club of Fremont County, Inc., or a similar organization, and will terminate if the use is abandoned for a period of time in excess of one year.

85. Lot 10, Block 2, Ferrier’s Addition

R-1, Low Density Residential

A. Accessory dwelling unit.

B. Conditions. The special review use permitted in this subsection is specifically subject to the following limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions:

1. The applicant must complete all requirements of the building, electrical and plumbing permits issued for the construction of the ADU and obtain a certificate of occupancy;

2. The water and sanitary sewer service must be found to be adequate for the proposed use;

3. The applicant must show proof of payment of any applicable water and/or sewer tap fees.

86. Lots 26, 27 and 28, Block 46, Harding’s Second Addition

R-2, Medium Density Residential

A. Therapy clinic.

B. Conditions. The special review use permitted in this subsection is specifically subject to the following limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions:

1. The existing sign on the premises must be brought into compliance with the requirements and limitations set forth in Section 17.30.070, Signs in residential districts, of the Cañon City Municipal Code, and the sign must remain unlit;

2. The two (2) existing driveways must be striped to accommodate three (3) standard and one handicap-accessible parking spaces, according to the requirements set forth in Subsection C of Section 17.28.070, Parking lot layout standards, of the Cañon City Municipal Code; and

3. The approval shall terminate automatically if the use is abandoned for more than one year.

87. A tract in the SW ¼ of Section 28, Township 18 South, Range 70 West of the 6th P.M., described as follows:

 

Beginning at the Northwest corner of Happy Homes, a subdivision in Cañon City, Colorado, which point of beginning is the point of intersection of the South line of Lot 26 in Block 8 in Palmer, Greenwood and Mellen’s Addition to Cañon City with the East line of said Block 8, and which point of beginning is 1261.92 feet East and 1026.32 feet North of the Southwest corner of Section 28, Township 18 South, Range 70 West of the 6th Principal Meridian; thence North along the East line of said Block 8, 140.78 feet to a point on the Southerly line of College Avenue, which point is the Northeast corner of said Block 8; thence Northeasterly along the Southerly line of College Avenue, 99.3 feet to a point on the Southerly line of College Avenue, 15.00 feet Southwesterly from the Northwest corner of Lot 8 in Humphrey Addition to Cañon City; thence Southeasterly and parallel with the Westerly line of said Lot 8, 124.64 feet to the Northerly line of said Happy Homes, which Northerly line is the Northerly line of the alley on the extreme Northerly side of said Happy Homes; thence Southwesterly along said Northerly line of Happy Homes to the Point of Beginning. All references to Happy Homes, a subdivision in Cañon City, and to Palmer, Greenwood and Mellen’s Addition to Cañon City are to said subdivision and addition respectively, according to the plats thereof on file and of record in the Office of the County Clerk and Recorder of Fremont County, Colorado.

R-1, Low Density Residential

A. Accessory Dwelling Unit.

B. Conditions. The special review use permitted in this subsection is specifically subject to the following limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions:

1.  The applicants must obtain all required building, electrical and plumbing permits for the construction of the ADU and obtain a certificate of occupancy; and

2.  The applicants must show proof of payment of the sewer tap fees prior to issuance of any building permit or certificate of occupancy.

88. Lot 1, Dawson Business Park

C, Commercial

A. Watchman’s Quarters.

B. Conditions. The special review use permitted in this subsection is specifically subject to the following limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions:

1. The applicants must obtain all required building, electrical and plumbing permits for the construction of the watchman’s quarters and obtain a certificate of occupancy; and

2. The applicants must show proof of payment of the sewer tap fees prior to issuance of any building permit or certificate of occupancy; and

3. The applicant and zoning administrator shall have flexibility in siting the watchman’s quarters in the general vicinity, as proposed in the application, but outside of the designated floodplain.

89. Lot 1 & East 16 ft. of Lot 2, Block 17, Palmer, Greenwood and Mellen’s Addition

R3, High Density Residential

A. Professional Office.

B. Conditions. The special review use permitted in this subsection is specifically subject to the following limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions:

1. The applicant shall obtain all building, electrical, plumbing or other local, state and/or federal permits as they may be required for the operation of the Special Review Use (professional office) as represented in the application and/or for the conversion of the single-family home to an office.

2. The applicant shall be allowed to use two (2) existing signs for the business as wall signs only.

3. The Special Review Use (professional office) shall not be limited to a specific time period but shall remain in full force and effect so long as the use represented in the application and granted herein continues.

4. Notwithstanding condition 3 above, the Special Review Use approval (professional office) shall automatically terminate without any further action by the City if: a) the use granted has not been established at the approved location within a period of one (1) year from the date of the approval; or b) the use granted has been discontinued for a period of one (1) year or longer.

90. A metes and bounds parcel in Sec. 32, T18S, R70W of the 6th P.M. Beg. at the SE corner of S. 2nd St. and E. Douglas Ave; th ely 247 ft.; th sly 200 ft.; th wly 247 ft.; th nly 200 ft. to POB.

R-3, High Density Residential

A. Training Facility, more particularly described as a School of Dance.

B. Conditions. The special review use permitted in this subsection is specifically subject to the following limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions:

1. This application shall not be approved unless and until an amendment to the Cañon City Zoning Regulations is approved allowing a Training Facility as a Special Review Use in the R-3 High Density Residential Zone District.

2. The applicant must obtain all required building, electrical and plumbing permits for any construction that may be necessary and obtain a Certificate of Occupancy.

3. The approval herein granted shall extend to the tenancy of The B. Box School of Dance and Kinetic Expression or similar organization, and shall automatically terminate without any further action by the City if: 1) the use has not been established at the approved location within a period of one (1) year from the date of approval, or 2) the use granted has been discontinued for a period in excess of one (1) year.

91. A portion of Lot 1, Block 40, Fruitmere Subdivision

R-2, Medium Density Residential

A. Child Care Center

B. Conditions. The special review use permitted in this subsection is specifically subject to the following limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions:

1. The applicant must obtain all required building, electrical and plumbing permits for any construction or alterations that may be necessary and obtain a Certificate of Occupancy if required. The applicant shall comply with any requirements of the Fremont Sanitation District and the Cañon City Area Fire District.

2. The applicant shall install 6-foot privacy fencing so that the entire north property line is fenced. A license agreement with the City may be required for the replacement of a fence if any fence is outside the property line.

3. Prior to occupancy of the subject building as the Giving Tree Child Care Center, the applicant shall execute a Future Improvements Agreement with the City for the provision of future public improvements and pay a one-time storm water impact fee of $375.00.

4. The applicant must obtain a State license for the operation of a child care facility at the proposed location, a copy of which shall be provided to the City Planning and Zoning office for its records.

5. Unless otherwise modified by this approval or other subsequent decision of the City Council as it may apply to this request, all material representations made by the applicant in its application submittal and/or in any public hearing shall be binding upon the applicant. The applicant’s failure to perform in accordance with such material representations could result in the revocation of this approval.

6. The approval herein granted shall extend only to the tenancy of Giving Tree Child Care Center or a similar organization so long as any subsequent owner/tenant operates the facility in general conformance with this approval, and will terminate if the use is abandoned for a period of time in excess of one year.

92. North 63 feet of Lots 15 & 16, Block 26, Tr-A, Cañon City

R-3, High Density Residential

A. Accessory Dwelling Unit

B. Conditions. The special review use permitted in this subsection is specifically subject to the following limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions:

1. The applicant shall comply with all requirements of Chapter 17.15, Accessory Dwelling Units of the Cañon City Zoning Regulations as such regulations pertain to the ADU requested: a new ADU in an existing single-family home.

2. The applicant shall obtain all required building, electrical and plumbing permits for any construction or alterations that may be necessary and obtain a Certificate of Occupancy if required.

3. The applicant shall comply with any and all requirements of the Fremont Sanitation District and the Cañon City Area Fire District.

4. Unless otherwise modified by this approval or other subsequent decision of the City Council as it may apply to this request, all material representations made by the applicant in its application submittal and/or in any public hearing shall be binding upon the applicant. The applicant’s failure to perform in accordance with such material representations could result in the revocation of this approval.

5. The approval herein granted shall extend only to the ADU plan as it is presented in this application: a new ADU in an existing single-family home, and will terminate if the ADU has not received a Certificate of Occupancy within one (1) year of the approval of this Special Review Use Request.

93. Lot 1, Zupan Subdivision

R-1, Low Density Residential

A. Accessory Dwelling Unit

B. Conditions. The special review use permitted in this subsection is specifically subject to the following limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions:

1. The applicant shall comply with all requirements of Chapter 17.15, Accessory Dwelling Units of the Cañon City Zoning Regulations as such regulations pertain to the ADU requested: a new ADU in an existing single-family home.

2. The applicant shall obtain all required building, electrical and plumbing permits for any construction or alterations that may be necessary and obtain a Certificate of Occupancy if required.

3. The applicant shall comply with any and all requirements of the Fremont Sanitation District and the Cañon City Area Fire District.

4. Unless otherwise modified by this approval or other subsequent decision of the City Council as it may apply to this request, all material representations made by the applicant in its application submittal and/or in any public hearing shall be binding upon the applicant. The applicant’s failure to perform in accordance with such material representations could result in the revocation of this approval.

5. Notwithstanding other material representations made by the applicant, full-time use of the ADU is contemplated.

6. The approval herein granted shall extend only to the ADU plan as it is presented in this application: a new ADU in the loft area of the existing detached garage, and will terminate if the ADU has not received a Certificate of Occupancy within one (1) year of the approval of this Special Review Use Request.

94. Lots 3 & 4, Block 8, HRM Addition and Outlot 1 Cañon City subject to easement B412 P439 and E2 of vacated 7th St lying S of the S line of the alley in Block 1 Cañon City and adjacent to Outlot 1 B504 P55, Lots 1 & 2, Block 1 Cañon City and W2 of vacated 7th St lying S of the S line of the alley in Block 1 Cañon City and adjacent to Lot 1 B504 P55

C, General Commercial

Light Industry with less than 100 employees. The special review use permitted in this subsection is specifically subject to the following limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions:

1. The approved use shall not exceed fifty (50) employees.

2. The applicant shall obtain all required building, electrical and plumbing permits for any construction or alterations as they may be necessary in the future. The applicant shall meet the six (6) requirements of Section 3409.4 of the 2006 IBC to the extent required as well as comply with the Building Inspector’s requirements for safety: a) Maintain thirty-six (36) inch aisles between equipment throughout production areas of the building, and, b) Interior wall openings in “Area A” as depicted on the reviewed building plans must be thirty-six (36) inches wide.

3. The applicant shall provide a minimum of sixteen (16) off-street parking spaces in conformance with the approved plan provided on February 21, 2017. Said parking shall be inspected by the Planning Dept.

4. The applicant shall install, and have inspected, RPZ devices as required by the City Engineer.

5. All conditions shall be completed within ninety (90) days of the approval of this application.

6. Unless otherwise modified by this approval or other subsequent decision of the City Council as it may apply to this request, all material representations made by the applicant in its application submittal and/or in any public hearing shall be binding upon the applicant. The applicant’s failure to perform in accordance with such material representations could result in the revocation of this approval.

7. The approval herein granted shall extend only to Hale Pet Door, or other similarly operated manufacturing business, as presented in this application and will terminate if the use is discontinued for a period of one year or more.

95. Lots 1 & 2, Block 2, Merriam’s 1st Addition

R-1, Low Density Residential

Accessory Dwelling Unit. The special review use permitted in this subsection is specifically subject to the following limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions:

1. The applicant shall comply with all requirements of Chapter 17.15, Accessory Dwelling Units of the Cañon City Zoning Regulations, except Subsection 17.15.030(F), as such regulations pertain to the ADU requested: an existing ADU located in an existing detached garage, and shall obtain a Certificate of Compliance for the approved ADU pursuant to Chapter 17.15.030(J)(2) no later than ninety (90) days after the approval of this application.

2. The applicant shall obtain all required building, electrical and plumbing permits for any construction or alterations that may be necessary and obtain a Certificate of Occupancy if required.

3. The applicant shall request an assignment of address for the ADU from the City within thirty (30) days of the approval of this request.

4. The applicant shall comply with any and all requirements of the Fremont Sanitation District and the Cañon City Area Fire District.

5. Unless otherwise modified by this approval or other subsequent decision of the City Council as it may apply to this request, all material representations made by the applicant in its application submittal and/or in any public hearing shall be binding upon the applicant. The applicant’s failure to perform in accordance with such material representations could result in the revocation of this approval.

6. The approval herein granted shall extend only to the ADU plan as it is presented in this application: an existing ADU in the loft area of the existing detached garage, and will terminate if the ADU has not received a Certificate of Compliance within ninety (90) days of the approval of this Special Review Use Request.

96. Lot 30, Raynolds Subdivision

R-2, Medium Density Residential

Accessory Dwelling Unit. The special review use permitted in this subsection is specifically subject to the following limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions:

1. The applicant shall comply with all requirements of Chapter 17.15 of the Cañon City Municipal Code, Accessory Dwelling Units, in particular Sections 17.15.030(J)(2) through (6). All requirements of Sections 17.15.030(J)(2) through (6) shall be satisfied and a Certificate of Compliance obtained prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for the new single-family home.

2. The applicant shall obtain all required building, electrical and plumbing permits for any construction or alterations that may be necessary for compliance with Sections 17.15.030(J)(2) through (6).

3. The applicant shall comply with any and all requirements of the Fremont Sanitation District and the Cañon City Area Fire District.

4. Unless otherwise modified by this approval or other subsequent decision of the City Council as it may apply to this request, all material representations made by the applicant in its application submittal and/or in any public hearing shall be binding upon the applicant. The applicant’s failure to perform in accordance with such material representations could result in the revocation of this approval.

5. The approval herein granted shall extend only to the ADU plan as it is presented in the application: the existing single-family home shall be converted to an ADU upon the construction of a new single-family home. Said approval shall terminate without any further action by the City if the new, proposed single-family home and the existing structure have not received a Certificate of Occupancy and Certificate of Compliance, respectively, within eighteen (18) months of the approval of this application.

97. Lot 13, Block 9, Cañon City

CB, Central Business District

Recreational Facility (Fitness Center). The special review use permitted in this subsection is specifically subject to the following limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions:

1. The applicant shall obtain all required building, electrical and plumbing permits for any construction or alterations that may be necessary.

2. Unless otherwise modified by this approval or other subsequent decision of the City Council as it may apply to this request, all material representations made by the applicant in its application submittal and/or in any public hearing shall be binding upon the applicant. The applicant’s failure to perform in accordance with such material representations could result in the revocation of this approval.

3. The approval herein granted shall extend only to Snap Fitness and as the use as presented in this application and will terminate if the use is abandoned or is not established within one year of the date of the approval.

4. The applicant shall inform patrons and post City parking restrictions (no parking on Main Street 4 a.m.—6 a.m.) at the facility.

98. Metes and Bounds parcel in Section 33, T18S, R70W of the 6th P.M.

R-L, Rural Living

Accessory Dwelling Unit. The special review use permitted in this subsection is specifically subject to the following limitations, restrictions, requirements and conditions:

1. The applicant shall comply with all requirements of Section 17.15.030, Accessory Dwelling Units of the Cañon City Zoning Regulations, in particular Subsections J.2—J.6. All requirements of Subsections J.2—J.6 shall be completed and a Certificate of Compliance shall be obtained prior to, or simultaneously with, the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for the new single-family home.

2. The applicant shall obtain all required building, electrical and plumbing permits for any construction or alterations that may be necessary for compliance with Subsections J.2—J.6 of Section 17.15.030.

3. The applicant shall comply with any, and all, requirements of the Fremont Sanitation District and the Cañon City Area Fire District. The applicant shall obtain a floodplain development permit(s) for new structure and modifications to existing structure.

4. The applicant shall provide written evidence of the transfer of the subject property to his or her ownership prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Compliance for the ADU.

5. Unless otherwise modified by this approval or other subsequent decision of the City Council as it may apply to this request, all material representations made by the applicant in its application submittal and/or in any public hearing shall be binding upon the applicant. The applicant’s failure to perform in accordance with such material representations could result in the revocation of this approval.

6. The approval herein granted shall extend only to the ADU plan as it is presented in this application: the existing single-family home shall be converted to an ADU upon the construction of a new single-family home. Said approval shall terminate without any further action by the City if the new, proposed single-family home and the existing structure have not received a Certificate of Occupancy and Certificate of Compliance, respectively, within twenty-four (24) months of the approval of this application.

99. All of blocks 1 and 2, Virginia Park Addition and Lots 1 through 14, Block 5, Virginia Park Addition

R-2, Medium Density Residential

Elementary school

100. Lots 1 through 4, Cañon City Middle School Exemption Plat

R-2, Medium Density Residential

Middle school

101. Lot 2, Redhawk Landing Minor Subdivision

C, General Commercial

Twelve (12) space Recreational Vehicle Park

102. Lot 2, Jackson Subdivision Exemption

R-1, Low Density Residential

One Accessory Dwelling Unit

(Ord. 11-2020 § 1; Ord. 28-2019 § 1; Ord. 22-2019 § 1; Ord. 26-2018 § 1; Ord. 9-2018 § 1; Ord. 41-2017 § 1; Ord. 38-2017 § 1; Ord. 27-2017 § 1; Ord. 19-2017 § 1; Ord. 8-2017 § 1; Ord. 1-2016 § 1; Ord. 16-2015; Ord. 3-2015; Ord. 15-2014; Ord. 6-2014; Ord. 16-2013 § 1; Ord. 11-2013 § 1; Ord. 8-2013 § 1; Ord. 5-2013 § 1; Ord. 19-2011; Ord. 2-2011; Ord. 13-2010; Ord. 9-2010; Ord. 23-2009; Ord. 17-2009; Ord. 13-2009; Ord. 12-2009; Ord. 29-2008; Ord. 22-2008; Ord. 19-2008; Ord. 10-2008; Ord. 1-2008 § 1; Ord. 11-2007 § 1; Ord. 10-2007; Ord. 7-2007 § 1; Ord. 4-2007; Ord. 18-2006; Ord. 16-2006; Ord. 10-2006; Ord. 14-2005; Ord. 11-2005; Ord. 5-2005; Ord. 14-2004 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 2-2004 § 1; Ord. 26-2003; Ord. 4-2003 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 23-2002 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 19-2002 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 11-2002 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 33-2001 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 6-2001 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 20-2000 § 1; Ord. 16-2000 § 1; Ord. 11-2000 § 1; Ord. 31-1999 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 22-1999 § 1; Ord. 19-1999 § 2; Ord. 13-1999 § 1; Ord. 27-1997 § 2; Ord. 24-1997; Ord. 19-1997; Ord. 25-1991 § 22)

 

17.24.060 Approval criteria for rafting takeouts.
    A.  In addition to the approval criteria specified at Section 17.24.030, no application for a rafting takeout facility shall be approved unless such approval is granted through a written rafting takeout facility permit issued for a period that is not less than one year nor more than five (5) years. Each such permit shall clearly state:

    1.   The full name, address and telephone number of the person to whom the rafting takeout facility permit is issued;

    2.   If the permit is issued to any person other than a natural person, such permit shall also identify, by name, address and telephone number, all principals having a ten percent (10%) or greater ownership interest in the partnership, corporation or other entity to which the permit is issued and also shall identify, by name, address and telephone number, a natural person as that entity’s “facility manager.” The facility manager must reside in Colorado at all times when the facility is capable of being used and operated under the terms of the permit. Any change in the identity of a facility manager must be reported in writing to the City Clerk no later than ten (10) days following such change;

    3.   The dates during the calendar year and hours of the day when the facility may be used and operated as a rafting takeout;

    4.   Limitations as to the number and types of vehicles, including buses and trailers, that may be parked or otherwise situated at the facility during permitted days and hours of operation. Depending upon the size and site plan of the facility, client/customer parking may be prohibited or limited;

    5.   The particulars as to temporary or permanent restroom facilities, if any, required at the facility during days and hours of operation;

    6.   Permitted access routes to and from the facility for vehicles, including buses and trailers, owned, operated or used by the river outfitter;

    7.   Limitations on the number of clients and other individuals, including the agents and employees of the river outfitter, who may put in or take out at the facility during any given day;

    8.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this title to the contrary, paving or other surface treatment requirements;

    9.   Any state or local licensing requirements that may apply to the river outfitter’s operation in the city, use of vessels, buses, trailers and other vehicles within the city;

    10. Any state or local insurance requirements that may apply to the river outfitter’s operation in the city, use of vessels, buses, trailers and other vehicles within the city;

    11. Any other conditions or requirements deemed necessary by City Council to eliminate or mitigate traffic hazards and congestion in the neighborhood where the rafting takeout facility is located and on streets and highways in the vicinity of such facility;

    12. Any other conditions or requirements deemed necessary by City Council to eliminate or mitigate detrimental impacts to the health, safety, convenience or welfare of the inhabitants of the neighborhood in which the rafting takeout facility is located;

    13. The termination date of the permit.

    B.   Any rafting takeout facility use authorized through the special review process shall be subject to an annual compliance review by City Council. Any rafting takeout facility permit issued pursuant to Subsection A of this section may be revoked by City Council during or following a public meeting, preceded by not less than seven (7) days’ prior written notice to the holder of the permit, upon proof of the holder’s material violation of one or more of the conditions stated in the permit.

    C.   No modification of any condition stated in any rafting takeout facility permit shall occur without prior written approval from City Council following a public hearing that is preceded by at least fifteen (15) days’ prior notice published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Any modifications granted through such written approval shall be incorporated into and become a part of the original permit. Applications for such modifications shall be determined in light of the standards set forth at Subsection A of this section.

    D.  Rafting takeout facility permits issued pursuant to Subsection A of this section shall be nontransferable. City Council may deny a rafting takeout permit to any person who operates or uses a rafting takeout facility without first having obtained a valid rafting takeout permit covering such facility. City Council also may deny a rafting takeout facility permit with respect to any property that was used as a rafting takeout facility by any person not holding a valid rafting takeout facility permit covering such facility at the time of such use.

    E.   In determining the duration of any rafting takeout permit issued pursuant to Subsection A of this section, City Council shall consider the following:

    1.   The recommendation of Planning Commission;

    2.   Planning staff recommendations, if any;

    3.   Recommendations from the office of City Clerk relative to matters of licensing and insurance;

    4.   The wishes of neighbors and the reasonable needs of the neighborhood within which the facility will be located and operated;

    5.   The length of time the applicant has operated as a river outfitter having significant activities within the city related to commercial river rafting;

    6.   The length of time the applicant has operated as a river outfitter having significant activities within the geographical area known as the Arkansas Headwaters Recreation Area;

    7.   The degree to which impacts (adverse or otherwise) upon the neighborhood in which the facility would be used and operated are known or capable of reasonable prediction;

    8.   The degree to which impacts (adverse or otherwise) upon the street system in the vicinity of the facility or proposed facility are known or capable of reasonable prediction.

    F.   Permits of shorter or intermediate duration shall be favored whenever:

    1.   The applicant is a person without an operational history as a river outfitter in and around the city;

    2.   The applicant is a person who has an operational history in and around the city which includes documented adverse impacts upon the neighborhood within which the applicant operates or has operated a rafting takeout facility or with respect to traffic in the immediate vicinity of the facility, when such adverse impacts are not considered serious enough to warrant a denial of the permit;

    3.   The involved real property has not previously been legally used as a rafting takeout facility;

    4.   The involved real property has been legally used as a rafting takeout facility and such prior use—whether by the applicant or by a prior permittee—has resulted in documented adverse impacts to the neighborhood in which the facility is located or with respect to traffic in the immediate vicinity of the facility, when such adverse impacts are not considered serious enough to warrant a denial of the permit. (Ord. 5-1999 § 2)

Chapter 17.28 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
17.28.010 Off-street parking spaces—General requirements.
    A.  Off-street parking shall be provided and maintained according to the requirements of this chapter. The number, size, location and layout of required off-street parking shall be brought into compliance with this chapter when: (1) a new structure is erected; (2) an existing structure is enlarged; or (3) a change in use of an existing structure or property occurs that does not meet the Site Plan Review exemption criteria contained in Chapter 4.12 of the Cañon City Subdivision and Development Regulations.

    B.   Off-street parking spaces for all uses shall be located on the same lot or property on which the use is located except that less than fifty percent (50%) of the required parking spaces for a commercial or industrial use may be located off-site provided: (1) the off-site parking shall be provided within a reasonable walking distance not to exceed five hundred (500) feet from the use or property; (2) the off-site location is owned or under the control of the use requiring the off-site parking by agreement that ensures the off-site parking will be available at all times to the use or until such time as the use no longer requires the off-site parking; and (3) sidewalks and pedestrian cross walks approved by the City Engineer between the off-site parking and the property on which the use is located either exist or will be provided by the use requiring the off-site parking.

    C.   It is the responsibility of the owner of a use or property to obtain an access permit from the Colorado Department of Transportation whenever a parking lot has direct access to/from a State Highway or as otherwise required by the State Highway Access Code before a building permit is issued by the City.

    D.  No building permit shall be issued by the City until plans are presented that show an area within the property that is for exclusive use as off-street parking and loading space when required.

    E.   Parking spaces required under this chapter shall be improved as required and made available for the use occupying the structure or property before a Certificate of Occupancy will be issued by the Building Official.

    F.   Once a Certificate of Occupancy has been granted by the City and the owner of the use or property has provided parking spaces according to the approved building permit or site plan, a subsequent change of use of the property shall be deemed to be conditional upon the continuance and availability of the parking provisions of the approved permit.

    G.  Any change in the use of a structure or property that increases the off-street parking as required under this chapter shall be unlawful and in violation of the Municipal Code until such time as the use complies with all applicable provisions of this chapter.

    H.  Once a parking space has been constructed according to the requirements of this chapter said parking space can be eliminated only if its removal will not result in fewer parking spaces than required by this chapter for the existing use of the structure or property. (Ord. 9-2011)

 

17.28.020 Exemptions from off-street parking requirements.
    A.  Uses of any structure or property in the Central Business (CB) Zone District shall be exempt from these parking requirements.

    B.   Parking for historic structures/ properties and their use shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter only as follows:

    1.   There shall be no off-street parking requirement for the use of a structure or property that demonstrates significant historical integrity, and/or architectural, archaeological, and cultural importance, as identified in the Cañon City Historic Building Survey or according to the Secretary of the Interior standards for historic preservation for structures and properties outside of the Central Business (CB) Zone District, as determined by the City Historic Preservation Officer, or as otherwise designated for historic preservation (together “Historic Structures”).

    2.   Only a new addition/expansion to a Historic Structure shall be required to provide off-street parking in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 9-2011)

 

17.28.030 Minimum standards.
    A.  All standards set forth in this chapter are the minimum requirements of the City and, as such, each land use required to comply with this chapter shall meet all minimum standards. The intent of a minimum standard is to promote long-term cost-efficiency and environmental sensitivity while ensuring that an appropriate level of parking will be available to serve citizens, visitors and businesses.

    B.   It is the obligation of the owner of any use or property that attracts vehicles, thereby generating the need for parking, to consider its actual parking demand and the type of vehicles attracted to the property and provide a sufficient number, size and design of off-street parking for its specific needs (e.g., large trucks may require parking spaces or drive aisles that exceed the minimum standards herein; locations along Highway 50 should consider the effect of Summer tourist traffic on parking needs). Typical space dimensions for larger trucks might be nine (9) feet in width to nineteen (19) or twenty (20) feet in length and a drive aisle up to thirty (30) feet wide.

    C.   The City is not responsible for a property owner’s or tenant’s failure to design and construct parking spaces that exceed the minimum requirements set forth in this chapter, including, but not limited to, the number of spaces provided or the dimensions to which spaces and drive aisles are constructed, in order to meet the specific parking needs of their use. (Ord. 9-2011)

 

17.28.040 Parking and loading area compliance review.
    A.  When parking is required under this chapter (excluding single-family homes and duplexes), a plan drawn to scale indicating how the off-street parking and loading requirements will be met shall accompany an application for site plan or building permit approval. The plan shall show all elements necessary, including, but not limited to, the following:

    1.   Property lines, easements, and adjoining rights-of-way;

    2.   Delineation of the location and size of individual standard, compact and handicap-accessible parking spaces and loading spaces, with dimensions of representative spaces, driveways and maneuvering aisles clearly noted;

    3.   Access to streets and property to be served and a CDOT access authorization when required;

    4.   Directional signage, striping, curbing, wheel stops or bumpers, lighting, pedestrian walkways, curb cuts, sidewalks, landscaped areas, or other features;

    5.   The location of buildings or uses to be served by the off-street parking;

    6.   Off-site or on-street parking locations, when allowed under this chapter, and the design standards of related parking improvements; and

    7.   An analysis of the total number of off-street parking spaces required, which may include a floor plan of the building indicating the square footage of floor area and the use to which it is devoted, information regarding the number of employees or rated capacity of the building or other similar information sufficient to determine the number of spaces required. (Ord. 9-2011)

 

17.28.050 Number of off-street parking spaces required for specific uses.
    A.  Number of Parking Spaces Required. All uses shall provide at least the minimum number of off-street parking spaces listed below:

 

Use Type

Minimum Parking Spaces Required

Residential

Single-family and duplex dwellings

2 spaces per dwelling unit

Multi-family dwelling, 2 or more bedrooms per dwelling unit

2 spaces per dwelling unit

Multi-family dwelling, 1 bedroom per dwelling unit

1.5 spaces per dwelling unit

Multi-family dwelling, studio or efficiency apartment

1 space per dwelling unit

All multi-family developments containing 5 or more dwelling units, regardless of the number of bedrooms

1 additional guest parking space per each 5 dwelling units or fraction thereof

Accessory dwelling unit

1 space/accessory unit

Group Homes

For the aged

1 space per 3 residents plus 1 per staff member/attendant

For the developmentally disabled

2 spaces per facility plus 1 per staff member/attendant

Resident care living facility

1 space per 2 residents plus 1 per staff member/attendant

Commercial Lodging

 

Hotels and motels

1.2 spaces per guest room

Bed and breakfast facility, rooming house, boardinghouse

1 space per dwelling unit plus 1 space per guest room

Dormitories, fraternities, sororities

1 space per 2 beds

Educational

Day care, preschool, nursery

2 spaces per employee

Elementary school, kindergarten, middle school

3 spaces per classroom, plus 1 space per administrative employee

High school, college

1 space per 3 seats in classroom, plus 1 space per staff member (see auditoriums, gymnasiums, below)

Vocational or commercial school

1 space per 3 seats in classroom, plus 1 space per staff member (see auditoriums, gymnasiums, below)

Institutional/Civic/Public

Nursing home, assisted living facility

1 space per 4 beds, plus 1 space per 2 employees

Hospital

1 space per 4 beds, plus 1 space per 2 employees on busiest shift, plus loading and emergency access

Auditoriums, gymnasiums, conference centers, meeting rooms

1 space per 4 seats of rated capacity

Churches, mortuaries

1 space per 4 seats in chapel/sanctuary where the congregation is seated during worship services (22″ of undivided seating = 1 seat)

Library

1 space per 500 square feet

Museum

1 space per 1,000 square feet

Commercial Amusement/Entertainment

Stadium, arena, theater (not drive-in)

1 space per 4 seats, plus 1 space per employee

Membership clubs and lodges

1 space per 150 square feet, plus 1 space per employee

Bowling alley

4 spaces per lane

Skating rink, arcade or game room, pool hall, indoor recreation center

1 space per 150 square feet

Tennis, racquetball and other court games

3 spaces per court

Fitness centers, health clubs, training facilities (dance, martial arts, gymnastics, animal obedience)

1 space per 250 square feet

Golf course

3 spaces per hole, plus additional spaces required for accessory uses (restaurant, bar, pro shop)

Golf driving range

1 space per tee

Miniature golf

1 space per hole

Amusement park, zoo

30 spaces per developed acre

Swimming pool

1 space per 4 persons maximum rated capacity

Riding stable

1 space per 4 stalls

Commercial – Retail/Service/Office

Convenience Grocery/Liquor

 

Without Gas

1 space per 300 square feet

With Gas

1 space per 200 square feet

Restaurant, fast-food (orders taken at a counter for either on- or off-site consumption)

1 space per 75 square feet

Restaurant, standard (orders taken at a table for consumption on-site – may also offer take-out)

1 space per 125 square feet

Restaurant – outdoor dining

1 space per 4 seats provided

Bars, taverns, nightclubs

1 space per 100 square feet

Retail, general

1 space per 300 square feet

Retail, low-intensity (boats, vehicles, equipment, office warehouse, furniture, major appliances, floor coverings, and similar uses often with showroom sales)

1 space per 500 square feet

Flea market

1.5 spaces per vendor stall

Personal services (laundry and dry cleaners, beauty shop, nail salon, day spa, tattoo parlor, travel agency, shoe repair, tailor)

1 space per 300 square feet

Office, professional, administrative, insurance, banks, savings and loan

1 space per 300 square feet

Vehicle service and repair

1 space per 200 square feet or 3 spaces per service bay, whichever is greater, plus adequate area for vehicles stored longer than 72 hours

Ambulance and taxi service

1 space per vehicle, plus 1 space per employee on principal shift

Kennel

1 space per 400 square feet

Pet daycare, groomer

1 space per 200 square feet

Medical

Medical and dental office/clinic

1 space per 250 square feet

Veterinary clinic, animal hospital

1 space per 300 square feet

Hospital

(See Institutional/Civic/Public)

Manufacturing, Wholesale and Industrial

Manufacturing and fabrication

2 spaces per 3 employees plus 1 space per 300 square feet of office or administrative area, or 1 space per 750 square feet, whichever is greater

Warehouses, public utility building, equipment rental centers, contractor’s equipment yards, lumberyards, research labs, printing, publishing, laundry and dry cleaning plants, and similar uses

1 space per each employee or 1 space per 1,000 square feet, whichever is greater

Wholesale and distribution

1 space per 300 square feet of office or administrative space, plus 1 space per 1,000 square feet of additional floor area

Food production and processing, meatpacking, cold storage warehouse, beverage bottling and distribution

1 space per 750 square feet

Self-storage or mini-warehouse, outdoor storage, RV and large vehicle storage

1 space per 300 square feet of office space, if applicable

Salvage yard

1 space per 300 square feet of office space

 

 

    B.   When square feet are specified in the above chart the area measured shall be the primary interior floor area of the structure(s) on the property within which the use operates, which shall exclude stairwells, restrooms, elevator shafts, hallways, ornamental balconies, space occupied by heating, air conditioning or other utility equipment, and interior area devoted to parking or loading.

    C.   The number of employees of a new or expanding business shall be estimated in a manner reflecting realistic needs, considering factors such as number of shifts, employees per shift, and parking space turnover rates of the existing or comparable business. The Zoning Administrator shall determine number of employees from an examination of employment information presented by the use or owner of the property.

    D.  In the event several uses occupy a structure or property simultaneously, the total requirements for off-street parking shall be the sum of the requirements of the several uses computed separately based on the proportional area devoted to each separate use.

    E.   A stacked or tandem parking arrangement, where one vehicle parked directly behind another must be removed before the front vehicle can exit its space, shall be allowed only for a structure containing one, two (2), or three (3) residential dwelling units.

    F.   The Zoning Administrator shall determine the number of off-street parking spaces required for uses not specifically listed in this section following an assessment of comparable uses and associated parking requirements. (Ord. 9-2011)

 

17.28.060 Dimensional standards.
    A.  Standard Parking Spaces. Standard parking spaces shall comply with the minimum dimensions and layout requirements specified in Table 17.28.060.A, as generally illustrated in Figure 17.28.060.A. Parking arrangements may include any aisle configuration. (Whenever possible, the City encourages the use of ninety (90) degree parking spaces within parking lots to reduce the unused surface area that otherwise occurs in seventy-five (75) degree, sixty (60) degree, or forty-five (45) degree parking spaces. Forty-five (45) degree parking spaces are the least efficient spaces.)

    B.   Compact Vehicle Spaces.

    1.   Compact parking spaces shall comply with the minimum dimensions requirements specified in Table 17.28.060.B and as generally illustrated in Figure 17.28.060.A.

    2.   In parking areas containing more than ten (10) spaces, up to twenty (20) percent of the spaces exceeding the first ten (10) spaces may be designed for compact vehicles.

    3.   Compact parking spaces shall be labeled for such purposes.

    C.   Interlocking Standard Parking Spaces. Interlocking standard parking spaces shall comply with the minimum dimensions and layout requirements specified in Table 17.28.060.A, as generally illustrated in Figure 17.28.060.A.

 

Table 17.28.060.A

Minimum Dimensional Requirements for Standard Parking Spaces

 

Measurement

 

A

B

C

D

E

Parking Angle (Degrees)

Space Width

Space Depth

Aisle Width (2-Way)

Aisle Width (1-Way)

Depth of Interlocking Spaces

Parallel 0º

8′

22′

18′

12′

n/a

45º

8.5′

17′

18′

12′

28.25′

60º

8.5′

18′

18′

16′

32′

75º

8.5′

18.5′

22′

20′

35′

Perpendicular 90º

8.5′

18′

24′

24′

36′

Note: A one and one-half foot overhang dimension (measurement F in Figure 17.28.060.A) for parking lots using perpendicular (ninety (90) degree angle) parking spaces may be exempt from the paved area if a raised curb or bumper guards are provided, allowing a reduction of the space depth to sixteen and one-half (16 1/2) feet.

 

 

Figure 17.28.060.A
PARKING AND MANEUVERING LAYOUT

 



 

Table 17.28.060.B

Minimum Dimensional Requirements for Compact Parking Spaces

 

Measurement

 

A

B

Parking Angle (Degrees)

Space Width

Space Depth

Parallel 0º

7.5′

18′

45º

7.5′

15.5′

60º

7.5′

16.25′

75º

7.5′

16.5′

Perpendicular 90º

7.5′

15.5′

(Ord. 9-2011)

 

17.28.065 Accessible parking for disabled persons.
    A.  Number of Spaces Required. A minimum number of the total required off-street parking spaces in each off-street parking area shall be specifically designated, located and reserved for use by persons with physical disabilities. The number of accessible spaces required shall conform to the following table:

 

Table 17.28.065.A

Minimum Number of Accessible Parking Spaces Required

 

Total Parking Spaces

Accessible Spaces

1 to 25

1

26 to 50

2

51 to 75

3

76 to 100

4

101 to 150

5

151 to 200

6

201 to 300

7

301 to 400

8

401 to 500

9

501 to 1,000

2% of total

1,001 and over

20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000

 

    B.   Dimensions, Signs and Markings. The minimum dimensions of accessible parking spaces, required signage and pavement markings shall conform to the ANSI A117.1 standards and the provisions contained in the most currently adopted edition of the International Building Code.

    C.   Location. Accessible parking spaces shall be located on the shortest accessible route of travel from adjacent parking to an accessible building entrance. Where buildings have multiple accessible entrances with adjacent parking, accessible parking spaces shall be dispersed and located near the accessible entrances. (Ord. 20-2011 § 1)

 

17.28.070 Parking lot layout standards.
    A.  Except as otherwise set forth herein, or as otherwise approved by the City Council, the surface of all parking lots, parking spaces, drive aisles and maneuvering areas shall be paved with asphalt or concrete. Alternative surfaces that create a porous parking lot surface and reduce the total impervious ground cover and/or on-site natural containment, filtering and infiltration may be approved by the City Engineer upon the applicant providing evidence that the alternative surface will be durable, dustless and/or environmentally appropriate for the size and scale of the area in which it is used. The City Engineer may grant credit toward the property owner/use’s requirement for stormwater best management practices (BMPs) or stormwater utility fees when such alternative reduces or eliminates stormwater runoff.

    B.   Where public access to a required parking lot/space is not paved at the time of parking construction the lot/space may remain gravel; however, it must be paved within six (6) months of the time that any point of public access is paved, unless an alternative surface treatment has been approved by the City Engineer or an alternative time frame for paving has been approved by the City Council, as part of the overall parking lot plan.

    C.   All required parking spaces (excluding those for single-family and duplex units) shall be outlined by white or yellow stripes not less than four (4) inches wide and painted on the surface area. Where existing parking spaces are not paved or an acceptable alternative surface is used an alternative material or bumper guards/wheel stops approved by the City Engineer shall be used to delineate the parking spaces.

    D.  All loading zones, emergency lanes, drive-through facilities, or spaces in front of doorways/entrances shall be clearly delineated.

    E.   Except for parking to serve residential uses or wherever vision clearance is required, all parking and loading areas adjacent to or within residential zone districts or uses shall provide a sight-obscuring fence six (6) feet tall along the property boundary with such residential use or zone district.

    F.   Parking spaces along the outer boundaries of a parking lot shall be contained by a curb or wheel stop at least four (4) inches high and securely anchored in the ground or parking lot, both of which shall be set back a minimum of four (4) feet from any sidewalk, or contained by a bumper rail set back at least one foot from a sidewalk.

    G.  No sidewalk adjacent to a parking space/lot shall be decreased to less than four (4) feet in width by a vehicle overhang. The overhang of any sidewalk that is located within a public right-of-way is prohibited.

    H.  Where parking lot lighting atop a pole within or at the edge of a parking lot is provided the type of light fixture and its orientation shall not allow light to shine, create glare, or trespass into a residential district or onto any adjacent residential property.

    I.    Except for residential dwelling units, parking spaces shall be located and served by a driveway so that their use does not require backing movements into or other maneuvering within a street right-of-way other than an alley.

    J.    Service drives to off-street parking areas shall be designed and constructed to facilitate the flow of traffic and provide maximum safety for pedestrians and vehicular traffic within the property. The traffic pattern, ingress and egress shall be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer. (Ord. 9-2011)

 

17.28.080 Alternative parking arrangements, credits and reduction of requirement.
    A.  On-Street Parking Allowance and Credit. On-street parking spaces located immediately abutting a property, entirely within the extension of the side lot lines into the roadway and not within any required vision clearance triangle at any intersection or access drive, may be counted on a one-for-one basis toward meeting the off-street parking requirement of this chapter; provided however, that the owner of the use or property requiring the off-street parking shall construct the parking space to the dimensions and surface required for off-street parking in this chapter along with curb and gutter and a sidewalk where they do not exist, unless exempted by the City Engineer, to provide pedestrian access to the use. Where streets have been designated as “No Parking” by the City, no credit for on-street parking shall be available.

    B.   Shared Parking Arrangements and Reduction of Requirement. In all zone districts, where shared parking can be provided among a mix of land uses located in the same structure or in adjacent structures, or on the same property or on adjacent properties, and the multiple uses or activities are not conducted during the same hours, or the hours of peak parking demand vary among the uses, approval for such joint use of parking spaces shall be granted as follows:

    1.   The Zoning Administrator, subject to the condition in Subsection (B)(3), may allow up to thirty percent (30%) of the parking spaces required for the predominant use in the structure or on the property to be shared with other uses of the structure or property. The specific percentage shall depend on the capacity of the available parking to meet the actual needs of the various uses. The predominant use shall be the use that requires the most parking spaces at any time.

    2.   The Planning Commission, subject to the condition in Subsection (B)(3), may allow up to seventy-five percent (75%) of the parking spaces required for uses such as theaters, auditoriums, gymnasiums, bowling alleys, nightclubs, movie theaters, and other predominantly evening uses, and churches and other uses operating predominately on the weekend to be shared with uses such as banks, offices, restaurants, schools, professional and commercial services and similar predominantly daytime uses. The specific percentage shall depend on the capacity of the available parking to meet the actual needs of the various uses.

    3.   The owners of the multiple uses or properties shall provide prior to approval: (a) adequate provisions ensuring that the existing uses will not require parking during the same hours; and (b) an agreement to the satisfaction of the City Attorney that a remedy to meet the requirements of this chapter exists in the event there is a change of any use or hours of operation such that the shared parking arrangement is no longer capable of meeting the parking needs of the various uses of the structure or property.

    C.   Unique Conditions and Reduction of Requirement. The Planning Commission may grant a reduction in the off-street parking requirement for a particular use or grouping of uses when, through proper study and analysis provided by the owner of the use(s) or property, it is determined that travel demand management practices (i.e., car pooling, installation of bike racks, adjusting hours of operation) or other unique operating characteristics of the business do not require the minimum number of parking spaces otherwise required under this chapter.

    D.  Bicycle Racks and Credit.

    1.   A bicycle rack(s), facilitating locking of at least one bicycle per twenty (20) parking spaces, shall be provided for uses of a structure or property requiring twenty (20) or more vehicle parking spaces.

    2.   Any use requiring fewer than twenty (20) parking spaces that provides a bicycle rack(s), facilitating locking of at least four (4) bicycles, shall be granted credit toward one required parking space.

    3.   When provided, bicycle racks shall be located near building entrances for convenience and security and be visible from the land uses they serve. Bicycle racks shall not be located so as to impede pedestrian or vehicle traffic flow or cause damage to plant material from bicycle traffic.

    4.   The City Administrator is hereby authorized to enter into a license agreement with property owners and tenants to allow bicycle racks to be established in the public right-of-way at locations deemed safe and appropriate for such purposes by the City Administrator or designee.

    E.   Motorcycle and Scooter Parking and Credit.

    1.   Any use that provides parking for motorcycles and scooters, facilitating at least four (4) motorcycle/scooter parking spaces, shall be granted credit toward two (2) parking spaces for every four (4) motorcycle/scooter parking spaces provided.

    2.   Motorcycle and scooter parking spaces shall measure at least four (4) feet in width by eight (8) feet in length and shall be signed appropriately for such use. (Ord. 9-2011)

 

17.28.090 Drive-through lanes and parking credit.
    A.  Drive-Through Lanes Are Allowed. Any use permitted in a zoning district not subject to the special review provisions of Chapter 17.24 or part of a Planned Unit Development approved under Chapter 17.16 that intends to conduct a portion or all of its business with a person(s) remaining in a vehicle must submit a site plan demonstrating the layout and operation of the drive-through lane(s) to be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer and City Planner. In reviewing and approving the site plan for the drive-through lane(s), the City Engineer and City Planner must be satisfied that the traffic circulation within and adjacent to the property conforms to the following criteria:

    1.   All traffic associated with the drive-through shall occur so that internal pedestrian and vehicular movements are compatible, pedestrian access to the building is not blocked, and traffic hazards on and immediately adjacent to the property on which the drive-through lane(s) are located will be minimal.

    2.   The drive-through lane(s) shall be arranged so as to avoid hazardous or adverse effects on adjacent properties and streets.

    3.   The vehicle stacking spaces within the drive-through lane(s) shall be located so as not to block parking lot aisles and required parking spaces.

    4.   Automobile stacking for a drive-through lane(s) is provided according to the following:

    a.   Restaurants shall provide at least ninety (90) feet behind each order and pick-up window or, if the ordering and pickup functions are separated, thirty (30) feet behind an order board and sixty (60) feet behind the pick-up window.

    b.   Financial institutions and/or financial transactions facilities (i.e., bill payment windows) shall provide at least seventy (70) feet behind each window or transfer facility. Where more than one window or transfer facility is provided, the stacking lanes may be distributed in twenty (20) foot increments among the various lanes as long as no lane is less than thirty (30) feet in length.

    c.   A car wash shall provide at least forty (40) feet behind each bay or stall.

    d.   Liquor stores, dry cleaners, and similar commercial establishments shall provide at least forty (40) feet behind each transaction point.

    e.   The minimum width of a drive-through lane shall be nine (9) feet.

    B.   Credit for Off-Street Parking. Vehicle stacking spaces within the drive-through lane(s) that comply with Subsection A shall be granted credit at a rate of fifty percent (50%) toward a required off-street parking space.

    C.   A driveway (not within public right-of-way) designed for continuous forward flow of vehicles for the purpose of loading and unloading passengers at a convenient access to facilities such as schools, theaters, hospitals, and children’s day care centers, shall be provided in all residential districts. Such facilities located in General Commercial (C), Central Business (CB) or Industrial (I) Zone Districts shall be reviewed by the City Engineer and City Planner for safe pedestrian and vehicle traffic flow. (Ord. 9-2011)

 

17.28.100 Off-street loading spaces and operations.
    A.  Buildings or structures to be built or substantially altered that receive and distribute material or merchandise by truck shall provide and maintain at all times off-street loading berths in sufficient number and size for merchandise, materials or supplies.

    B.   Discontinuance of loading berths by a previous use shall not relieve the property owner or new use of providing one or more berths if required by a new use.

    C.   Off-street parking and maneuvering areas required under this chapter shall not be used for loading and unloading operations except during periods when such parking and maneuvering areas are not required to accommodate peak parking demands.

    D.  Loading operations shall not block streets and alleys. (Ord. 9-2011)

 

17.28.110 Parking and storage of goods, recreational vehicles, recreational equipment and utility trailers.
    A.  Except as otherwise allowed herein, required parking spaces shall not be used for storage of vehicles or materials or for the parking of trucks used in conducting the business or use.

    B.   Temporary outdoor display or storage of seasonal items (landscaping materials, outdoor furniture, Christmas trees, and other similar items) may be permitted in a required parking space(s); provided however, the loss of required parking shall not cause an adverse impact on nearby properties. If it is determined by the Code Enforcement Officer that such temporary storage has displaced a use’s parking requirement onto adjacent properties not owned or controlled by the impacting use, said use shall remove some or all of the items temporarily stored to ensure that it can maintain adequate on-site parking.

    C.   No recreational vehicles, recreational equipment or utility trailer shall be parked or stored on private property in a manner or location that infringes upon any resident’s access to their property, blocks any driveway or public sidewalk, obstructs clear passage to the front door of any residence, obstructs vision for driveway use, or encroaches into a vision clearance area defined in Section 17.08.010 and as required by Section 17.20.200 of the Municipal Code. Any such vehicle or equipment parked or stored must be secured in a manner to prevent any movement while unattended.

    D.  No recreational vehicle may be used for dwelling or sleeping purposes unless such vehicle is parked within a commercial RV park or trailer park, except for short periods of time, such as during the visit of friends or relatives. In that case, such use shall not extend longer than two (2) weeks, and only then when proper health and safety precautions are taken. (Ord. 9-2011)

 

17.28.120 Parking and storage of commercial vehicles and mobile machinery in residential zone districts.
    A.  Except as provided in Subsections B, C, D and E of this section, no commercial vehicle and no item of mobile machinery weighing more than one and one-half tons gross weight shall be parked or stored on a lot in any residential zone district.

    B.   Commercial vehicles and mobile machinery used for or in support of construction or maintenance projects occurring on one or more adjacent or contiguous residential lots may be parked or stored on the site of such project during the course of construction; provided, however, all required permits for such project have been obtained and are in full force and effect and that the project is being diligently pursued toward its conclusion. All such machinery shall be promptly removed from the site if construction ceases for a period of more than sixty (60) days.

    C.   Commercial vehicles and mobile machinery may be parked or stored inside of garages or inside of other similar fully-enclosed and covered accessory structures on lots within residential zone districts. This subsection shall not be construed to authorize any person to repair or to perform mechanical, maintenance or body work on any such commercial vehicle or mobile machinery, or to allow others to perform such work if the performance of the work at such location would violate any other provision of the Municipal Code.

    D.  All types of commercial vehicles may be parked on the paved portions of parking lots serving legally-established convenience stores located in any MH-1 Zone District for purposes related to the business of the convenience store and for periods not to exceed eight (8) hours in any twenty-four (24) hour period. In addition, one or more buses used or capable of being used to transport passengers may be parked or stored on the paved portions of parking lots serving legally-established convenience stores located in any MH-1 Zone District; provided, however, such buses must be: (1) operational, licensed and insured; and (2) owned by or leased to the owner or operator of the convenience store. If buses are stored on a convenience store parking lot they must be stored in such a manner that the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required for the convenience store under this chapter will be available to serve the convenience store when it is open for business.

    E.   School buses used to transport students to and from schools and for other educational purposes may be parked or stored on property owned or controlled by a school or school district, including school sites and maintenance facilities that are used for or in support of educational purposes; and church-owned buses regularly used to transport church members to and from church services and functions may be parked or stored on church parking lots.

    F.   No vehicle used to haul, transport or carry flammable liquid, explosives or hazardous materials shall be parked or stored anywhere within the public right-of-way or on a lot within any residential zone district. (Ord. 9-2011)

Chapter 17.30 SIGNS
17.30.010 Purpose.
    A.  It is declared to be the purpose of the City Council in passage of this Chapter 17.30 to regulate the existing and future use of signs situated anywhere within the City in a fair and consistent manner in order to protect and promote the health, safety, welfare and aesthetic interests of the people of the City. The City Council finds and declares that the enactment of this chapter is necessary to further the following municipal interests:

    1.   Promotion of safety of persons and property by regulating signs so as not to confuse or distract motorists or impair drivers’ ability to see pedestrians, obstacles, other vehicles, or traffic directional signs;

    2.   Promotion of public pride and spirit within the City;

    3.   Preservation and enhancement of the natural and scenic beauty of the City by reducing visual clutter;

    4.   Broadening the economic well-being and general welfare by attracting to the City tourists and other travelers;

    5.   Providing the traveling public with information as to necessary goods and services in the City and its surrounding areas;

    6.   To provide for eventual replacement or removal of nonconforming signs, but in a manner intended to minimize financial impact upon and inconvenience to those whose signs will become nonconforming as a result of the enactment of this chapter;

    7.   The establishment of permissible limitations or controls on signs within the City which are as stringent or more stringent than those imposed by the state of Colorado to the extent that such limitations or controls do not jeopardize receipt by the state of Colorado of its full share of federal highway funds, and to that end, it is the purpose and intent of the City Council that no provision of this chapter shall be enforced to the extent that the enforcement of such provisions would jeopardize receipt by the state of Colorado of its full share of federal highway funds;

    8.   Preservation of the right of constitutionally protected free speech; and

    9.   Promotion of efficient communication of messages.

    B.   The City Council further finds and declares that this chapter, taken as a whole, represents a balancing of the above-stated substantial municipal interests. (Ord. 20-2017 § 1)

 

17.30.020 Definitions.
    The definitions in Chapter 17.08 of this Code shall apply to this chapter. The meaning of certain additional words and phrases as used in this chapter shall be as follows:

    “Abandoned sign” means any sign promoting any business, interest or activity which has been inactive or discontinued for a period of time in excess of ninety (90) days.

    “Alteration” means any change, modification or addition to the structure of any sign, with the exception of a nonmaterial alteration such as simple maintenance and refurbishing of an existing message.

    “Animated sign” means any sign or part of a sign which changes physical position by any movement, rotation, or change in lighting.

    “Area” means the greatest number of square feet of sign exposed to public view on either face thereof; provided, that when the faces exposed to view of any sign are more than thirty (30) inches apart at any place, all faces shall be included in calculating the area thereof.

    “Banner” means a flexible material (e.g. cloth, paper, vinyl, etc.) on which a sign is painted or printed.

    “Billboard sign” means a freestanding sign advertising an establishment, merchandise, service, or entertainment, which is not sold, produced, manufactured, or furnished at the property on which the sign is located.

    “Electrical sign” means a sign or marquee illuminated by the use of electrical current.

    “Electronic message sign” means an automated sign, which may be programmed by computer, using moving illuminated words or graphics.

    “Flag” means any fabric, banner or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns or symbols and is attached to a pole and which is intended to be permanently affixed to the ground or attached to a building.

    “Flagging, streamers and pennants” means a continuous length of cord or other similar material to which long, narrow flags or pennants are attached, for the purpose of attracting attention to a business or location.

    “Flashing sign” means any directly or indirectly illuminated sign either stationary or animated, which exhibits changing natural or artificial light or color by any means.

    “Freestanding sign” means a detached sign which is supported by one or more columns, uprights, poles, or braces extended from the ground, or a detached sign which is erected on the ground, provided that no part of the sign is attached to any part of the building, structure or other sign.

    “Height,” where applied to signs, means the distance from grade to the top of the sign structure, as erected, in a vertical line.

    “Marquee/canopy sign” means a permanent roofed (covered) structure which may be attached to and supported by a building, and which may project over public property, including any object or decoration attached to, or a part of, such structure.

    “Official sign” means a sign required by law or constructed, placed or maintained by the state, the federal government or the City. The inclusion of “government” in defining such signs does not intend to subject the government to regulation, but instead helps describe the type of sign that falls within the immunities of the government from regulation.

    “Owner, business” means the person actively conducting the business for which the signs or marquee is in use.

    “Owner, property” means the owner of the land upon which any sign structure is located.

    “Owner, sign” means the person owning a sign structure.

    “Parcel” means, for purposes of this chapter, one or more adjacent lot(s) or tract(s) of land under common ownership and occupied by a single principal structure or use.

    “Permanent sign” means any sign which is permanently affixed or attached to the ground or to a structure.

    “Portable sign” means any sign which is not permanently affixed to a building, structure, pole or the ground, including, but not limited to, banners, A-frame or sandwich board signs.

    “Projecting sign” means a sign or marquee affixed to and projecting from any building or structure.

    “Roof sign” means any sign which is erected or constructed wholly upon and/or over the roof of any building and supported on the roof of the structure. Freestanding signs which pass through an overhang roof or canopy shall be considered roof signs.

    “Sign” means any display, device, figure, painting, drawing, message, placard, poster, billboard, or any other contrivance designed, intended, or used to promote the interest of any person, or to give information and being in public view.

    “Sign enforcement officer” means the City employee(s) appointed by the City Administrator to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.

    “Structure” means that which is erected or constructed with a fixed location from the ground above grade, any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, excluding poles, cables or other transmission or distribution facilities of public utilities.

    “Thickness” means the greatest distance between outer surfaces of any two (2) faces of a sign exposed to public view.

    “Trailblazing sign” means a sign used in conjunction with a “tourist oriented directional sign” which is necessary to ensure that motorists do not immediately become lost after exiting the highway.

    “Wall” means, for purposes of this chapter, an exterior surface of a building which has a slope of greater than sixty (60) degrees from the horizontal plane.

    “Wall sign” means a sign which is painted on or fastened to the wall or parapet of a building or structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure or forms the background surface of the sign.

    “Width” means the distance overall, side to side, in a horizontal line of a sign or marquee, as erected. (Ord. 20-2017 § 1)

 

17.30.030 Permit required—Application fees.
    A.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no sign shall be erected, replaced or altered unless a permit shall have first been issued therefor. Permits shall be issued by the Engineering Department with the approval of the sign enforcement officer.

    B.   Permit fees shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees in Section 17.44.040 of this Code, with the same force and effect as if set forth herein in every particular, with the following exceptions:

    1.   The fee for portable signs, flagging, streamers and pennants shall be ten dollars ($10.00) at the time of the initial permit, and an annual renewal fee of five dollars ($5.00). No fee shall be charged in the case of the replacement of a permitted portable sign, for which the applicable fee has been paid, with another portable sign of the same design and dimension.

    2.   There shall be no fee for a permit for any portable sign which is to be displayed for a period of thirty (30) days or less annually. Council may from time to time amend the fee schedule for permits by resolution.

    C.   Applications for permits to erect, replace or alter signs shall be made in writing on forms provided by the City and shall contain at least the following information:

    1.   Sign owner’s name, address and phone;

    2.   Property owner’s name, address and phone;

    3.   Address and legal description of the land on which the sign is built, proposed to be built, or attached;

    4.   Name and address of the person responsible for erection and maintenance of the sign;

    5.   The structural features and, where appropriate, the lighting layout of the sign, including detailed plans and specifications;

    6.   A plot plan drawn to scale with accurate dimensions showing the location of the proposed sign relative to property lines and to other significant features on the site, including but not limited to, existing and proposed structures, existing signs, landscaping, utility poles and pedestrian and vehicle traffic patterns on the site;

    7.   Manufacturer’s installation literature showing how the sign is to be anchored and attached to the building, post, ground or other support, showing that wind loads and the structural integrity of the sign supports have been addressed. In the absence of manufacturer’s literature, the sign enforcement officer may require that the sign and its supports be designed by a registered professional engineer licensed to do work within the state of Colorado;

    8.   A description of the use(s) occupying the site; and

    9.   Any other information which may be determined by the sign enforcement officer as necessary to show full compliance with this chapter and all the other laws and ordinances of the City.

    D.  The sign enforcement officer shall reject any application which is not prepared and submitted in compliance with the provisions of this chapter or that describes a sign which, when erected, would not be in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.

    E.   No permit will be issued for any sign located within the jurisdiction of the Colorado Department of Highways until documented approval has been received that such sign meets state requirements.

    F.   If the work for which a sign permit is granted is not completed within sixty (60) days from the date said permit was issued, the permit, unless renewed, shall become void. A permit may be renewed one time upon submission of a written application for renewal made not later than seventy (70) days after the issuance of the original permit and payment of a five dollar ($5.00) renewal fee. (Ord. 20-2017 § 1)

 

17.30.040 Signs for which no permit is required.
    No permit shall be required to erect or maintain the following signs:

    A.  Signs painted on walls of buildings or other structures for information or direction, provided that the area of any such painted signs shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total square foot area of the wall upon which the sign is painted;

    B.   Signs placed inside a building, provided that all such signs meet the requirements of the International Building Code and International Fire Code;

    C.   Signs, excepting illuminated signs, which are imbedded or set into the exterior wall of a building or are flush with the building wall;

    D.  Official signs, danger signs, emergency signs and legal notices may be placed by responsible persons upon approval of the City Administrator;

    E.   Informational and directional signs not exceeding five (5) square feet in area and which do not project into the public right-of-way;

    F.   Signs which are painted on, or attached to, an operable vehicle;

    G.  Signs at construction sites which do not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area and six (6) feet in height;

    H.  Flags, provided the flag does not interfere with the required vision clearance or extend into the right-of-way;

    I.    Unlimited number of signs, not to exceed three (3) square feet, are permitted four (4) months prior to an election so long as the sign conforms with the other limitations of this chapter. Such additional signs must be removed ten (10) days after the conclusion of the election; or

    J.    Subject to the express approval of the City Council, all signs within the PUD shall be controlled by written agreement between the owners and/or tenants of the PUD or otherwise, to avoid excessive advertising and insure a harmonious relationship to the PUD as a whole. All signs within the PUD shall not project above the roofline nor project from the face of the building more than one foot. Signs shall be limited in size to one square foot of sign area for each one lineal foot of building frontage. Only one sign per business is permitted unless the business has double frontage, in which case two (2) signs are permitted. One free-standing sign may be authorized on the shopping center site by the City Council, and shall be shown on the final development plan for the PUD. (Ord. 20-2017 § 1)

 

17.30.050 Prohibited signs.
    All signs listed and described below are expressly prohibited within the City:

    A.  Flashing or intermittently lighted signs and signs which are animated with lights or illuminations which flash, move, rotate, blink, flicker, or vary in intensity or color or which may be confused with traffic control devices or emergency vehicles. Electronic message signs in conjunction with stacking lanes in drive-through facilities, may be allowed by resolution of City Council, provided that such signs conform to all other requirements of this chapter;

    B.   Any sign which due to size, color, shape, location or message is likely to be confused with any official sign;

    C.   Any sign which causes any direct glare into or upon any residential building or premises located within a residential zone district, other than the building or premises to which the sign is attached;

    D.  Any sign which obstructs a window, door, fire escape, stairway, ladder, or openings intended to provide light, air, ingress or egress to or from any building as required by law;

    E.   Any sign of such size or located in such a manner as to cause a physical or visibility hazard to the movement of vehicles or pedestrians, or obstruct or interfere with the view of traffic signs, signals or other safety devices located along or upon a public right-of-way;

    F.   Roof signs which project above the highest point of a building, except where the height of the sign from grade level is less than twenty-five (25) feet;

    G.  Signs along highways as defined in Section 43-2-101(1) C.R.S., 1973, as amended, and signs along the interstate system of highways as defined in Section 43-2-101(2) C.R.S., 1973, as amended, which fail to conform with all of the requirements of the Outdoor Advertising Act, Part 4 of Article 1 of Title 43, C.R.S., 1973, as amended, and all rules and regulations promulgated by the State of Colorado Department of Highways pursuant thereto; provided however, that if any of the provisions of this chapter are more restrictive, the provisions of this chapter shall control;

    H.  Any sign that is not anchored or attached to a structure, the ground, a pole, or other device in a manner which will insure that the sign will be stable under wind effects determined in accordance with applicable requirements of the International Building Code and amendments thereof;

    I.    Any sign which is designed to emit a noise or sound intended to draw attention or to capture the interest of the public, or which inadvertently emits sound and noise which can be detected more than one hundred fifty (150) feet distant from the sign location;

    J.    Any sign, paper or other fabric pasted or otherwise fastened, painted, stenciled, or written on any sidewalk, curb, gutter or street, or on any post, pole or elsewhere beyond the building line, or to any other sign, porch, building, fence or other structure, with the exception of address numbers on curbs, unless sanctioned by the provisions of this title; nor shall any of the said objects be defaced in any other manner. The placement of address numbers on curbs shall not relieve the owner or occupant of any building from the requirement to place address numbers in a conspicuous place on or above the front door of the building, as set forth in Section 12.24.090 of the Municipal Code;

    K.  Any sign not specifically prohibited elsewhere under this Section 17.30.050 which fails to satisfy the requirements of, or exceeds the limitations or restrictions set forth at Section 17.30.060 regarding sign classifications, Section 17.30.070 regarding signs in residential districts and/or Section 17.30.080 regarding general requirements;

    L.   Any sign erected prior to September 11, 1991 which, when erected, failed to conform to the requirements of the Cañon City Municipal Code in effect at the time such sign was erected. (Ord. 20-2017 § 1)

 

17.30.060 Signs in nonresidential districts.
    A.  Freestanding Signs.

    1.   Area. The allowable area of a freestanding sign shall be a maximum of one hundred (100) square feet of sign area for signs located in the general commercial and industrial districts and up to a maximum sign area of thirty-two (32) square feet in the central business district.

    2.   Height. The maximum height of a freestanding sign shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet for signs located within the general commercial and industrial districts and to a maximum height of twelve (12) feet in the central business district. The height of a freestanding sign may be increased to thirty-five (35) feet on a commercial or industrial lot where the property line of the parcel nearest to an arterial street is in excess of two hundred (200) feet from such arterial street.

    3.   Number. Only one freestanding sign shall be allowed on a parcel of land having less than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet of area, unless there are two (2) businesses located on the parcel as provided for herein. Two (2) freestanding signs will be allowed on parcels of land having twenty-five thousand (25,000) or more square feet of area. In the instance of a second business located on a single parcel, a secondary freestanding sign may be allowed with a maximum height of twenty (20) feet and a maximum face area of fifty (50) square feet.

    B.   Marquee/Canopy Signs.

    1.   Area. The allowable sign area shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet per business.

    2.   Height. Signs upon a marquee or canopy shall not extend above the highest point of the marquee or canopy.

    C.   Projecting Signs.

    1.   Area. The allowable area of a projecting sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet.

    2.   Height. Projecting signs shall be erected so that no part of the sign is less than ten (10) feet above a sidewalk or grade directly beneath the sign. No projecting sign shall extend above the roof of the building at the point where it is attached.

    3.   Projection. The maximum projection of the sign, its supports and appurtenances, shall not exceed twelve (12) feet from the face of the building to which it is attached, except in the Central Business District, where the buildings are constructed upon the property line abutting public right-of-way, where the projection of the sign, its supports and appurtenances, shall not exceed six (6) feet from the face of the building to which it is attached.

    4.   Number. Only one projecting sign shall be allowed per business. Several businesses may advertise on one common projecting sign provided the maximum area allowed for a single projecting sign is not exceeded.

    5.   Construction. All projecting signs, including frames, braces, supports and ornaments, shall be made of noncombustible materials.

    D.  Roof Signs.

    1.   Area. The allowable area of a roof sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. In the absence of any freestanding sign on the parcel, a roof sign may be allowed up to one hundred (100) square feet in area.

    2.   Height. Roof signs shall not project above the highest point of a building, except where the maximum height of the sign from grade level is less than twenty-five (25) feet.

    3.   Number. Only one roof sign shall be allowed per structure.

    4.   Construction. All roof signs, including frames, braces, supports and ornaments, shall be made of noncombustible materials.

    5.   Freestanding pole signs that pass through an overhang roof or canopy are considered roof signs.

    E.   Portable Signs.

    1.   Area. The allowable sign area shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet.

    2.   Height. The maximum height of a portable sign shall not exceed eight (8) feet, except in the case of a banner attached to the wall of a building, in which case the maximum height shall not extend above the eave line of the building, or twenty-five (25) feet above grade level, whichever is less.

    3.   Number. Only one portable sign shall be allowed on a parcel of land having less than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet in area. In the case of a parcel of land having more than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet in area, two (2) portable signs shall be allowed, or one sign shall be allowed for each street on which the parcel fronts, whichever is greater.

    4.   Location. No portable sign shall be placed in such a manner as to obstruct the flow of traffic on the property, or otherwise constitute a safety hazard.

    5.   Additional Limitations. Any portable sign placed upon any property shall be securely anchored to the ground, a building or other structure, or a pole or poles, to prevent accidental movement of the sign by wind, or deliberate movement of the sign by anyone other than the sign owner, in a manner to be approved by the sign enforcement officer. Any portable sign for which a permit has been issued may be replaced by a similar portable sign during the year for which the permit was issued, providing that all requirements set forth herein are met by the replacement sign. Permits for portable signs, with the exception of those displayed for thirty (30) days or less per calendar year, must be renewed annually.

    F.   Wall Signs.

    1.   Area. The allowable area of wall signs attached to structures shall be a maximum of one hundred (100) square feet per wall. The maximum sign area allowed per wall may be increased by an additional fifty (50) square feet in the absence of any freestanding sign on the parcel. As an alternative to the foregoing, in the instance of a multi-use structure with individual signs, the wall sign area per use shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet.

    2.   Height. No wall sign attached to a structure shall project above the highest point of the building, excluding roof top mechanical structures, chimneys, elevator shafts, ventilators or other such facilities. Electrical signs on raceways shall be at least seven (7) feet, six (6) inches above any sidewalk or pedestrian walkway.

    3.   Number.

    a.   Each wall shall be allowed an attached wall sign and a painted wall sign, but the area of the attached wall sign shall never exceed one hundred (100) square feet and the two (2) together shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet.

    b.   See Subsection 17.30.040(B), painted wall signs for which no permit is required.

    4.   Projection from Wall. Wall signs may project no more than twelve (12) inches from the building or structure, except that electrical signs on raceways which are at least seven (7) feet, six (6) inches above any sidewalk or pedestrian walkway may project no more than eighteen (18) inches from the building or structure.

    G.  Flags, Flagging, Streamers and Pennants.

    1.   Length. Except as provided for in this chapter, the total length of any flagging, streamers and/or pennants shall not exceed the length of the perimeter of the parcel of land upon which it is to be displayed.

    2.   Height. No flagging, streamers, and/or pennants, shall be attached to any poles or buildings at a height greater than twenty-five (25) feet.

    3.   Additional Limitations. Any flags, flagging, streamers or pennants which become worn or tattered with age, or by the wind, shall be promptly removed or replaced by the property owner, upon notification by the Code Enforcement Officer. (Ord. 20-2017 § 1)

 

17.30.070 Signs in residential districts.
    A.  One freestanding sign is permitted to be placed, without a sign permit, in the front yard of a lot or in the case of a corner lot, the sign may be placed in the side yard. Such sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet or placed within five (5) feet of any lot line or right-of-way line. Placement of such signs shall be subject to other provisions of this title pertaining to vision clearance areas.

    B.   Any additional signage in residential districts shall require a permit, subject to the following conditions:

    1.   Except as otherwise provided in this Code, such signs may be externally illuminated, providing the lamp is so deflected or subdued as to not shine or create glare beyond the boundary of the property on which the sign is located.

    2.   Such signs shall not exceed forty-eight (48) inches in height and ninety-six (96) inches in length, exclusive of supporting structure, which supporting structures shall be only so large as is reasonably necessary for the purposes of safely supporting the sign permitted hereby, but in no case to exceed eight (8) feet in height.

    C.   Such signs may be affixed to, or designed as a part of, the exterior of a building or extension thereof,

    D.  Signs in conjunction with home occupations which meet the regulations in Chapter 17.20 shall be permitted in residential districts. (Ord. 20-2017 § 1)

 

17.30.075 Comprehensive sign plan.
    A.  There may be special circumstances where flexibility from the sign code requirements contained herein is in the best interest of property owners and members of the community, particularly when such flexibility may allow: (1) improved visibility (signage closer to rights-of-way, for instance), (2) on- and off-premises signage in excess of one or more current sign regulations, and (3) cost sharing. Such plans must nevertheless strive to eliminate excessive signage in terms of number, height and/or bulk that may otherwise be allowed and provide uniformity in terms of quality and character.

    The purpose of this subsection is to allow a comprehensive sign plan to be considered when it can be demonstrated that such plan affords flexibility while still meeting the purpose of this sign code. In the absence of a comprehensive sign plan, nothing contained herein shall prohibit the owners and/or tenants from developing signage in accordance with the regulations set forth in this title and that is applicable to the underlying zone district of such properties.

    The Zoning Administrator may permit the utilization of a comprehensive sign plan for: (1) multiple businesses located in a single building, (2) building complexes that are located on one or more continuous parcels held in unified control, such as a business park, or (3) where the owners and tenants on contiguous parcels join in such application.

    B.   A pre-application conference with the Zoning Administrator is required before the applicant may submit a comprehensive sign plan application in order to discuss the general components of the plan and contents of an application including the application fee. The application fee is assessed upon issuance of a sign(s) permit based on the valuation of the sign(s).

    C.   An application for a comprehensive sign plan shall be submitted according to the requirements for the contents of an application as located in Subsection 17.30.030(C). All owners and/or parties affected by the comprehensive sign plan shall sign or otherwise authorize the application.

    1.   The applicant shall file a complete application. No application shall be allowed to proceed until it has been deemed to be complete.

    2.   One full set of all application materials shall be submitted. Graphic documents shall be provided in an eleven (11) inch by seventeen (17) inch format or larger, if necessary, and produced in color. All details shall be clearly readable.

    3.   Once the application has been deemed complete, the Zoning Administrator will review the application and the established approval criteria and determine whether to approve the plan, with or without conditions, or deny the application.

    4.   The Zoning Administrator’s decision following his or her review, as provided for in paragraph 3 of this subsection, shall be set forth in a written “Notice of Decision” sent to the applicant’s address, as shown on the application.

    D.  The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and may grant the application, with or without conditions, if it is found that the plan:

    1.   Provides the total signage necessary to accommodate the needs of the development;

    2.   Eliminates number, height and/or bulk of signage that would otherwise be allowed;

    3.   Eliminates nonconforming signage or sign structures, if existing;

    4.   Provides signage that is uniform in terms of quality and character for the development;

    5.   Does not substantially alter the basic character of the zone district in which it is located or jeopardize the development or redevelopment potential of property within the district; and

    6.   Conforms with all other zoning requirements contained in this title.

    E.   An applicant may appeal a decision by the Zoning Administrator denying the application or imposing any condition in the Notice of Decision to the Board of Adjustment pursuant to Section 17.36.050 of this Code.

    F.   City Council’s decisions shall be final decisions. (Ord. 18-2020 § 9; Ord. 40-2017 § 1)

 

17.30.080 General requirements.
    The following requirements shall apply to all signs which are located within the City:

    A.  No sign shall be erected, constructed, maintained or altered within the City in violation of the Code of Cañon City, including but not limited to this chapter.

    B.   Proper vision clearance shall be provided at all times. Except in the CB, Central Business Zone District, no freestanding sign or its support structure shall be located closer than five (5) feet from the property line. When a freestanding sign is located at or near the intersection of streets, alleys or other points of vehicular ingress/egress, in addition to the five (5) foot setback described above, no sign or sign support structure shall be located within the area created by measuring fifteen (15) feet from the property corner parallel along the public way each direction and striking a diagonal line.

    C.   No sign shall project past the property line except in the Central Business District and no sign in the Central Business District shall project into that portion of any right-of-way designated for vehicular traffic.

    D.  No sign of any type shall be erected or placed so as to obstruct any necessary egress in case of fire.

    E.   No sign shall be erected or maintained which has less vertical or horizontal clearance from communication or electrical power lines than that required by the State Electrical Code or the supplying utility. It shall be the responsibility of those erecting any sign to ensure that the applicable requirements are met.

    F.   All exterior signs shall be designed and constructed to resist the wind effects determined in accordance with applicable requirements of the International Building Code and amendments thereto as adopted by the City Council.

    G.  The owner of any sign or structure regulated by this chapter shall keep the same in good repair and properly painted whenever the sign or structure has painted parts, and shall keep all metal parts and supports thereof that are not galvanized or made of rust-resistant metals properly covered with paint. (Ord. 20-2017 § 1)

 

17.30.090 Nonconforming signs.
    A.  Definition. A nonconforming sign shall be any sign which on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter was lawfully maintained and had been lawfully erected in accordance with the provisions of any prior ordinance pertaining to or regulating signs, but which sign does not conform to the limitations established by this chapter.

    B.   Continuance. Subject to the termination hereinafter provided, any nonconforming sign may be continued in operation and be maintained after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; provided, however, that no such sign shall be changed in any manner that increases the nonconformity of such sign with the provisions of this chapter.

    C.   Termination of a nonconforming sign shall take place upon:

    1.   Structural change to any nonconforming sign.

    2.   Structural alteration to prolong the life of the sign, except to meet safety requirements.

    3.   Alteration or expansion in any manner which increases the degree of nonconformity.

    4.   Damage or destruction if the estimated cost of reconstruction exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the value of the sign structure prior to being damaged.

    5.   Abandonment of the structure housing the occupancy for which the sign is in use for longer than ninety (90) continuous days.

    6.   Abandonment of a nonconforming sign shall terminate immediately the right to maintain such a sign.

    7.   Any violation of this chapter shall terminate immediately the right to maintain such sign. (Ord. 20-2017 § 1)

 

17.30.110 Permits and licenses—Revocation conditions.
    Permits issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by order of the Sign Enforcement Officer after determination that any sign for which a sign permit had been issued was not constructed, or is not being constructed, according to the requirements of this chapter.

(Ord. 17-2020 § 1; Ord. 20-2017 § 1)

 

17.30.120 Awnings, barberpoles and mailboxes.
    A.  Awnings supported by metal frames securely fastened to a building may extend over a sidewalk a distance not to exceed two-thirds of the width thereof to a maximum distance of five (5) feet from the building. No part of any awning frame shall be less than seven (7) feet six (6) inches above the sidewalk, and no curtain or fringe suspended from the frame shall be less than seven (7) feet above the sidewalk. Awnings installed shall meet all requirements as set forth in the current edition of the International Building Code as adopted by the City of Cañon City. Signs on awnings shall be treated as wall signs.

    B.   Barberpoles and mailboxes attached to a building may be placed over the sidewalk not more than one foot from the property line. (Ord. 20-2017 § 1)

 

17.30.130 Abandoned signs.
    Abandoned signs for which a permit is required but which are not deemed unsafe and abandoned signs painted upon buildings shall be altered by concealing from view, or removal of, any and all messages. At such time as the sign may again be put to use, a permit shall be obtained and said sign shall be brought into full compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Signs which are abandoned by virtue of the seasonal nature of the business it advertises may remain in place with a “closed for the season” statement across the face of the sign. (Ord. 20-2017 § 1)

 

17.30.140 Unsafe signs.
    A.  Any sign existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter which shall be dangerous to life or property or create a fire hazard shall be and be deemed an unsafe sign and upon written notice from the Building Inspector and within five (5) days thereafter, a sign owner shall cause any unsafe or insecure sign to be removed. Upon failure of the owner of the sign to remove such sign, the City may do so.

    B.   In any case where an inspection reveals that any sign is imminently dangerous to the public, the Building Inspector, with the concurrence of the City Administrator, may order its immediate removal by written communication to the owner. Failure to remove a sign determined to be imminently dangerous within twenty-four (24) hours, may result in removal of same by the City.

    C.   In any instance where the City is forced to remove a sign to insure public safety and welfare, the cost of such removal shall be borne by the owner of the sign or the owner of the property upon which the sign is constructed or both. (Ord. 20-2017 § 1)

17.30.150 Nuisance maintenance prohibited.
    A.  Any sign erected after September 11, 1991, with respect to which a required permit has not been issued or which is otherwise in violation of the provisions of this chapter, shall be deemed a nuisance, and upon notice by the City to the owner, such nuisance shall, within five (5) days of receipt of such notice, be abated by the owner by removal of the sign or changing, altering, or repairing the same to conform to the provisions of this chapter.

    B.   The Code Enforcement Officer may extend the time allowed for abatement of the nuisance up to an additional ninety (90) days upon receipt of a written certification by the sign owner that the nuisance will be abated. Forms for such certification will be provided by the City. (Ord. 20-2017 § 1)

 

17.30.160 Liability for damages.
    Nothing herein contained shall be construed to relieve any person from his or her liability to any other person for damages sustained by such other person by reason of negligence in constructing, erecting or maintaining any sign. (Ord. 20-2017 § 1)

 

17.30.170 Administration.
    A.  The City Council of the City of Cañon City may from time to time by resolution adopt rules and regulations pertaining to the interpretation, administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and all such rules and regulations so adopted shall become binding and enforceable upon the effective date of any such resolution.

    B.   All rules and regulations promulgated with respect to this chapter shall be made available for inspection and copying by members of the general public upon request during normal business hours of the City. (Ord. 20-2017 § 1)

 

17.30.180 Appeal.
    Appeals of interpretations of this chapter or decisions of the Sign Enforcement Officer may be made to the Board of Adjustment in the manner and in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 17.36 of this title. (Ord. 20-2017 § 1)

 

17.30.190 Violation—Penalty.
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, maintain, replace or alter any sign in the City, or permit the same in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.44.050 of this title. (Ord. 20-2017 § 1)

 

17.30.200 Billboard free zones.
    All land within the City limits of the City of Cañon City is designated a billboard free zone. Billboard signs are prohibited throughout the City of Cañon City. (Ord. 20-2017 § 1)

Chapter 17.32 NONCONFORMING LOTS AND STRUCTURES
17.32.010 Continuation of use or structure—Conditions.
    Subject to the provisions of Sections 17.32.010 through 17.32.080, a nonconforming structure or use may be continued and maintained in reasonable repair but shall not be altered or extended. The extension of a nonconforming use to a portion of a structure which was arranged or designed for the nonconforming use at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this title is not an extension of a nonconforming use. (Prior code § 17.28.010)

 

17.32.020 Completion of earlier construction.
    Nothing contained in this title shall require any change in the plans, construction, alteration or designated use of a building for which a building permit has been issued and construction work has commenced prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title, except that if the designated use will be nonconforming it shall, for the purpose of Section 17.32.040, be a discontinued use if not in operation within two (2) years of the date of issuance of the building permit. (Prior code § 17.28.070)

 

17.32.030 Alteration or extension permitted when.
    A structure conforming as to use but nonconforming as to height, setback or coverage may be altered or extended, providing the alteration or extension does not result in a violation of this title. (Prior code § 17.28.020)

 

17.32.040 Discontinuance of nonconforming uses.
    A.  If a nonconforming use involving a structure is discontinued from use for a period of one year, further use of the property shall be for a conforming use.

    B.   If a nonconforming use not involving a structure is discontinued for a period of six (6)

months, further use of the property shall be for a conforming use.

    C.   Discontinuance of a residential use in I-1 and I-2 zoning districts for a period of more than one year may be voided and use allowed only upon review as provided under Chapter 17.24 of this title. (Prior code § 17.28.030)

 

17.32.050 Termination of nonconforming uses.
    A.  A nonconforming use not involving a structure or one involving a structure having an assessed value of less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be discontinued within two (2) years from the date of passage of the ordinance codified in this title.

    B.   A use which is nonconforming with respect to provisions for screening shall provide screening within a period of five (5) years from the passage date of the ordinance codified in this title. (Prior code § 17.28.040)

 

17.32.060 Changes of nonconforming uses.
    If a nonconforming use is changed, it shall be changed to a use conforming to the regulations of the district and, after change, it shall not be changed back again to the original nonconforming use. (Prior code § 17.28.050)

 

17.32.070 Destruction and possible restoration of nonconforming structures and uses.
    A.  General Rule. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, if a nonconforming structure or a conforming structure containing a nonconforming use is damaged or destroyed by any means to an extent exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the replacement cost of the structure, using new materials, any repaired, restored or replacement structure and/or use on the property shall conform to the provisions of this title. If destruction is determined to be less than fifty percent (50%), restoration of the structure and continuation of the nonconforming use shall be permitted; provided that such restoration must be started within twelve (12) months of the event causing the loss, diligently pursued and completed within twenty-four (24) months.

    B.   Exception to General Rule For Single-Family Dwellings. In any district, and notwithstanding the limitations set forth in Subsection A of this section, a single-family dwelling that is situated on any single lot that was of record as of January 1, 2006, if damaged or destroyed by any means, may be reconstructed, and its use as a single-family dwelling continued, without regard to the extent of damage or destruction; provided that the lot coverage of the reconstructed single-family dwelling shall not exceed the lot coverage of the single-family dwelling immediately prior to the event that caused the damage or destruction; and further provided that a building permit for the reconstruction of such damaged or destroyed single-family dwelling must be issued within one year of the loss and reconstruction of such single-family dwelling must be commenced within eighteen (18) months of the loss and be diligently pursued to completion. The reconstructed single-family dwelling shall not increase the degree of nonconformance of yard dimensions and other requirements of the applicable zone district. All repairs, restoration, reconstruction and new construction permitted under this subsection shall be accomplished in conformity with the requirements of applicable building, housing and fire codes.

 

    C.   Re-build Letters. The Zoning Administrator and/or his designee is authorized to issue “re-build letters” with respect to transactions involving single-family dwellings that will qualify for reconstruction pursuant to the provisions and limitations of Subsection B of this section. Such letters will be issued within twenty (20) days following the City’s receipt of a written request for such letter and a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 5-2006 § 2: prior code § 17.28.060)

 

17.32.080 Nonconformity following district changes.
    Whenever the boundaries of a district are changed so as to transfer an area from one district to another district or a different classification, Sections 17.32.010 through 17.32.080 shall also apply to any nonconforming uses existing therein. (Prior code § 17.28.080)

 

17.32.090 Nonconforming and undersized lots of record.
    A.  In any district, permitted structures and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any legally-created single lot that was of record on January 1, 2006, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this title. Such lots must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area, width or both, that are generally applicable in the district; provided that yard dimensions and requirements, other than those applying to area, width or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Variance of yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of the Board of Adjustment, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.36.

    B.   If two (2) or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership were of record on January 1, 2006, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements of this title established for lot width and area, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this title, and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established in this title, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area below the requirements stated in this title, and no variance or exception shall be made or granted which will permit the creation of a nonconforming structure or use upon any such parcel.

    C.   Additional Exceptions Pertaining to Lot Area Only. In circumstances where a legally-created lot that was of record on January 1, 2006 is too small to satisfy the minimum lot area requirement for a residential structure devoted to a permitted use in the district where the lot is located, such lot may nevertheless be used for the establishment or re-establishment of such residential structure; provided that the structure is established or re-established in accordance with all yard, bulk and dimensional requirements, other than the minimum lot area requirement pertaining to such structure, and also in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 1, 2 or 3 of this subsection, whichever is applicable.

    1.   If the residential structure to be established or re-established is a single-family dwelling, the lot area must not be less than five thousand (5000) square feet; or

    2.   If the residential structure to be established or re-established is a two-family dwelling, the lot area must be not less than five thousand two hundred and eighty (5280) square feet; or

    3.   If the residential structure to be established or re-established is a three (3) to six (6) unit multi-family dwelling, the minimum lot area must be equal to or greater than the product resulting from multiplying the number of dwelling units in such residential structure times two thousand two hundred (2200) square feet. (Ord. 5-2006 § 3: prior code § 17.28.090)

 

17.32.095 Nonconforming mobile home parks.
    A.  Mobile Home Parks in the MH-1 Zone District. Any mobile home located within a mobile home park in the MH-1 zone district which is nonconforming as to setbacks may be replaced with another mobile home, subject to the provisions of Section 17.12.110(E) of this title, provided that applicable setbacks as shown in paragraph 1. of section 17.12.110(C) of this title are met.

    B.   Mobile Home Parks in Other Than the MH-1 Zone District. Any mobile home located within a mobile home park in any zone district other than MH-1 may be replaced with another mobile home, subject to the provisions of Section 17.12.110(E) of this title, provided that the replacement mobile home does not exceed the length or width of the mobile home being replaced. (Ord. 6-2009 § 5; Ord. 1-1998 § 10)

 

17.32.100 Uses prohibited under prior zoning ordinance.
    Any prohibited use under the provisions of the zoning ordinance of the City which was repealed by the ordinance from which this title derives, shall not, by reason of such repeal and the adoption of the new ordinance from which this title derives, be considered a permitted nonconforming use under the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 17.28.100)

 

17.32.110 Limited preservation of certain uses as permitted uses and related structures within MH-1 zoning districts.
    A.  Subject to all other applicable requirements of this municipal code, any lot located within an MH-1 (formerly R-5) zone district on July 1, 1998 and continuously thereafter, in addition to all other permitted uses identified in Section 17.12.110(A) of this title, shall be entitled to a church or convenience store use as a permitted use, provided that the record owner of each such lot was the record owner thereof on July 1, 1998. Such ownership must be proven to the reasonable satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator through certified copies of public records or other evidence deemed suitable by the Zoning Administrator.

    B.   Lots which do not meet all of the requirements of Subsection A of this section shall not have as permitted uses church or convenience store uses, but such uses may be permitted through special review, if enumerated at Section 17.12.110(B) of this title.

    C.   A church or convenience store use of a lot within an MH-1 (formerly R-5) zoning district, which is legally established as a permitted use pursuant to Subsection A of this section or which is established pursuant to and in accordance with City Council’s authorization through the special review process provided for at Chapter 17.24, shall in all respects be a conforming use and shall not be subject to the other provisions of this chapter. In addition, all church or convenience store structures legally erected on any such lot in accordance with the requirements of all applicable ordinances, regulations and codes shall not be subject to the other provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 6-2009 § 6; Ord. 1-1998 § 10)

Chapter 17.34 MARIJUANA CULTIVATION FOR PERSONAL USE
17.34.010 Intent, authority, applicability and interpretation.
    A.  Intent. It is the intent of this chapter to prohibit and otherwise restrict certain land uses related to the cultivation, use and disposition of marijuana plants and products and, in furtherance of its intent, the City Council makes the following findings:

    1.   The Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, Section 12-43.3-101, C.R.S., somewhat clarifies Colorado law regarding the scope and extent of Article XVIII, § 14 of the Colorado Constitution but does not adequately address issues related to cultivation, use, processing or disposition of medical marijuana by patients and caregivers;

    2.   Rules regarding the cultivation and use of medical marijuana by patients and caregivers have been adopted and are periodically amended by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment but do not adequately or completely foreclose opportunities for serious abuses by some persons who claim a medical need for excessive numbers of marijuana plants, thus making the adoption of this chapter necessary;

    3.   The Colorado Medical Marijuana Code specifically authorizes a municipality to either prohibit or license and otherwise regulate the operation of medical marijuana centers, optional premises cultivation operations, and medical marijuana-infused products manufacturers’ licenses (collectively called “medical marijuana facilities” in this Code) based on local government police powers through zoning and other laws governing and protecting the health, safety and welfare of visitors to and inhabitants of the City, but provides little guidance and almost no regulation as to the cultivation of medical marijuana by unlicensed persons, including those who are patients and/or caregivers (see Sections 12-43.3-106, 301 and 305(3), C.R.S.);

    4.   Article XVIII, § 16 of the Colorado Constitution and the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code specifically authorize a municipality to ban or regulate (consistent with other requirements of State and local law) with respect to the establishment and operation of retail marijuana establishments, including “retail marijuana cultivation facilities,” “retail marijuana product manufacturing facilities,” “retail marijuana testing facilities,” and “retail marijuana stores” through the enactment of ordinances but does not address in any meaningful way cultivation of medical marijuana by unlicensed persons, including patients and caregivers;

    5.   The voters of the City of Cañon City in November 2014, decided to ban all forms of retail marijuana establishments from the City; and

    6.   Based on the expressed wishes of the City’s voters and the implications that may be drawn therefrom, and after careful consideration of applicable Colorado laws, and after having considered potential benefits and impacts associated with the cultivation of large numbers of marijuana plants (for medical use or for personal use), including secondary effects and impacts upon neighbors and neighborhoods that are associated with the cultivation of marijuana plants, the cultivation of marijuana is hereby found to be a land use that may and probably will have an adverse effect on the health, safety and welfare of many inhabitants of the City (including most specifically those who reside adjacent or close to locations where large numbers of marijuana plants are cultivated by unlicensed persons) if such cultivation is not appropriately limited and otherwise effectively regulated to prevent or minimize such adverse impacts.

    B.   Authority. The City’s authority to adopt this chapter is found in: the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code; article XVIII, Sections 14 and 16 of the Colorado Constitution, the Local Government Land Use Control Enabling Act, Section 29-20-101, C.R.S.; Section 31-23-101, C.R.S. (municipal zoning powers); Sections 31-15-103, 31-15-401, C.R.S. (municipal police powers); Section 31-15-501, C.R.S. (municipal authority to regulate businesses); and the home rule Charter of the City of Cañon City.

    C.   Applicability. This chapter shall apply to all property within the City. To the extent that the City is required to allow the cultivation of medical marijuana or marijuana for personal use under State law, the rules and prohibitions set forth in Section 17.34.020 shall apply.

    D.  Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to permit marijuana dispensaries, facilities or establishments of any kind otherwise prohibited by State law or by any provision of the Cañon City Municipal Code. If the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, Article XVIII, § 14 of the Colorado Constitution, the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, and/or Article XVIII, § 16 of the Colorado Constitution are declared unlawful in violation of Federal law, nothing in the Cañon City Municipal Code shall be deemed to permit the cultivation, possession or use of marijuana for medical or any other purpose. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the prosecution of offenses under the federal Controlled Substances Act occurring in the City of Cañon City. (Ord. 3-2016 § 2)

 

17.34.020 Prohibitions with respect to cultivation of marijuana by unlicensed persons.
    A.  It is unlawful for any person to grow marijuana for personal or medicinal use anywhere in the City other than in a secure area, within a detached single-family residential property used as the cultivator’s primary residence, garage or detached accessory structure under the ownership of the person cultivating the marijuana or with the written permission of the property owner, which permission may be withdrawn by the property owner in a subsequent written document delivered to the person cultivating the marijuana. Such delivery may be made by personal service or certified mail. (the terms “secure area” and “primary residence” are described in Section 17.08.010(C), CCMC).

    B.   Restrictions on Numbers of Plants.

    1.   If recreational marijuana is grown by or for a single person twenty-one (21) years of age or older, a maximum of six (6) plants may be grown by or for such person in a secure area at such person’s primary residence and, if recreational marijuana is grown by or for multiple persons twenty-one (21) years of age or older residing in the same primary residence, a maximum of twelve (12) plants may be grown by or for such persons in a secure area at their primary residence.

    2.   If medical marijuana is grown by or for a single qualified patient who is authorized under State law to grow more than six (6) medical marijuana plants, a maximum of eight (8) plants may be grown in a secure area at such patient’s primary residence. Otherwise, a single qualified patient may grow not more than six (6) medical marijuana plants in a secure area at such patient’s primary residence. If medical marijuana is grown by or for two (2) or more patients occupying a single dwelling unit as their primary residence and at least one of those patients is authorized under State law to grow more than six (6) medical marijuana plants, a maximum of sixteen (16) medical marijuana plants may be grown in a secure area at their primary residence. Otherwise, groups that include more than one patient, living in the same primary residence may not, as a group, grow more than twelve (12) medical marijuana plants in a secure area.

    3.   The foregoing limits will apply regardless of the number of qualified patients, caregivers or persons otherwise allowed to possess and grow marijuana for personal use or medical use residing in the same dwelling unit as their primary residence.

    4.   It is unlawful for any person or group of persons to cultivate more plants than are allowed in this subsection C unless such person is licensed by the State under the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code and by the City under Chapter 5.56 of the Cañon City Municipal Code.

    C.   It is unlawful for any person to cultivate marijuana inside a detached residential dwelling unit in an area exceeding one hundred (100) square feet and exceeding a height of ten (10) feet.

    D.  1. It is unlawful for any person to cultivate marijuana in a detached accessory structure that is situated within twenty (20) feet of any neighboring residential dwelling unit or if such structure is greater than one hundred (100) square feet in area or more than ten (10) feet in height.

    2.   It is unlawful for any person to cultivate marijuana within an attached or detached garage in an area that is greater than one hundred (100) square feet.

    3.   Any grow area within a garage or accessory structure used for the cultivation of marijuana, including all walls, doors, and the roof, shall be constructed with a firewall assembly of green board meeting the minimum building code requirements for residential structures and include material strong enough to prevent entry except through an open door.

    4.   Other provisions of this chapter notwithstanding, a permit issued by the City (for which no fee shall be charged) is required for an accessory structure used for growing marijuana.

    5.   Any accessory structure used for growing marijuana plants must meet all applicable setback requirements, including, but not necessarily limited to, the setback required in this subsection D.

    E.   All high intensity discharge (HID) lighting, including, but not limited to, Mercury-vapor lamps, Metal-halide (MH) lamps, Ceramic MH lamps, Sodium-vapor lamps, high-pressure Sodium (HPS) lamps and Xenon short-arc lamps, are prohibited with respect to the indoor cultivation of marijuana unless the electrical system to which such lamps are connected has been inspected and approved by a qualified State electrical inspector. Thereafter, as a condition to the continued use of HID lighting, the Cañon City Area Fire Protection District shall be invited by the marijuana cultivator, no less often than once annually, to inspect such electrical system and associated HID lighting to determine whether such system and lighting are set up and operated in a manner that takes into account the reasonable safety needs of first responders in the event of a fire. The dates and outcomes of such inspections shall be documented in writing by the Cañon City Area Fire Protection District and made available to the marijuana cultivator and the City.

    F.   It is unlawful for any person to use compressed, flammable gas as a solvent in the extraction of THC or other cannabinoid in a residential setting. (This prohibition is authorized by Section 9-7-113, C.R.S.)

    G.  It is unlawful for any person to use a kitchen, bathroom, or primary bedrooms for the cultivation of marijuana within a primary residence.

    H.  It is unlawful to cultivate marijuana in any structure without complying with applicable building and fire codes, applicable plumbing and electrical codes, and all applicable yard, bulk and other zoning requirements for the zone district within which the growing occurs, including, but not limited to, those specifying maximum lot coverage, setback and height requirements.

    I.    It is recommended that any marijuana cultivation area within a residence or garage shall include a ventilation and filtration system designed to ensure that odors from the cultivation are not detectable beyond the property line for detached single-family residences, and designed to prevent mold and moisture and otherwise protect the health and safety of persons residing in the residence.

    J.    It is unlawful for any person to store chemicals used for marijuana cultivation inside of the habitable areas of a residence.

    K.  It is unlawful for any person to conduct or permit the conduct of any marijuana cultivation activity that adversely affects the health or safety of the nearby residents by creating dust, glare, heat, noise, noxious gasses, noxious odors, traffic, vibration, or other similar impacts.

    L.   It is unlawful for any person to conduct any marijuana cultivation or processing activity in a manner that involves the use or storage of chemicals, products, wastes or processes in a manner that is hazardous to the health or safety of nearby residents or to the health and safety of the occupants of the place where such marijuana is cultivated or processed.

    M.  It is unlawful for any person to grow marijuana plants at any place where such growing plants are visible from ground level on neighboring properties or from ground level on public rights-of-way or are otherwise grown in public view.

    N.  Any violation enumerated in this Section 17.34.020 shall constitute a public nuisance that may be dealt with and abated in accordance with the provisions of Title 8 of the Cañon City Municipal Code in addition to the provisions of Chapter 17 of the Cañon City Municipal Code. (Ord. 12-2019 § 14; Ord. 3-2016 § 2)

 

17.34.030 Penalties.
    A.  Any person who violates any provision enumerated in Section 17.34.020 (excluding subsections I and N) is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a mandatory minimum fine that shall not be less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than the maximum fine provided for at Section 1.28.010, CCMC.

    B.   Any twenty-four (24) hour period during which a violation of any such provision of Section 17.34.020 continues may be charged and, upon conviction, punished as a separate offense.

    C.   In determining whether to impose a fine in an amount greater than the mandatory minimum provided for in subsection A, the court shall take into account, whenever applicable, the number of marijuana plants being grown that are in excess of the number of plants, if any, that the convicted violator is authorized to cultivate under the provisions of Section 17.34.020 and/or the area within which such plants are grown is in excess of one hundred (100) square feet. Fines in excess of the mandatory minimum are recommended when such violations involve plant counts and grow areas that exceed the maximum number of plants and maximum grow areas permitted under Section 17.34.020. (Ord. 3-2016 § 2)

Chapter 17.36 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
17.36.010 Establishment and organization.
    A.  The board of adjustment is established according to the statutes of Colorado pertaining thereto.

    B.   The word “board,” when used in this chapter, means “board of adjustment.”

    C.   The board of adjustment shall consist of five members who shall be appointed by the City Council. The City Council may also appoint two alternate members, to serve only in the absence of regular members. Not more than two members (regular and alternate) may be current members of the City Planning Commission.

    D.  Appointments to the board of adjustment shall be for a period of three years, except when vacancies occur prior to the expiration of a regular term, they shall be filled in the same manner as regular appointments but shall serve only until the expiration of the term in which the vacancy occurred. To provide some experienced board membership, the terms shall be staggered as follows at the first appointment date following the passage of the ordinance codified in this title (1983): One member shall be appointed for one year; two for two years; two for three years; thereafter appointments shall be for a period of three years.

    E.   Members of the board shall elect at the first meeting held each new year from among their members a chairman and vice chairman to serve for a term of one year.

    F.   The concurring vote of four members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the administrator charged with the enforcement of this title, or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which it is required to pass under this title or to grant any application for variance permitted under this chapter.

    G.  The City Council shall have the power to remove any member of the board for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office after official public hearing. (Ord. 30-2002 § 1; Ord. 8-1990)

 

17.36.020 Powers and duties.
    A.  The board of adjustment shall have the power and duty to:

    1.   Hear and decide appeals from, and review any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the administrative official charged with the enforcement of this title;

    2.   Hear and decide, grant or deny applications for variances from the provisions of this title;

    3.   Hear and decide such other matters as the City Council may by ordinance prescribe; and

    4.   Hear and decide whether a specific use is expressly permitted in a use group.

    B.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the board shall not have the power to:

 

    1.   Permit uses of land not otherwise allowed in any zoning district by this title; or

    2.   Review any action or determination of the City Council, including but not limited to actions or determinations provided for in Chapter 17.24 (Uses Permitted by Special Review). (Ord. 8-1990)

 

17.36.030 Meetings—Rules and proceedings.
    A.  The board shall hold regular monthly meetings on the first Tuesday of each month, providing there is business to conduct. In addition, board meetings may be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. All meetings shall be open to the public. The chairman, or, if absent, the vice chairman may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.

    B.   The board shall adopt written rules and regulations necessary to the conduct of its affairs and in keeping with the provisions of this title.

    C.   The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each decision, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating that. When board members have made physical inspection of the applicant’s property, or taken other official action, it shall be so noted in the minutes of the appropriate meeting and shall become public record to be immediately filed in the office of the board.

    D.  Every decision of the board shall be based upon findings of fact and every finding of fact shall be supported in the record of the hearing. All testimony shall be presented publicly. (Ord. 30-2002 §§ 2, 3; Ord. 8-1990)

 

17.36.040 Applications for variance.
    A.  Applications for variance shall be on forms furnished by the board and made available to the public at the office of the Zoning Administrator. Such forms shall be in conformity with the requirements of Subsection A of Section 17.44.030. No application shall be accepted which does not contain all of the information required on such forms.

    B.   All applications must be accompanied by an application fee, as set forth in the schedule of fees in Section 17.44.040 of this Code. No application will be accepted for filing until the application fee has been paid.

    C.   Applications shall be filed with the office of the Zoning Administrator, and the date such application is filed shall be clearly marked on the application.

    D.  Hearings on applications for variances shall be conducted in accordance with Section 17.36.060.

    E.   In determining whether a variance should be granted, the board must consider whether the practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship claimed by the applicant was created by the applicant and take into account the nature of the hardship. No variance shall be granted unless the board makes all of the following findings:

    1.   That the strict application of this title would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, unique to the applicant’s property, inconsistent with the objectives of this title;

    2.   That:

    a.   There are unique or unusual circumstances or conditions applicable to the site of the variance, such as unusual lot size or shape, topography, or other physical conditions peculiar to the affected property, that do not exist throughout the neighborhood or zone district in which the property is located, or

    b.   There is a physical handicap affecting an owner of the property or any member of the family of an owner who resides on the property, which impairs the ability of the disabled person to utilize or access the property;

    3.   That the unique or unusual circumstances or conditions of the property will not allow a reasonable use of the property, comparable with other property in the general neighborhood of the site, in the absence of relief;

    4.   That the variance to be granted is the minimum variance needed to allow for a reasonable use of the land, building, buildings and/or other structure or structures involved.

    5.   That the variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent property; and

    6.   That the granting of the variance will not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations on other properties classified in the same district.

    F.   In granting a variance, the board may impose such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this title. The applicant shall be bound by any such conditions and safeguards imposed by the board.

    G.  Approval by the board on any application for variance shall be effective for six months from the date notice of approval is transmitted to the applicant. If a building permit is not obtained within that period, the variance shall become null and void.

    H.  Application for variance from the requirements of the sign code may be considered providing the determination for granting such variance is based upon certain specific criteria. No variance from the requirements or limitations set forth in Chapter 17.30 shall be granted unless the board makes the following findings:

    1.   That there exists practical difficulties and unnecessary hardships which were not self-created by the applicant. Mere financial hardship claimed by the applicant will not be sufficient grounds to support the granting of a variance.

    2.   That the strict application of the provisions of Chapter 17.30 would result in undue hardship or practical difficulty inconsistent with the objectives of this title.

    3.   That there are unusual circumstances or conditions applicable to the site of the variance that do not exist throughout the zone district in which the property is located.

    4.   That the variance, if granted, will not substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent property.

    5.   That no variance may be granted which will authorize the construction or maintenance of a sign which would endanger the safety of the public in contravention of applicable construction standards or vision clearance setbacks established in this title.

    6.   That in any instance where a variance may be granted, such variance shall in all cases be granted only to the extent necessary to afford reasonable relief of hardship and any increase to the height of a sign shall be granted only where no other relief can be found. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no variance shall be granted which results in a deviation of more than ten percent from any standard set forth in Chapter 17.30. (Ord. 30-2002 §§ 4‑6; Ord. 4-1994; Ord. 25-1991 § 30; Ord. 17-1991; Ord. 8-1990)

 

17.36.050 Appeals.
    A.  Appeals to the board of adjustment concerning any order, requirement, determination or decision made by the administrator charged with enforcement of this title may be submitted by any persons aggrieved or by any official of the City affected by any decision of said administrator.

    B.   No appeal shall be accepted after thirty days from the date of the order, requirement, decision or determination being appealed. Appeal shall be made by filing with the Zoning Administrator and with the board a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof and the relief sought by the appellant. The Zoning Administrator shall then forthwith notify the board of the appeal and transmit to the board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken, together with the original notice of appeal.

    C.   In order to meet the filing requirements set forth in Subsection B, the applicant shall file an original and one copy of the notice of appeal with the office of the Zoning Administrator. The date such original and copy are accepted for filing shall be clearly marked on each.

    D.  All notices of appeal shall be accompanied by an application fee, as set forth in the schedule of fees in Section 17.44.040 of this Code. No such notice or application shall be accepted for filing until the application fee is paid.

    E.   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the administrator from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board after the notice of appeal has been filed with him that, by reason of facts stated in the certification, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the board or by a court of record on application, on notice to the Zoning Administrator, and on due cause shown.

    F.   Hearing on the notice of appeal shall be conducted in accordance with Section 17.36.060. (Ord. 18-2020 § 10; Ord. 3-1995; Ord. 8-1990)

 

17.36.060 Hearing procedures.
    A.  Hearing on any properly filed notice of appeal or application for variance shall be held at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board, provided that such notice or application was filed not later than fifteen days prior to such next regularly scheduled meeting of the board. Hearings on notices or applications filed less than fifteen days prior to such next regularly scheduled meeting shall be held at the regular meeting which next follows such next regularly scheduled regular meeting.

    B.   As to all hearings set by the Board, public notice thereof shall be given, no less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing date set by the Board, in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. In addition to such public notice, the board shall cause notice of any such hearing to be sent by regular mail to all parties in interest not later than ten (10) days prior to the date set for hearing. Parties in interest shall include at least the appellant or applicant, the Zoning Administrator and owners of property abutting the land with respect to which the appeal or application for variance applies.

    C.   The appellant or applicant, appointed agent or attorney shall be present at the hearing. Failure to appear shall result in the appeal or application being tabled to the next regularly scheduled meeting. Failure to appear a second time shall result:

    1.   In the case of an appeal, in a dismissal of the appeal, with prejudice; and

    2.   In the case of an application for a variance, in a dismissal without prejudice. In the event of a dismissal without prejudice, the applicant may resubmit his or her application for variance along with applicable processing fees.

    D.  The Board may affirm, reverse (wholly or partly) or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed and may make such order, made in the premises, and to that end shall have all powers of the administrator from whom the appeal is taken.

    E.   The Board’s decision shall be made no later than thirty (30) days following the conclusion of the hearing. All such decisions shall be writing and sent, return receipt requested or by electronic mail, to the appealing party and the administrative body or official of the City whose decision has been the subject of the appeal. The Board’s decision shall be final, subject to judicial review. (Ord. 18-2020 §§ 11, 12; Ord. 8-1990)

Chapter 17.40 AMENDMENTS TO ZONING PROVISIONS
17.40.010 Initiation of amendments.
    An amendment to the text or the zoning map of this title may be initiated by the City Council, by the Planning Commission, or by application of a property owner or authorized agent only at required scheduled meetings. (Prior code § 17.32.010)

 

17.40.020 General procedure—Statutory authority.
    Amendments to this title shall be in accordance with the laws of the State of Colorado which require the following action before adoption of any such amendment:

    A.  Planning Commission Procedure. Study and recommendation on the proposed amendment shall be made by the Planning Commission. Before submitting a report and recommendation on any proposed amendment to this title, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment with the following data:

    1.   For proposed amendments to the zoning district map, a written notice of such hearing shall be sent by first class mail at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing date, to property owners within the area in question, and within three hundred (300) feet of the area in question, as such ownership is available in the office of the City Finance Officer, Fremont County Assessor, and such other source that may be available.

    2.   In addition, a notice declaring that rezoning is being applied for shall be posted on a sign provided by the City, the fee for use of which shall be included in the application fee, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing on the property proposed for rezoning along the part thereof fronting a street. Such posted notice shall indicate the purpose, time, date and place of the hearing before the Planning Commission, the existing and proposed zoning of the property, and the street address or location and legal description of the subject property.

    3.   The Planning Commission may recess a hearing in order to obtain additional information pertaining to the amendment.

    B.   City Council Procedure.

    1.   Completion of a public hearing before the City Council after at least fifteen (15) days’ notice of the time and place of such hearing has been given by at least one publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the city;

    2.   A notice declaring that rezoning has been applied for shall be posted on a sign provided by the City, the fee for use of which shall be included in the application fee, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing on the property proposed for rezoning along the part thereof fronting a street. Such posted notice shall indicate the purpose, time, date and place of the hearing before the City Council, the existing and proposed zoning of the property, and the street address or location and legal description of the subject property;

    3.   For proposed amendments to this title, the City Council shall impose a fee as described in Section 17.44.040 to cover the cost of advertising and processing the application. (Ord. 17-2011 §§ 13, 14; Ord. 12-2003 § 3; prior code § 17.32.020)

 

17.40.030 Exceptions for general revisions.
    When the zoning district map is in any way to be changed or amended incidental to or as a part of a general revision of this title, whether such revision is made by repeal of this title and enactment of a new zoning ordinance, or otherwise, a notice of posting shall not be required. (Prior code § 17.32.030)

 

17.40.040 Rezoning—Policy and conditions.
    A.  For the purpose of establishing and maintaining sound, stable and desirable development within the city, the rezoning of land is to be discouraged. Rezonings should only be considered if:

    1.   The land to be rezoned was zoned in error and as presently zoned is inconsistent with the policies and goals of the City’s Comprehensive Plan (Master Plan); or

    2.   The area for which rezoning is requested has changed or is changing to such a degree that it is in the public interest to encourage a redevelopment of the area; or

    3.   The proposed rezoning is necessary in order to provide land for a community-related use which was not anticipated at the time of the adoption of the City’s Comprehensive Plan (Master Plan), and that such rezoning will be consistent with the policies and goals of the Comprehensive Plan (Master Plan).

    B.   This declaration of policy for rezoning shall not control a rezoning which occurs incidental to a comprehensive revision of the City’s zoning map, or a rezoning granted for a planned unit development in accordance with Chapter 17.16 of this title or the rezoning of a property from a DR District. (Ord. 5-2009 § 3; prior code § 17.32.040)

 

17.40.050 Rezoning—Minimum parcel size.
    No amendment changing the zoning classification of any lot parcel or tract of land shall be adopted unless such lot, parcel or tract can meet the minimum frontage and lot area requirements for the requested zoning district, or unless it abuts on a lot, parcel or tract of land that has the same zoning classification as that which is proposed for the property which is subject to the proposed amendment. (Prior code § 17.32.050)

 

17.40.060 Zoning map amendment conditions.
    In granting an amendment to the zoning map, upon application by a property owner or authorized agent, the City Council may require the dedication of additional street right-of-way where an officially adopted street plan indicates a need for increased width or where the nature of the proposed development warrants increased street width, and the Council may require permanent screen strips or other devices to minimize conflict with residential land use. (Prior code § 17.32.060)

 

17.40.070 Annexed territory.
    Zoning of land in the process of annexation may be done in accordance with the procedure and notice requirements of this chapter.

    A.  The proposed zoning ordinance shall not be passed on final reading prior to the date when the annexation ordinance is passed on final reading. If the zoning process is commenced prior to the effective date of the annexation ordinance, the legal protest area for zoning shall be determined solely on geographic location, irrespective of whether land in such legal protest area is within or without or partly within and partly without the boundaries of the City, in accordance with Colorado State Statutes 31-12-115(l).

    B.   Any area annexed shall be brought under this zoning ordinance and map within ninety (90) days after the effective date of the annexation ordinance, irrespective of any legal review which may be instituted challenging the annexation in accordance with Colorado State Statutes 31-12-115 and 31-12-116.

    C.   During such ninety (90) day period or such portion thereof as is required to zone the territory, the City shall refuse to issue any building permit for any portion or all of the newly annexed areas. (Prior code § 17.32.070)

 

17.40.080 Records of amendments.
    The City Clerk and City Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of amendments to the text and map of this title in a form convenient for the use of the public. (Prior code § 17.32.080)

Chapter 17.44 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
17.44.010 Interpretation of Title 17 provisions.
    The provisions of this title shall be held to be the minimum requirements fulfilling its objectives. Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this title are less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provisions of this title or of any section of the Code of the City, or any other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions which are more restrictive shall govern. (Prior code § 17.36.040)

 

17.44.020 Enforcement authority—Appeals.
    The Zoning Administrator designated by the City Administrator, or the City Administrator if no such designation is made, shall have the power and duty to enforce the provisions of this title. An appeal from a ruling of the Administrator shall be made to the Board of Adjustment. (Prior code § 17.36.010)

 

17.44.030 Form of petitions, applications and appeals.
    A.  All permits, petitions, and applications provided for in this title shall be made on forms provided for the purpose or as otherwise prescribed by the Planning Commission, Board of Adjustment or City Council, in order to assure the fullest practical presentation of pertinent facts and to maintain a permanent record.

    B.   All applications for building and occupancy permits shall be accompanied by plans and specifications, drawn to scale, showing:

    1.   The actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be used and/or built upon;

    2.   The exact sizes and locations on the lot of the buildings and other structures, existing and proposed;

    3.   The existing and intended use of each building, structure, or part thereof;

    4.   The number of families to be accommodated, if any; and

    5.   Such other information as is needed to determine conformance with the provisions of this title and of the current building code. (Ord. 18-2020 § 13; prior code § 17.36.020)

 

17.44.040 Schedule of fees.
    All land use applications required by this title shall be accompanied by the applicable fee set forth in the City’s fee schedule. No application for which a fee is charged shall be deemed complete until the appropriate fee has been paid. Fees are calculated to cover anticipated costs incurred by the City in the review and processing of the applications. The fee schedule shall be established, and may be revised from time to time, by resolution of the City Council. The fee schedule shall be posted at City Hall, and made available for review in the office of Planning and Zoning and on the City’s website. (Ord. 27-2014 § 2; Ord. 16-2014 § 11; Ord. 17-2011 § 20)

 

17.44.050 Violation and penalty.
    A.  Any violation of this title shall be unlawful and is deemed a nuisance and may be abated as such.

    B.   Every day, or portion thereof, any violation of this title exists or continues, shall constitute a separate offense.

    C.   The owner or owners of any building or premises, or part thereof, where any violation of this title exists or is placed or maintained; and/or any architect, builder or contractor who assists in the commission of any such violation; and/or all persons or corporations who violate or maintain any violation of any of the provisions of this title or who fail to comply therewith or with any requirements thereof, or who build in violation of any statement or plan submitted and approved thereunder are, for each and every violation, guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in an amount that does not exceed the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010. (Ord. 28-2017 § 1; Ord. 17-2013 §§ 60, 61; Ord. 15-1993 § 1; prior code § 17.36.060)

Chapter 17.45 WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES
17.45.010 Purpose.
    The purposes of this chapter are: to allow the location of wireless service facilities (“WSF”) in the City while protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community; to act on applications for the location of WSFs within a reasonable period of time; to encourage co-location of WSFs; and to prevent unreasonable discrimination among providers of functionally equivalent services. (Ord. 30-2017 § 1)

 

17.45.020 Definitions.
    A.  “Accessory equipment for a WSF” means equipment, including buildings and structures, used to protect and enable radio switching equipment, back up power and other devices incidental to a WSF, but not including antennae.

    B.   “Antenna” means communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used to provide wireless service.

    C.   “Base station” means a structure or equipment, other than a tower, at a fixed location that enables Federal Communications Commission-licensed or authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term includes any equipment associated with wireless communications services, including radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration (including Distributed Antenna Systems and small-cell networks). The term includes any structure, other than a tower, to which any of the equipment described hereof is attached.

    D.  “Building roof-mounted WSF” means a WSF that is mounted and supported entirely on the roof of a legally existing building or structure.

    E.   “Eligible telecommunications facility request” means a request for approval of the modification of an existing tower or base station that involves the collocation of new transmission equipment, the removal of transmission equipment or the replacement of transmission equipment.

    F.   “Equipment storage shelter” means buildings, storage shelters, and cabinets used to house WSF equipment.

    G.  “Freestanding WSF” means a WSF that consists of a stand-alone support structure such as a tower or monopole, and antennae and accessory equipment.

    H.  “Microwave antenna” means a disk-type antenna used to link communication sites together by wireless voice or data transmission.

    I.    “Micro Wireless Facility” means a WSF that is no larger in dimensions than twenty-four (24) inches in length, fifteen (15) inches in width, and twelve (12) inches in height and that have an exterior antenna, if any, that is no more than eleven (11) inches in length.

    J.    “Public right-of-way” means all roads, streets and alleys and all other dedicated rights-of way, access and utility easements of the City, the state, or any district, utility or roadway.

    K.  “Small cell facility” means either a personal wireless service facility as defined by the federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, or a WSF where:

    1.   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than three (3) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more than three (3) cubic feet; and

    2.   Primary equipment enclosures are no larger than seventeen (17) cubic feet in volume. The following associated equipment may be located outside of the primary equipment enclosure and, if so located, is not included in the calculation of equipment volume: Electric meter, concealment, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, back-up power systems, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, and cut-off switch.

    A small cell facility includes a micro wireless facility.

    L.   “Small cell network” means a collection of interrelated small cell facilities designed to deliver wireless service.

    M.  “Substantial change” means a modification to an existing tower or base station under the following circumstances:

    1.   A substantial change in the height of an existing tower or base station occurs as follows:

    a.   For a tower outside of a public right-of-way, when the height of the tower is increased by more than ten percent (10%), or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed twenty (20) feet, whichever is greater.

    b.   For a tower located in a public right-of-way or for a base station, when the height of the structure increases by more than ten percent (10%) or by more than ten (10) feet, whichever is greater.

    2.   Changes in height are measured as follows:

    a.   When deployments are separated horizontally, changes in height shall be measured from the original support structure, not from the height of any existing telecommunications equipment.

    b.   When deployments are separated vertically, changes in height shall be measured from the height of the tower or base station, including any appurtenances, as the tower or base station existed on February 22, 2012.

    3.   A substantial change in the width of an existing tower or base station occurs as follows:

    a.   For a tower outside of public rights-of-way, when the addition of an appurtenance to the body of the tower protrudes from the edge of the tower more than twenty (20) feet, or more than the width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater.

    b.   For a tower in a public right-of-way or a base station, when the addition of an appurtenance to the body of the structure would protrude from the edge of the structure by more than six (6) feet.

    4.   A substantial change also occurs for an existing tower in a public right-of-way or an existing base station as follows:

    a.   When the change involves the installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground, if no ground cabinets presently exist; or

    b.   When the change involves the installation of ground cabinets that are more than ten percent (10%) larger in height or overall volume than any existing ground cabinets.

    5.   A substantial change also occurs for any existing tower or base station when any of the following are found:

    a.   When the change involves installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, or more than four (4) new cabinets, whichever is less.

    b.   When the change entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site.

    c.   When the change would defeat the concealment elements of the eligible support structure.

    d.   When the change does not comply with conditions associated with the original siting approval of the construction or modification of the tower, base station or base station equipment. This limitation does not apply if the non-compliance is due to an increase in height, increase in width, addition of cabinets, or new excavation that would not exceed the thresholds identified in subsections (1) through (5)(b), hereof.

    N.  “Tower” means a structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any Federal Communications Commission-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities, including structures that are constructed for wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul, and the associated site.

    O.  “Whip antenna” means an array of antennae that is cylindrical in shape.

    P.   “Wireless service” means data and telecommunications services, including commercial mobile services, commercial mobile data services, unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier wireless exchange access services, as all of these terms are defined by federal law and regulations.

    Q.  “Wireless service facility” or “WSF” means a facility for the provision of wireless services, including a small cell facility; except that “wireless service facility” does not include coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is not immediately adjacent to, or directly associated with, a particular antenna. (Ord. 30-2017 § 1)

 

17.45.030 Standards for all WSFs.
    A.  Applicability. The standards contained in this chapter apply to all applications for WSFs. Applicants must also comply with any other applicable provisions of the Code as determined by the City. The applicant shall demonstrate in writing that its proposed WSF meets all applicable standards of this chapter and any other required provisions of the Code.

    B.   Co-Location. The City encourages co-location of WSFs when feasible to minimize the number of WSF sites. To further the goal of co-location:

    1.   No WSF owner or operator shall unreasonably exclude a telecommunications competitor from using the same facility or location. Upon request by the City, the owner or operator shall provide evidence explaining why co-location is not possible at a particular facility or site; and

    2.   If a telecommunications competitor attempts to co-locate a WSF on an existing or approved WSF or location, and the parties cannot reach an agreement, the City may require a third-party technical study to be completed at the expense of either or both parties to determine the feasibility of co-location.

    C.   Consent given to a telecommunications provider or broadband provider to erect or construct any poles, or to locate or collocate communications and WSF on vertical structures in a right-of-way, does not extend to the collocation of new facilities or to the erection or construction of new poles in a right-of-way not specifically referenced in the grant of consent.

    D.  Permitted Zoning Districts. WSFs shall be considered a permitted use in all zoning districts subject to administrative review and determination as provided in this chapter.

    E.   Compliance with FCC Standards. All WSFs shall meet the current standards and regulations of the FCC and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate WSFs. Upon a request by the City at any time, WSF owners and operators shall verify that:

    1.   The WSF complies with the current FCC regulations prohibiting localized interference with reception of television and radio broadcasts; and

    2.   The WSF complies with the current FCC standards for cumulative field measurements of radio frequency power densities and electromagnetic fields.

    3.   By adopting this section, the City is not attempting to regulate radio frequency power densities or electromagnetic fields, which are controlled by the FCC.

    F.   Abandonment. If the WSF ceases operation for any reason for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days:

    1.   The owner or operator shall remove the WSF; and

    2.   Any permit issued for operation of a WSF shall expire.

    G.  Height Limit. Notwithstanding any other height limitations in this chapter, in no case shall a WSF located on property owned by the City or in any public right-of-way exceed forty (40) feet in height. (Ord. 30-2017 § 1)

 

17.45.040 Freestanding WSFs.
    A.  Minimum Setbacks for Freestanding WSFs. A freestanding WSF shall meet the minimum setback requirements for buildings and structures of the underlying zone district. A freestanding WSF shall be set back either subject to the minimum setback requirements of the underlying district or by one foot of distance for each foot of height of the WSF, whichever is greater. A freestanding WSF may not be located within two hundred (200) feet of the following: any existing principal residential structure; or the banks of the Arkansas River.

    B.   Maximum Height for Freestanding WSFs. A freestanding WSF, including antennae, shall not exceed the maximum structure height limit in the zone district in which the facility is located. In no case shall a freestanding WSF, including its appurtenances, exceed one hundred (100) feet in height.

    C.   Design Standards for Freestanding WSFs. A freestanding WSF shall meet the following design standards to minimize impacts:

    1.   The facility shall be designed to be compatible with surrounding buildings and structures and existing or planned uses in the area.

    2.   Existing land forms, vegetation, and structures shall be used to screen the facility from view and blend in the facility with the surrounding environment.

    3.   Existing vegetation shall be preserved or enhanced.

    4.   The total area of any equipment storage shelters shall not exceed four hundred (400) square feet for each WSF.

    5.   Equipment storage shelters shall be grouped as closely together as technically possible.

    6.   No equipment storage shelter shall exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.

    7.   All freestanding WSFs shall accommodate co-location of facilities, unless co-location is technically unfeasible as set forth in Section 17.45.030(B).

    8.   All applicable landscape regulations shall be observed. A landscape plan prepared by a professional landscape architect may be required to demonstrate that such landscape appropriately shields the base and security fencing from view if the base of the facility is otherwise visible from adjacent rights-of-way.

    9.   Any equipment that could be dangerous to persons or wildlife shall be adequately covered or fenced.

    10. The applicant shall provide evidence that the facility is being constructed by a licensed wire carrier.

    11. No lighting of a facility or accessory facility shall be permitted. (Ord. 30-2017 § 1)

 

17.45.050 Building roof or wall-mounted WSFs.
    A.  A building wall-mounted WSF shall adhere to the following design standards to minimize impacts:

    1.   The facility shall be screened from view and/or colored to match the building or structure to which it is attached.

    2.   The mounting of antennae shall be as flush to the building wall as possible, and in no case shall the antennae extend more than three (3) feet out from the building wall.

    3.   The facility shall not extend above the highest point of the roof of the building.

    B.   A building roof-mounted WSF shall adhere to the following design standards to minimize impacts:

    1.   A building roof-mounted WSF, including antennae, shall be the shorter of: twenty (20) feet taller than the building to which it is attached; or one-hundred (100) feet.

    2.   The facility shall be screened from view and/or colored to match the building or structure to which it is attached.

    3.   The facility shall be set back such that it is not visible from ground level on adjacent rights-of-way or residential uses or zones at a distance of one hundred (100) feet or less.

    4.   The diameter of a microwave dish antenna shall not exceed four (4) feet.

    C.   Accessory equipment for a building roof or wall-mounted WSF shall be placed inside the building if feasible. All equipment storage shelters shall be grouped as closely as technically possible, and the total area of all accessory equipment, including storage shelters, shall not exceed four hundred (400) square feet per WSF. (Ord. 30-2017 § 1)

 

17.45.060 Small cell facilities.
    A.  A telecommunications provider or broadband provider may locate or collocate small cell facilities or small cell networks on light poles, light standards, traffic signals, or utility poles in the right-of-way owned by the City, subject to the following:

    1.   A small cell facility or a small cell network shall not be located or mounted on an apparatus, pole, or signal with tolling collection or enforcement equipment attached.

    2.   The construction, installation, operation and maintenance of a small cell facility must comply with applicable federal and state law and the provisions of this chapter. If upon inspection, the City concludes that a wireless service facility fails to comply with such laws and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then, upon written notice being provided to the owner of the small cell facility, the owner shall have thirty (30) days from the date of the notice to bring such facility into compliance. Upon good cause shown by the owner, the City may extend such compliance period not to exceed ninety (90) days from the date of said notice. If the owner fails to bring such facility into compliance within said time period, the City may remove such facility at owner’s expense or prohibit future, noncompliant use of the light pole, light standard, traffic signal or utility.

    B.   Micro wireless facilities. No application or permit shall be required for the installation, placement, operation, maintenance, or replacement of micro wireless facilities that are suspended on cable operator-owned cables or lines that are strung between existing utility poles in compliance with the national safety code, subject to the following:

    1.   The City may require a permit for installation, placement, operation, maintenance, or replacement of micro wireless facilities where the installation, placement, operation, maintenance, or replacement of micro wireless facilities does any of the following, upon determination of the City:

    a.   Involves working within a highway travel lane or requires the closure of a highway travel lane;

    b.   Disturbs the pavement or a shoulder, roadway, or ditch line;

    c.   Includes placement on limited access rights-of-way; or

    d.   Requires any specific precautions to ensure the safety of the traveling public; the protection of public infrastructure; or the operation of public infrastructure; and such activities either were not authorized in, or will be conducted in a time, place, or manner that is inconsistent with, the approval terms of the existing permit for the facility or structure upon which the micro wireless facility is attached. (Ord. 30-2017 § 1)

 

17.45.070 Application and approval procedures.
    A.  An application for approval of a proposed WSF shall include all information regularly required for other development applications, in addition to the following:

    1.   A site plan and written, narrative statement describing in detail, how the proposed WSF will comply with each of the applicable design standards set forth in this chapter.

    2.   If requested by the City, photographic simulations showing the proposed facility and, if applicable, the structure on which it will be attached.

    B.   Consolidated Applications for Small Cell Facilities. A telecommunications provider or broadband provider may file a consolidated application to receive a single permit for small cell networks involving multiple individual small cell facilities within the City. However, each small cell facility within the consolidated application individually remains subject to review for compliance with the requirements provided in this chapter.

    C.   Incomplete Applications.

    1.   When an application is incomplete, the City shall provide written notice to the applicant within thirty (30) days, specifically identifying all missing documents or information.

    2.   If an application remains incomplete after a supplemental submission, the City shall notify the applicant within ten (10) days. Second or subsequent notices of incompleteness may not require the production of documents or information that were not requested in the original notice of incompleteness.

    D.  Expedited Review.

    1.   An eligible WSF, including an application for location or collocation of a small cell facility or small cell network or replacement or modification of a small cell facility or facilities or small cell network request shall be approved or denied by the City within sixty (60) days of the date of the City’s receipt of the completed application. This time period may be tolled only by mutual agreement or when an application is incomplete.

    2.   If the City fails to approve or deny an eligible WSF request within the sixty (60) days of the date of the City’s receipt of the completed application (accounting for any tolling), the request shall be deemed granted; provided that this automatic approval shall become effective only upon the City’s receipt of written notification from the applicant after the review period has expired (accounting for any tolling) indicating that the application has been deemed granted.

    E.   Review.

    1.   Criteria for approval or denial of application. In considering an application for location or collocation of a WSF, the City shall base the decision as to the approval or denial of the application on whether the proposed WSF meets the applicable design standards as outlined in this chapter, rather than any criteria set forth in any other chapters of this Title 17.

    2.   Approval.

    a.   The City shall approve an eligible WSF request that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of a tower or base station.

    b.   The City may approve an eligible WSF request that substantially changes the physical dimensions of a tower or base station if it complies with the remainder of this Code.

    c.   The City may condition the approval of any eligible WSF request on compliance with generally applicable building, structural, electrical, and safety codes or with other laws codifying objective standards reasonably related to health and safety.

    3.   Denial. A final decision by the City to deny an eligible telecommunications facility request under this section shall be in writing and shall include the reason(s) for denial.

    F.   Application Denial. A final decision by the City to deny any application under this chapter shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. Any appeal of a final decision denying an application pursuant to this chapter may be made to the Board of Adjustment pursuant to Section 17.36.050. (Ord. 30-2017 § 1)

Title 18 VESTED PROPERTY RIGHTS
Chapter 18.04 VESTED PROPERTY RIGHTS

Chapter 18.04 VESTED PROPERTY RIGHTS
18.04.010 Purpose of provisions.
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide the procedures necessary to implement the provisions of Article 68 of Title 24, Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended. (Ord. 3-1988 § 3; prior code § 18.01.010)

 

18.04.020 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:

    A.  “Site-specific development plan” means:

    1.   In the case of subdivisions: Approval by the City Council of the final plat presented by the subdivider after notice and public hearing and recordation of the plat, unless the subdivider and the City have reached a written agreement providing for the vesting of real property rights at a different time;

    2.   In the case of planned unit developments: Approval by the City Council of the final PUD development plan and plat after notice and public hearing, unless the developer and the City have reached a written agreement providing for the vesting of real property rights at a different time;

    3.   No other land use decision by any board, commission, or the City Council of the City shall be deemed to create vested real property rights;

    4.   The Council may, by agreement with the developer or subdivider, designate an approval other than those described above to serve as the site-specific development plan approval for a specific project.

    B.   “Vested property right” means the right to undertake and complete the development and use of property under the terms and conditions of a site-specific development plan. (Ord. 3-1988 § 3; prior code § 18.01.020)

 

18.04.030 Site-specific development plan—Notice and hearing.
    No site-specific development plan shall be approved until after a public hearing before the City Council, preceded by public notice of such hearing. Such notice may, at the City’s option, be combined with any notice required by State statute or City ordinance, for zoning or subdivision regulations, or with any other required notice. At such hearing interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. (Ord. 3-1988 § 3; prior code § 18.01.030)

 

18.04.040 Site-specific development plan—Approval conditions and amendments.
    A.  A site-specific development plan shall be deemed approved upon the effective date of the Council’s approval action relating thereto, as set forth at Section 18.04.020, and upon recordation of the plat with the County Clerk and Recorder, unless conditions are imposed by the Council which shall extend the approval date until the developer or subdivider has met all such conditions.

    B.   In the event amendments to a site-specific development are proposed and approved, the effective date of such amendments, for purposes of duration of a vested property right, shall be the date of the approval of the original site-specific development plan, unless the Council specifically finds to the contrary and incorporates such finding in its approval of the amendment. (Ord. 3-1988 § 3; prior code § 18.01.040)

 

18.04.050 Vested property right—Notice of approval.
    Each map, plat or site plan or other document which, by specific agreement, constitutes a site-specific development plan, shall contain the following language: “Approval of this plan may create a vested property right pursuant to Article 68 of Title 24, Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended.” Failure to contain this statement shall invalidate the creation of the vested property right. In addition, a notice describing generally the type and intensity of use approved, the specific parcel or parcels of property affected and stating that a vested property right has been created shall be published once, not more than fourteen (14) days after approval of the site-specific development plan, in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. (Ord. 3-1988 § 3; prior code § 18.01.050)

 

18.04.060 Other property use provisions unaffected.
    Approval of a site-specific development plan shall not constitute an exemption from or waiver of any other provisions of this Code pertaining to the development and use of property. (Ord. 3-1988 § 3; prior code § 18.01.060)

 

18.04.080 Limitations—Statutory authority.
    Nothing in this chapter is intended to create any vested property right, but only to implement the provisions of Article 68 of Title 24, Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended. In the event of the repeal of such article or a judicial determination that such article is invalid or unconstitutional, this chapter shall be deemed to be repealed, and the provisions hereof no longer effective. (Ord. 3-1988 § 3; prior code § 18.01.080)

Title 19 DRAINAGE
Chapter 19.10 DRAINAGE

Chapter 19.10 DRAINAGE
19.10.010 Purpose and intent.
    The purpose of this chapter is to regulate maintenance of curbs, gutters, culverts, and ditches to protect public infrastructure, health, safety, and private property. (Ord. 12-2019 § 10)

 

19.10.020 Definitions.
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning set forth in this section:

    A.  “Culvert” means a buried pipe installed to convey drainage or irrigation water.

    B.   “Curb” means the concrete or asphalt vertical edge often accompanying a gutter constructed at the edge of a road to collect surface water and direct it away.

    C.   “Ditch” means any narrow channel dug in the ground, typically used for drainage or irrigation alongside a road or the edge of a field.

    D.  “Gutter” means the concrete or asphalt shallow trough structure with an invert often accompanying a curb constructed at the edge of a road or crossing a road to collect surface water and direct it away.

    E.   “Obstruction” means any dam, wall embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel rectification, building, fence, stockpile, refuse, material, vegetation, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across or projecting into any curb, gutter, or ditch which might impede, retard or change the direction of a flow of water, either by itself or by catching or collection debris carried by such water.

    F.   “Occupant” means and includes any person who occupies the whole or a part of a building, premises, or land, whether alone or with others, whether for residential or commercial purposes. “Occupant” means and includes the terms “tenant” and “lessee.”

    G.  “Owner” means and includes:

    1.   Any owner or holder of any legal or equitable estate in real property, including a dominant or servient tenement, except a future or reversionary interest and except the interest of a public trustee, lienholder, mortgagee, or beneficiary of a deed of trust; or

    2.   The owner of record, as reflected by the records of the office of the County Assessor.

    H.  “Private Culvert” means a buried pipe installed to convey drainage or irrigation water under private improvements such as, but not limited to, a private driveway.

    I.    “Public Culvert” means a buried pipe installed to convey drainage or irrigation water under public improvements such as, but not limited to, a public roadway. (Ord. 12-2019 § 10)

 

19.10.030 Applicability.
    This chapter shall apply to all curbs, gutters, culverts, and ditches within the public rights-of-way or easements unless explicitly exempted by this chapter. (Ord. 12-2019 § 10)

 

19.10.040 Responsibility for administration.
    The City Engineer, or his or her designee, shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 12-2019 § 10)

 

19.10.050 Curbs and gutters.
    All occupants/owners are required to keep the curbs and gutters for drainage that may extend along any roadway between the center of such roadway and the property occupied by them clear of all obstructions to the free flow of water therein. (Ord. 12-2019 § 10)

 

19.10.060 Ditches and culverts.
    A.  All occupants/owners are required to keep the private culverts and ditches for drainage and/or irrigation that may extend along any roadway between the center of such roadway and the property occupied by them clear of all obstructions to the free flow of water therein.

    B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause obstruction of the free flow of water within public culverts. (Ord. 12-2019 § 10)

 

19.10.070 Corrective action by City and charge of costs.
    If an occupant/owner violates any requirement of this chapter, the City may take corrective measures and charge the cost of such corrective measures to the occupant/owner. Such costs shall include the actual cost of any work deemed necessary by the City Engineer, plus reasonable administrative and inspection costs and any civil penalties imposed pursuant to Chapter 20.10 of this Code. (Ord. 12-2019 § 10)

 

19.10.080 Enforcement and penalties.
    This chapter shall be subject to the enforcement provisions in Section 20.10.160. (Ord. 12-2019 § 10)

Title 20 STORMWATER ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND PERMITS
Chapter 20.10 STORMWATER ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS

Chapter 20.10 STORMWATER ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
20.10.010 Purpose and intent.
    The purpose of this chapter is to regulate non-stormwater discharges to the storm drainage system, as required by federal and state law, to protect and enhance the water quality of the City’s watercourses, water bodies and wetlands in a manner consistent with the Federal Clean Water Act. The objectives of this chapter are:

    A.  To regulate the introduction of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4);

    B.   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4;

    C.   To provide for inspection and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter;

    D.  To reduce pollutants in stormwater discharges from construction activity by guiding, regulating, and controlling the design, construction, use, and maintenance of any development or other activity that disturbs or breaks the topsoil or results in the movement of earth on land;

    E.   To require permanent stormwater runoff controls to be constructed along with development to prevent the deterioration of water quality; and

    F.   To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper discharge of pollutants into the storm drainage system. (Ord. 12-2019 § 11)

 

20.10.020 Definitions.
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning set forth in this section:

    A.  “Applicable Construction Activity” means construction activities with land disturbance (surface disturbing and associated activities) of one or more acres, or disturbing less than one acre if that construction activity is part of a larger common plan of development or sale that would disturb, or has disturbed one or more acres, unless the disturbed areas have been finally stabilized. “Applicable construction activities” include the land disturbing activity and all activities and materials associated with the construction site and located at, or contiguous to, the land disturbing activities.

    B.   “Best Management Practices (BMPs)” means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.

    C.   “CDPHE” means the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment.

    D.  “Clean Water Act” means the federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.

    E.   “Colorado Discharge Permit System (CDPS) Stormwater Discharge Permit” or “CDPS permit” means a permit issued pursuant to the Colorado Water Quality Control Act (C.R.S. § 25-8-101 et seq., as amended).

    F.   “Common Plan of Development or Sale” means a contiguous (within 0.25 miles) area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities may be taking place at different times on different schedules, but remain related.

    G.  “Construction Activity” means ground surface disturbing and associated activities (land disturbance), which include, but are not limited to, clearing, grading, excavation, demolition, installation of new or improved haul roads and access roads, staging areas, stockpiling of fill materials, and borrow areas. Construction does not include routine maintenance to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or the original purpose of the facility. Activities to conduct repairs that are not part of regular maintenance or for replacement are construction activities and are not routine maintenance. Repaving activities where underlying and/or surrounding soil is cleared, graded, or excavated as part of the repaving operation are considered construction activities unless they are an excluded site. Construction activity is from initial ground breaking to final stabilization regardless of ownership of the construction activities.

    H.  “Control Measure” means the same as Best Management Practices.

    I.    “Director” means the City Engineer of the City of Cañon City or designee.

    J.    “Disturbed Area” means that area of the land’s surface disturbed by any work or activity upon the property by means including, but not limited to, grading; excavating, stockpiling soil, fill, or other materials; clearing; vegetation removal; removal or deposit of any rock, soil, or other materials; or other activities which expose soil. Disturbed area does not include the tillage of land that is zoned for agricultural use.

    K.  “Facility” means any building, including a private home, structure, installation, process, or activity from which there is or may be a discharge of a pollutant.

    L.   “Final Stabilization” means the condition reached when all ground surface disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and for all areas of ground surface disturbing activities a uniform vegetative cover has been established with an individual plant density of at least seventy percent (70%) of pre-disturbance levels, or equivalent permanent, physical erosion reduction methods have been employed.

    M.  “Hazardous Materials” means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.

    N.  “Illicit Connections” means any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drainage system, including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drainage system; and any connections to the storm drainage system from indoor drains, sump pumps and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved.

    O.  “Illicit Discharge” means any direct or indirect release of pollutants to the storm drainage system, except as excluded in Section 20.10.050(F) of this chapter.

    P.   “Industrial Activity” means activities subject to CDPS or NPDES Industrial Permits, as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14).

    Q.  “Land Disturbing Activity” means any activity that results in a change in the existing land surface (both vegetative and non-vegetative). “Land disturbing activities” include, but are not limited to, clearing, grading, excavation, demolition, installation of new or improved haul roads and access roads, staging areas, stockpiling of fill materials, and borrow areas. Compaction that is associated with stabilization of structures and road construction shall also be considered a land disturbing activity.

    R.   “Mobile Washing Operation” means a commercial activity involving power washing, steam cleaning, and any other method of mobile cosmetic cleaning of, by way of example, the following: vehicles, fabric, pets and/or exterior surfaces.

    S.   “Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4)” means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains):

    1.   Owned or operated by a State, city, town, county, district, association, or other public body (created by or pursuant to State law) having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, stormwater, or other wastes, including special districts under State law such as a sewer district, flood control district or drainage district, or similar entity, or a designated and approved management agency under Section 208 of the CWA that discharges to state waters;

    2.   Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, which shall include conveyances that are owned or operated by the City through an agreement, contract, direct ownership, easement or right-of-way and are for the purpose of managing floodplains, stream banks, and channels for conveyance of stormwater flows;

    3.   Which is not a combined sewer; and

    4.   Which is not part of a Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW). See 5 CCR 1002-61.2(62).

    T.   “National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit” or “NPDES permit” means a permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Clean Water Act.

    U.  “Non-Stormwater Discharge” means any discharge to the storm drainage system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.

    V.  “Operator” means the person or entity who is responsible for the overall operation of the facility or activity from which the associated discharge originates.

    W.  “Owner” means the person who owns a facility, a development, part of a facility, or land.

    X.  “Pollutant” means any sewage, sewage biosolids, dirt, slurry, garbage, chemical waste, biological material, biological nutrient, solid waste, incinerator residue, ash, munitions, radioactive material, heat, rock, sand, cellar dirt, wrecked or discarded equipment and any municipal, industrial and agricultural wastes.

    Y.  “Pollution” means the presence in waters of the state of any substances, contaminants, or manmade or man-induced impairment of waters or alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, or radiological integrity of water in quantities or at levels which are or may be potentially harmful or injurious to human health or welfare, animal or plant life, or property or which unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property, including outdoor recreation unless authorized by applicable law.

    Z.   “Premises” means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved, and including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.

    AA. “Receiving Water” means any water of the State of Colorado that receives a stormwater discharge from MS4, including all watercourses, even if they are usually dry, and irrigation ditches that receive municipal stormwater. It also includes storm drainage systems owned by other entities.

    BB.           “Site Plan” means construction stormwater site plans, sediment and erosion control plans, stormwater pollution prevention plans, drainage reports, drainage plans, stormwater management plans, drainage and erosion control plans, etc.

    CC.           “Spill” means any intentional or unintentional release of solid or liquid material which may cause pollution of the MS4 or waters of the state.

    DD. “Storm Drainage System” has the same meaning as “Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4).”

    EE. “Stormwater” means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.

    FF. “Stormwater Management Plan (SWMP)” means a plan describing the BMP and activities to be implemented to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, MS4, or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.

    GG. “Threatened Discharge” means a condition creating a substantial probability of harm, which makes it reasonably necessary to take immediate action to prevent, reduce or mitigate damages to persons, property or natural resources.

    HH. “Wastewater” means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility.

    II.   “Watercourse” means a channel, natural depression, slough, artificial channel, gulch, arroyo, stream, creek, pond, reservoir or lake, including major drainageways, in which stormwater runoff and floodwater flows, either regularly or infrequently.

    JJ.  “Waters of the State of Colorado (waters of the state)” means any and all surface and subsurface waters that are contained in or flow in or through the State of Colorado. The definition includes all watercourses, even if they are usually dry. (Ord. 12-2019 § 11)

 

20.10.030 Applicability.
    This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drainage system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by this chapter. (Ord. 12-2019 § 11)

 

20.10.040 Responsibility for administration.
    The Director shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 12-2019 § 11)

 

20.10.050 Illicit discharge prohibited—Exclusions.
    A.  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the MS4 or watercourses any illicit discharge, including, but not limited to, the following:

    1.   Chemicals, petroleum products, paint, varnishes, solvents, oil, grease and other automotive fluids, pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers, or other toxic materials;

    2.   Non-hazardous liquid, solid wastes and yard wastes;

    3.   Hazardous materials, sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens, dissolved and particulate metals;

    4.   Trash, refuse, rubbish, garbage, food wastes, pet wastes, litter, other discarded or abandoned objects, floatables and cleaning products;

    5.   Landscaping materials, sediment, lawn clippings, leaves, branches or other landscaping and yard debris;

    6.   Construction activities wastes and residues including, but not limited to, trash, painting, paving, concrete placement, sawcutting, material storage and earthwork;

    7.   Wastes and residues that result from mobile washing operations, discharges from toilets and sinks, industrial processes, cooling systems, boilers, fabric cleaning, equipment cleaning, commercial vehicle cleaning and substances added to the storm drain to control root growth;

    8.   Any other material that is considered harmful to humans, animals, or aquatic life and its habitat.

    B.   Exclusions. The following discharges, when properly managed, are excluded from the discharge prohibitions established by this chapter:

    1.   Landscape irrigation;

    2.   Lawn watering;

    3.   Irrigation return flows;

    4.   Diverted stream flows;

    5.   Rising ground water;

    6.   Uncontaminated ground water infiltration;

    7.   Uncontaminated pumped groundwater; provided it has not come into contact with construction activities;

    8.   Springs;

    9.   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;

    10. Water line flushing in accordance with CDPHE’s Low Risk Policy Discharge Guidance: Potable Water;

    11. Discharges from potable water sources in accordance with CDPHE’s Low Risk Discharge Guidance: Potable Water provided it has not been used in any additional processes such as washing, heat exchange, manufacturing and hydrostatic testing of pipelines not associated with treated water distribution systems;

    12. Foundation drains;

    13. Air conditioning condensation;

    14. Water from crawl space pumps;

    15. Footing drains;

    16. Individual residential car washing;

    17. Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges in accordance with CDPHE’s Low Risk Discharge Guidance: Swimming Pools;

    18. Water incidental to street sweeping (including associated sidewalks and medians) and that is not associated with construction;

    19. Dye testing in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations;

    20. Stormwater runoff with incidental pollutants;

    21. Discharges resulting from emergency firefighting activities;

    22. Discharges authorized by a CDPS or NPDES permit provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted by the City for any discharge to the storm drain system;

    23. Agricultural stormwater runoff; and

    24. Discharges that are in accordance with CDPHE’s Low Risk Policy guidance documents or other CDPHE policies and guidance documents where CDPHE has stated that it will not pursue permit coverage or enforcement for specified point source discharges. (Ord. 12-2019 § 11)

 

20.10.060 Illicit connections prohibited.
    The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the MS4 is prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. (Ord. 12-2019 § 11)

 

20.10.070 Threatened discharges.
    A.  It is unlawful to cause materials to be deposited in such a manner or location as to constitute a threatened discharge into the MS4 or waters of the state. Pollutants that are no longer contained in a pipe, tank or other container are considered to be threatened discharges unless they are actively being cleaned up.

    1.   Cleaning of Paved Surfaces Required. The owner of any paved parking lot, street or drive shall clean the pavement as necessary to prevent an illicit discharge of pollutants. Paved surfaces shall be cleaned by dry sweeping, wet vacuum sweeping, collection and treatment of wash water or other methods in compliance with this chapter.

    2.   Materials Storage. Materials including, but not limited to, stockpiles used in construction and landscaping activities shall be stored to prevent the release of pollutants.

    3.   Pesticides, Herbicides and Fertilizers. Pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers shall be applied in accordance with manufacturer recommendations and applicable laws. Pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers shall be stored in a manner to prevent release to the MS4. (Ord. 12-2019 § 11)

 

20.10.080 Best management practices.
    The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment or a disturbed area shall provide, at his or her own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the MS4 or watercourses through the use of structural and non-structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for premises, which are, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person’s expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the MS4. (Ord. 12-2019 § 11)

 

20.10.090 Access and inspection of properties and facilities.
    A.  Whenever the Director has reasonable cause to believe that there exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a violation of this chapter, the Director shall have the right to enter the premises at any reasonable time to determine if the owner or operator is complying with all requirements of this chapter. In the event that the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter has been made, the City is hereby empowered to seek assistance from a court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry.

    B.   The Director shall have the right to set up on the property of any discharger to the MS4 such devices that are necessary to conduct an investigation of such discharges. The investigation may include, but is not limited to, the following: sampling of any discharge or process waters, the taking of photographs, interviewing staff on alleged violations, and access to any and all facilities or areas within the premises that may have any effect on the discharge.

    C.   If the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the Director is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. (Ord. 12-2019 § 11)

 

20.10.100 Notification of spills.
    Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for any premises, facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the MS4, or waters of the state, that person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the Director in person or by phone no later than twenty-four (24) hours. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the Director within five (5) calendar days of the phone notice. The Colorado Department of Public Health shall also be notified within twenty-four (24) hours. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3) years. (Ord. 12-2019 § 11)

 

20.10.110 Permitting.
    A.  Permit Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any activity resulting in the following total disturbed area without first obtaining a stormwater quality permit:

    1.   One acre or more;

    2.   Less than one acre if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules, unless the development has been stabilized; or

    3.   The City may also require a stormwater quality permit regardless of the size of the total disturbed area in conjunction with approval of a final subdivision plat, special use permit, or site development plan, or if the construction activities are adjacent to a watercourse or wetlands.

    B.   The following activities are exempt from this chapter:

    1.   Agricultural land management activities; and

    2.   Facilities associated with oil and gas exploration, production, processing, or treatment operations, or transmission facilities, including activities necessary to prepare a site for drilling and for the movement and placement of drilling equipment, whether or not such activities or operations may be considered to be construction activity.

    C.   Permit Application. Applications for stormwater quality permits shall be filed with the Director on a form prescribed by the City.

    1.   In support of the application, the applicant shall submit all information required on the City’s form and any additional information requested by the City.

 

    2.   The application shall be signed by a person responsible for compliance with the permit throughout the permit’s validity.

    3.   The application shall include:

    a.   Documentation proving that a complete application for a current CDPHE stormwater general permit for construction activities has been made; and

    b.   A completed SWMP, including an erosion and sediment control plan.

    4.   If, at the time of filing of a permit application pursuant to this subsection, the applicant has not filed documentation proving that a CDPHE stormwater general permit for construction activities was issued, the permit to be issued by the City shall not be issued or valid until the applicant has provided proof of CDPHE permit certification to the City. No construction activities shall be commenced prior to the applicant’s submission of such proof of certification.

    D.  Construction activities may not proceed until permit approval is received from the City.

    E.   Permit Issuance/Denial. The Director shall, within ten (10) working days of receipt of a completed stormwater quality permit application, either issue or deny a permit. The permit shall be denied if the applicant fails to provide the information, fees, or security required by this chapter. If a permit is denied, the applicant shall be notified, in writing, of the grounds for denial and of the corrective actions that must be taken to obtain a permit. An applicant may appeal the denial in writing to the City Administrator no later than thirty (30) calendar days from the date of issuance of denial. The appeal must set forth the grounds for the appeal and include any documents in support of the applicant’s appeal. The City Administrator shall within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of an appeal rule on the matter based solely upon review of the application, denial, appeal, and all documents related thereto. The parties shall receive written notice of the City Administrator’s decision.

    F.   Permit Fees. Fees for any permit required by this chapter shall be established from time to time by resolution of the City Council, and no permit shall be issued until and unless the fee has been paid. (Ord. 12-2019 § 11)

 

20.10.120 Construction stormwater management plan.
    A.  The SWMP shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of the most recent SWMP guidance document prepared by the CDPHE, and the engineering, hydrologic and pollution control practices outlined in the City’s Design Standards and Construction Specifications.

    B.   The owner or its representative will be required to have the approved SWMP on site at all times and shall be prepared to respond to maintenance of specific BMPs.

    C.   The owner or their representative shall inspect all BMPs at least every fourteen (14) days and within twenty-four (24) hours after any precipitation or snow melt event that causes surface runoff.

    D.  Based on inspections performed by the owner or by City personnel, modifications to the SWMP will be necessary if at any time the specified BMPs do not meet the objectives of this chapter. In this case, the owner shall meet with City personnel to determine the appropriate modifications. All modifications shall be completed within seven (7) days of the referenced inspection, and shall be recorded on the owner’s copy of the SWMP.

    E.   SWMP Review/Changes. The operator shall amend the plan whenever there is a significant change in design, construction, operation, or maintenance, which has a significant effect on the potential for discharge of pollutants to the MS4 or receiving waters, or if the SWMP proves to be ineffective in achieving the general objectives of controlling pollutants in stormwater discharges associated with construction activities.

    F.   Records of inspection are to be maintained on site with the SWMP and are to be available to the City Inspector upon request. (Ord. 12-2019 § 11)

 

20.10.130 Technical standards and specifications.
    A.  All BMPs designed to meet the requirements of this chapter shall comply with the following technical standards:

    1.   Urban Drainage and Flood Control District’s Urban Storm Drainage Criteria Manual-Volume 3-BMP or its successor;

    2.   The City’s Standard Construction Specifications Manual; and

    3.   Any other alternative methodology approved by the City, which is demonstrated to be effective. (Ord. 12-2019 § 11)

 

20.10.140 Post-construction requirement of permanent BMPs.
    A.  Land development that meets the requirements of this chapter must address stormwater runoff quality through the use of permanent BMPs which shall be maintained in perpetuity.

    1.   Structural BMPs located on private property shall be owned and operated by the owners of the property on which the BMP is located, unless the City in writing agrees that a person other than the owner shall own or operate such BMP.

    2.   As a condition of approval of the BMP, the owner shall also agree to maintain the BMP to its design capacity unless or until the City relieves the property owner of that responsibility in writing. The obligation to maintain the BMP shall be memorialized on the subdivision plat, annexation plat, development agreement or other instrument in a form acceptable to the City and shall be recorded in the office of the County Clerk and Recorder.

    B.   Certification of Permanent BMPs. Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy is granted, the City shall perform an inspection to verify the BMP is constructed and is operating in accordance with the approved site plan. A final inspection by the City is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. The City shall also provide a written certification stating that the completed project is in compliance with the approved final drainage plan. All applicants are required to submit “as built” plans for any permanent BMPs after final construction is completed which must be certified by a Colorado licensed professional engineer. The plans must include the following:

    1.   Design details for all structural control measures implemented.

    2.   A narrative reference for all non-structural control measures implemented for the site.

    3.   Documentation of operation and maintenance procedures which include inspection frequencies and maintenance activities to ensure the long-term maintenance and operation of the BMP.

    4.   Documentation of easements or other legal means of access for the operation, maintenance and inspection of the BMP(s).

    C.   Ongoing Inspection and Maintenance of Permanent BMPs.

    1.   Maintenance Agreements. The owner of site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the City, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the permanent BMPs.

    2.   Long-Term Inspection of Permanent BMPs. Permanent BMPs included in a final drainage plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and to ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this chapter. (Ord. 12-2019 § 11)

 

20.10.150 Corrective action by City and charge of costs.
    If a permittee does not successfully complete all work required under a permit issued by the City pursuant to this chapter or violates any requirement of this chapter, the City may take corrective measures and charge the cost of such corrective measures to the permittee. Such costs shall include the actual cost of any work deemed necessary by the Director, plus reasonable administrative and inspection costs and any civil penalties imposed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 12-2019 § 11)

 

20.10.160 Enforcement and penalties.
    A.  It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter, an approved stormwater quality permit or SWMP. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter may be subject to one or more of the enforcement actions outlined in this section.

    B.   In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the Director is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property.

    C.   Cost of Abatement of the Violation.

    1.   If the City abates a violation, then within ten (10) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs by personal delivery or by mail to the last known address of the owner as shown in the records of the County Assessor. The notice shall be effective upon the date of mailing or personal delivery. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within ten (10) days of the effective date of the notice.

    2.   If no protest is filed, then the charges shall become due and payable on the date set forth in the notice, which date shall be after the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, and such charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment.

    3.   In the event a protest is filed, a hearing on such protest shall be held before the City Administrator or his or her designee within fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of the written protest. If any charges are upheld upon completion of such hearing, then such charges shall become due and payable ten (10) days after the issuance of the order upon such protest and if not timely paid, such charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment.

    4.   If the amount due is not paid within ten (10) days of the decision of the City Administrator or the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal under this section, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. The assessment shall be certified by the Director of Finance to the office of the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as the collection of general property taxes.

    D.  Stop Work Order. Whenever the Director determines that any activity is occurring which is not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter, an approved stormwater quality permit or SWMP, the Director can order the activity stopped upon service of written notice upon the responsible owner and/or operator. The owner and/or operator shall immediately stop all activity until authorized in writing by the City to proceed. If the owner and/or operator cannot be located, the notice to stop shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the area where the activity is occurring and shall state the nature of the violation. It shall be unlawful for any owner and/or operator to fail to comply with a stop work order.

    E.   Civil Penalties Authorized. The Director is hereby authorized to impose and collect civil penalties not to exceed two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) per violation per day, from the day the violation is identified or reported until it is eliminated, if an alleged violator who is served a written notice of violation, identifying one or more specific violations of this chapter or of an approved stormwater quality permit or of a SWMP, fails to take the remedial action set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations set forth therein within ten (10) days after the notice of violation is served upon the owner or operator (or such longer period as is authorized in writing by the Director, if a cure cannot reasonably be accomplished in ten (10) days). The amount of the penalty shall depend upon the severity of the violation and may be appealed to the City Administrator using the same process as is provided for in subsection C of this section. The City shall not prosecute any alleged violator nor seek the imposition of criminal penalties with respect to any violation for which a civil penalty was imposed and paid pursuant to this subsection.

    F.   Criminal Penalties; Enforcement Costs. It is unlawful and an offense for any person to violate or permit or cause a violation of this chapter or of the provisions of any discharge permit issued under this chapter. Upon conviction thereof, violators shall be punished by a fine in an amount that does not exceed the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010.

    G.  Violations Deemed a Public Nuisance. Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a public nuisance. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall enjoin violations of this chapter, upon proof of such violations.

    H.  Remedies Not Exclusive. Except as expressly provided above, the remedies in this chapter are cumulative and the exercise of any one or more remedies shall not prejudice any other remedies that may otherwise be pursued for a violation of this chapter. The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies.

(Ord. 18-2020 § 14; Ord. 12-2019 § 11)

Title 21 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Chapter 21.10 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS

Chapter 21.10 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
21.10.010 Title and purpose.
    A.  Statutory Authorization. The Legislature of the State of Colorado has in Article 20 of Title 29 and Part 2 of Article 23 of Title 31, Colorado Revised Statutes delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses.

    B.   Findings of Fact.

    1.   The flood hazard areas of the City are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.

    2.   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.

    C.   Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:

    1.   Promote sound planning, use and development of floodplain areas consistent with the degree of hazard involved;

    2.   Protect human life and health;

    3.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

    4.   Protect the public from avoidable financial expenditures for the repair and restoration of flood damaged public and private facilities;

    5.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

    6.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;

    7.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;

    8.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas;

    9.   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area and minimize victimization of unwary home and land purchasers; and

    10. Ensure that those who occupy the Special Flood Hazard Areas assume responsibility for their actions.

    D.  Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods:

    1.   Facilitate the administration of flood hazard areas by establishing requirements that must be met before use or development is permitted;

    2.   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;

    3.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

    4.   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters;

    5.   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage;

    6.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. (Ord. 12-2019 § 12)

 

21.10.020 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter the meaning of certain words and phrases shall be as set out in this section. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.

    A.  “100-Year Flood” means a flood having a recurrence interval that has a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded during any given year (one-percent-annual-chance flood). The terms “one-hundred-year flood” and “one percent chance flood” are synonymous with the term “100-year flood.” The term does not imply that the flood will necessarily happen once every one hundred years.

    B.   “100-Year Floodplain” means the area of land susceptible to being inundated as a result of the occurrence of a one hundred year flood.

    C.   “500-Year Flood” means a flood having a recurrence interval that has a 0.2-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded during any given year (0.2-percent-chance-annual-flood). The term does not imply that the flood will necessarily happen once every five hundred years.

    D.  “500-Year Floodplain” means the area of land susceptible to being inundated as a result of the occurrence of a five hundred year flood.

    E.   “Addition” means any activity that expands the enclosed footprint or increases the square footage of an existing structure.

    F.   “Administrator” means the local administrative official responsible for administering and implementing these regulations as set forth in Section 21.10.030.

    G.  “Appeal” means the request for a review of the City’s interpretation of any provisions of this chapter or a request for a variance.

    H.  “Appeal Board” means the Board of Adjustment, as provided for in Chapter 17.36 of this Code.

    I.    “Applicant” means any individual, partnership, corporation, association, company or public body, including the federal government or any political subdivision, agency, corporation or instrumentality of the state applying for a floodplain development permit pursuant to these regulations.

    J.    “Area of Shallow Flooding” means a designated AO or AH zone on the City’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.

    K.  “Base Flood” means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The term is used interchangeably with “Intermediate Regional Flood,” “one hundred year flood” and “one percent chance flood.”

    L.   “Base Flood Elevation (BFE)” means the elevation shown on a FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map for Zones A, AE, AH, AO, or A1-99 that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year.

    M.  “Basement” means any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides.

    N.  “Channel” means a natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible extent with definite bed and banks which confines and conducts continuously or intermittently flowing water.

    O.  “Channelization” means the artificial creation, enlargement or realignment of a stream channel.

    P.   “Code of Federal Regulations (CFR)” means the codification of the general and permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the executive departments and agencies of the federal government. It is divided into fifty (50) titles that represent broad areas subject to federal regulation.

    Q.  “Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR)” means FEMA’s comment on a proposed project, which does not revise an effective floodplain map, that would, upon construction, affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodplain.

    R.   “Critical Facility” means a structure or related infrastructure, but not the land on which it is situated, as specified in Section 21.10.050(G), that if flooded may result in significant hazards to public health and safety or interrupt essential services and operations for the City at any time before, during and after a flood.

    S.   “Crawl Space” means a type of foundation in which the lowest floor of a house is elevated above the ground on continuous foundation walls, creating an uninhabitable enclosed area.

    T.   “Development” means any man-made change in improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.

 

    U.  “Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM)” means FEMA digital floodplain map. These digital maps serve as “regulatory floodplain maps” for insurance and floodplain management purposes.

    V.  “Elevated Building” means a non-basement building: (1) built, in the case of a building in Zones A, AE, A1-99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water; and (2) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones A, AE, A1-99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, “elevated building” also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters.

    W.  “Existing Construction” means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. “Existing construction” may also be referred to as “existing structures.”

    X.  “Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a City.

    Y.  “Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision” means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).

    Z.   “Federal Register” means the official daily publication for rules, proposed rules, and notices of federal agencies and organizations, as well as executive orders and other presidential documents.

    AA. “FEMA” means Federal Emergency Management Agency, the agency responsible for administering the National Flood Insurance Program.

    BB. “Flood or Flooding” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:

    1.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters;

    2.   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source;

    3.   Mudslides or mudflows that occur from excess surface water that is combined with mud or other debris that is sufficiently fluid so as to flow over the surface of normally dry land areas (such as earth carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current).

    CC. “Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means an official map of the City, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the Special Flood Hazard Areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the City.

    DD. “Flood Insurance Study (FIS)” means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the Flood Boundary-Floodway Map.

    EE. “Floodplain or Flood-Prone Area” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding).

    FF. “Floodplain Development Permit” means an official document required by this chapter for development within any Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) to ensure that proposed development projects meet the requirements of the NFIP and this chapter.

    GG. “Floodplain Management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.

    HH. “Floodplain Management Regulations” means zoning chapters, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as floodplain ordinances, grading ordinances and erosion control ordinances) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.

    II.   “Flood Control Structure” means a physical structure designed and built expressly or partially for the purpose of reducing, redirecting, or guiding flood flows along a particular waterway. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.

    JJ.  “Flood Protection System” means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within the City subject to a “special flood hazard” and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.

    KK. “Flood Proofing” means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.

    LL. “Floodway (Regulatory Floodway)” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. The designated height to be used for all newly studied reaches shall be one-half foot (six (6) inches). Letters of Map Revision to existing floodway delineations may continue to use the floodway criteria in place at the time of the existing floodway delineation.

    MM. “Freeboard” means the vertical distance in feet above a predicted water surface elevation intended to provide a margin of safety to compensate for unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood such as debris blockage of bridge openings and the increased runoff due to urbanization of the watershed.

    NN. “Functionally Dependent Use” means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water.

    OO. “Highest Adjacent Grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

    PP. “Historic Structure” means any structure that is:

    1.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

    2.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

    3.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or

    4.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:

    a.   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or

    b.   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.

    QQ. “Levee” means a man-made embankment, usually earthen, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. For a levee structure to be reflected on the FEMA FIRMs as providing flood protection, the levee structure must meet the requirements set forth in Title 44 CFR Chapter 1, 65.10.

    RR. “Levee System” means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.

    SS. “Letter of Map Revision (LOMR)” means FEMA’s official revision of an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), or Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM), or both. LOMRs are generally based on the implementation of physical measures that affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the effective Base Flood Elevations (BFEs), or the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).

    TT. “Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F)” means FEMA’s modification of the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) based on the placement of fill outside the existing regulatory floodway.

    UU. “Lowest Adjacent Grade” means the lowest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

    VV. “Lowest Floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3, NFIP Regulations.

    WW. “Manufactured Home” means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”

    XX. “Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

    YY. “Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS)” also sometimes known as Safety Data Sheet (SDS) aligning with the Globally Harmonized System (GHS) of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals means a form with data regarding the properties of a particular substance. An important component of product stewardship and workplace safety, it is intended to provide workers and emergency personnel with procedures for handling or working with that substance in a safe manner, and includes information such as physical data (melting point, boiling point, flash point, etc.), toxicity, health effects, first aid, reactivity, storage, disposal, protective equipment, and spill-handling procedures.

    ZZ. “Mean Sea Level” means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on the City’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.

    AAA. “Mixed-Use Structure” means any structure with both residential and nonresidential uses.

    BBB. “National Flood Insurance Program Regulations (CFR 44/NFIP)” means regulations created within the federal program established with the passage of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 in conjunction with the Robert T. Stafford Relief and Emergency Assistance Act and administered by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) enabling property owners in participating communities to purchase insurance protection against losses from flooding. This insurance is designed to provide an insurance alternative to disaster assistance to meet the escalating costs of repairing damage to buildings and their contents caused by floods. Participation in the NFIP is based on an agreement between local communities and the federal government that states if the City will adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations to reduce future flood risks to new construction in Special Flood Hazard Areas, the federal government will make flood insurance and disaster assistance available within the City as a financial protection against flood losses. The regulations are contained within the Code of Federal Regulations Title 44.

    CCC. “New Construction” means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, “new construction” means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by the City and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

    DDD. “New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the City.

    EEE. “No-Rise Certification” means a record of the results of an engineering analysis conducted to determine whether a project will increase flood heights in a floodway. A No-Rise Certification must be supported by technical data and signed by a registered Colorado Professional Engineer. The supporting technical data should be based on the standard step-backwater computer model used to develop the 100-year floodway shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM).

    FFF. “Nonconforming Use” means any structure, development or land use not permitted under the terms and provisions of this Regulation but in existence on the effective date of this Regulation.

    GGG.        “Nonresidential Structure” means any structure used exclusively for, or designed as and capable of being used for, office, commercial, industrial, or governmental occupation, or the temporary lodging of persons for periods of less than thirty (30) days, including hotels, motels, a boarding house, emergency shelters, and overnight shelters.

    HHH. “Obstruction” means any dam, wall embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel rectification, bridge, culvert, building, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across or projecting into any floodplain which might impede, retard or change the direction of a flow of water, either by itself or by catching or collection debris carried by such water.

    III. “Permanent Foundation” means reinforced piers, posts, piles, poured concrete walls, reinforced block walls, or compacted fill in use as a permanent foundation for a manufactured home or mobile building. Stacked concrete blocks shall not be considered to constitute a permanent foundation.

    JJJ. “Physical Map Revision (PMR)” means FEMA’s action whereby one or more map panels are physically revised and republished. A PMR is used to change flood risk zones, floodplain and/or floodway delineations, flood elevations, and/or planimetric features.

    KKK.        “Recreational Vehicle” means a vehicle which is:

    1.   Built on a single chassis;

    2.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;

    3.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and

    4.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

    LLL. “Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation” means the elevation one foot above the water surface elevation of the base flood.

    MMM. “Residential Structure” means any structure that is used for, or designed as and capable of being used for, the temporary or permanent domicile of persons for periods of thirty (30) days or more, including, without limitation, a dwelling unit, a boarding house, a bed and breakfast, and similarly used structures.

    NNN. “Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA)” means the land in the floodplain within the City subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AE, AH, AO, or A1-99.

    OOO. “Start of Construction” includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

    PPP. “Structure” means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.

    QQQ. “Substantial Damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure just prior to when the damage occurred.

    RRR. “Substantial Improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before “start of construction” of the improvement. The value of the structure shall be determined by the local jurisdiction having land use authority in the area of interest. This includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:

    1.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary conditions; or

    2.   Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.”

    SSS. “Threshold Planning Quantity (TPQ)” means a quantity designated for each chemical on the list of extremely hazardous substances that triggers notification by facilities to the state that such facilities are subject to emergency planning requirements.

    TTT. “Variance” means a grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this chapter when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 NFIP Regulations.)

    UUU. “Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the City’s floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without a floodplain development permit, the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of the NFIP Regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.

    VVV. “Watercourse” means a natural or artificial channel, depression dry wash, slough, gulch, arroyo, stream, creek, drainage way, pond reservoir or lake in which water flows either continuously, intermittently or periodically.

    WWW. “Water Surface Elevation” means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. (Ord. 33-2019 § 1;  Ord. 12-2019 § 12)

 

21.10.030 General provisions.
    A.  Lands to Which This Chapter Applies. This chapter shall apply to all SFHAs and areas removed from the floodplain by the issuance of a FEMA Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F) within the jurisdiction of the City.

    B.   Basis for Establishing the Special Flood Hazard Area. The SFHA identified by FEMA in a scientific and engineering report entitled, “The Flood Insurance Study for Fremont County, Colorado and incorporated areas,” dated July 3, 2012, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Boundary-Floodway Maps (FIRM and FBFM) and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. These SFHAs identified by the FIS and attendant mapping are the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies designated and approved by the City. The Floodplain Administrator shall keep a copy of the FIS, DFIRMs, FIRMs and/or FBFMs on file and available for public inspection.

    C.   Establishment of Floodplain Development Permit. A Floodplain Development Permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter.

    D.  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Nothing herein shall prevent the City from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. These regulations meet the minimum requirements as set forth by the Colorado Water Conservation Board and the National Flood Insurance Program.

    E.   Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another chapter, ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.

    F.   Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:

    1.   Considered as minimum requirements;

    2.   Liberally construed in favor of the City; and

    3.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.

    G.  Warning and Disclaimer or Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the SFHAs or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.

    H.  Severability. If any section, clause, provision or portion of these regulations should be found to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of these regulations shall not be affected thereby and are hereby declared to be necessary for the public health, safety and welfare.

    I.    Amendments. The regulations, restrictions and boundaries set forth in these regulations may, from time to time, be amended, supplemented, changed or repealed in accordance with the appropriate process. (Ord. 12-2019 § 12)

 

21.10.040 Administration.
    A.  Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. The City Engineer is hereby appointed the Floodplain Administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.

    B.   Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

    1.   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter including the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures and any floodproofing certificate required by this chapter;

    2.   Review permit application to determine whether proposed building site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding;

    3.   Review, approve or deny all applications for floodplain development permits required by adoption of this chapter;

    4.   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required;

    5.   Inspect all development at appropriate times during the period of construction to ensure compliance with all provisions of this chapter, including proper elevation of the structure;

    6.   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the SFHAs (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation;

    7.   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the State Coordinating Agency which is Colorado Water Conservation Board, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the FEMA;

    8.   Ensure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained;

    9.   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 21.10.030(B), the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of Section 21.10.050;

    10. When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain Administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the City’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated in accordance with Section 21.10.050(E) and applicable NFIP standard practices that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one-half foot at any point within the City;

    11. Under the provisions of Title 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, NFIP Regulations, the City may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the City’s FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one-half foot, provided that the City first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA (Conditional Letter of Map Revision), fulfills the requirements for such revisions as established under the provisions of Section 65.12 and receives FEMA approval.

    C.   Permit Procedures.

    1.   Application for a Floodplain Development Permit shall be presented to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by the Administrator and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to the SFHA. Additionally, the following information is required:

    a.   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;

    b.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be flood proofed;

    c.   A registered professional engineer shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this chapter are satisfied;

    d.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and

    e.   Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with Section 21.10.040(B)(1).

    2.   Approval or denial of a Floodplain Development Permit by the Floodplain Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors:

    a.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

    b.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;

    c.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

    d.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

    e.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

    f.    The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;

    g.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;

    h.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

    i.    The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;

    j.    The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area;

    k.   The public and private facilities such as electrical, gas, sewer, and water systems that must be located within or across a floodway are designed by a registered professional engineer and certified that the flood hazard has been appropriately considered and that all Colorado Department of Health regulations regarding design and construction of such facilities are followed; and

    l.    A proposed development does not increase the depth of flooding in the floodway, increase flow velocities, adversely change the direction of flow, adversely affect public health, safety, and general welfare, and decrease the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of the water course.

    3.   Processing of Application.

    a.   An application shall not be accepted until it is completed as specified;

    b.   If deemed incomplete by the Administrator, the additional information required will be specified;

    c.   If an application involves a development downstream from a dam and reservoir subject to review and approval of the State Engineer, the Administrator shall refer the application to the Dam Safety Section, Colorado Division of Water Resources, for review and comment;

    d.   The Administrator shall review applications for conformance with these regulations, and within thirty (30) days of receiving completed applications, report the results of such review to applicants;

    e.   If an application involves an allowed use, the Administrator shall, within fifteen (15) days of completing the review, either:

    i.    Grant a Floodplain Development Permit if the proposal complies with the provisions of these regulations, and establish any conditions deemed appropriate for the particular proposal, or

    ii.   Deny a Floodplain Development Permit if the proposal does not comply with the provisions of these regulations, and document the reasons for the denial;

    f.    Applicant shall pay nonrefundable fees in the amount of sixty dollars ($60.00), but in no event shall such amount exceed the cost incurred in the review and approval of the permit application, including all hearings conducted therefor and any applicable recording fees as set forth by the Fremont County Clerk and Recorder;

    g.   Floodplain Development Permits shall be issued on the form provided by the Administrator. The Administrator shall present a certified copy of the permit to the Fremont County Clerk and Recorder for official recording. Copies of the permit or a notice thereof shall be sent, on payment of the cost of reproduction, to any other person or entity requesting a copy.

    D.  Variance Procedures.

    1.   The Appeal Board as established in Chapter 17.36 of this Code shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.

    2.   The Appeal Board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.

    3.   Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board may appeal such decision, as provided by law.

    4.   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the FEMA upon request.

    5.   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter.

    6.   Variances may not be issued for new construction and substantial improvements using size of project or property as a factor.

    7.   Factors to be considered in granting a variance shall include technical evaluations and all relevant factors and standards specified in this chapter.

    8.   Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this chapter.

    9.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

    10. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.

    11. Prerequisites for Granting Variances.

    a.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief;

    b.   Variances shall only be issued upon:

    i.    Showing a good and sufficient cause;

    ii.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and

    iii.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or chapters;

    c.   Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.

    12. Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:

    a.   The criteria outlined in this section are met; and

    b.   The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. (Ord. 12-2019 § 12)

 

21.10.050 Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
    A.  General Standards. In all SFHAs the following provisions, except as stated in Section 21.10.050(E) for designated Floodways, are required for all new construction and substantial improvements:

    1.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;

    2.   In the event that floodwaters attain a velocity greater than three (3) feet per second (at any point where the proposed development is to occur), additional floodproofing sufficient to withstand such greater water velocity shall be required;

    3.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed to include additional floodproofing sufficient to withstand floodwaters that attain a velocity greater than three (3) feet per second as determined by the design engineer;

    4.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;

    5.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding;

    6.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;

    7.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from the systems into flood waters;

    8.   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;

    9.   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain Administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the City’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated in accordance with Section 21.10.050(E) and applicable NFIP standard practices that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one-half foot at any point within the City;

    10. Under the provisions of Title 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, NFIP Regulations, the City may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the City’s FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one-half foot, provided that the City first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA (Conditional Letter of Map Revision), fulfills the requirements for such revisions as established under the provisions of Section 65.12 and receives FEMA approval;

    11. Prohibited Uses. No uses shall be permitted which alone or cumulatively with other such uses would cause or result in:

    a.   The storing or processing of materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or otherwise potentially injurious to human, animal or plant life;

    b.   The disposal of garbage or other solid or liquid waste materials; and

    c.   The potential of solid debris or waste being carried downstream;

    12. Allowed Uses. The following structures and uses are allowed:

    a.   All permanent structures are allowed provided that the conditions and standards of this chapter are adhered to;

    b.   Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry and sod farming;

    c.   Private and public recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, fish hatcheries and hiking and equestrian trails;

    d.   Open area residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas;

    e.   Uses accessory to open space; and

    f.    Railroads, streets, bridges, utility lines and facilities, and structures for irrigation, drainage, flood control or water diversion.

    B.   Specific Standards. In all SFHAs where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in this chapter, the following provisions are required:

    1.   Residential Construction. With the exception of Critical Facilities, outlined in Section 21.10.050(H), new construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. A registered professional engineer shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in Section 21.10.040(C) is satisfied. A certification shall be prepared based on the construction plans and second one for the finished construction prior to occupation of the structure;

    2.   Nonresidential Construction. With the exception of Critical Facilities, outlined in Section 21.10.050(H), new construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. All areas of the structure intended for lodging shall be elevated to or above the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. A registered professional engineer shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator. A registered professional engineer shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in Section 21.10.040(C), is satisfied. A certification shall be prepared based on the construction plans and second one for the finished construction prior to occupation of the structure or use of the property;

    3.   Mixed-Use Construction. With the exception of Critical Facilities, outlined in Section 21.10.050(H), new construction and substantial improvements of any mixed-use structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy and all areas of the structure intended for as overnight stay of persons (guest rooms) or used for, or designed as and capable of being used for, the temporary or permanent domicile of persons, or a portion of such a domicile are elevated to or above the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. A registered professional engineer shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator. A registered professional engineer shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in Section 21.10.040(C), is satisfied. A certification shall be prepared based on the construction plans and second one for the finished construction prior to occupation of the structure or use of the property;

    4.   Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Enclosures below the lowest floor shall not be permitted if there is the potential for the storing or processing of materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or otherwise potentially injurious to human, animal or plant life. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

    a.   A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided;

    b.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and

    c.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters;

    5.   Below-Grade Residential Crawlspace Construction. New residential construction and substantial improvements, with a crawlspace below the lowest floor and which are subject to flooding shall be designed according to the criteria in Section 21.10.050(B)(3) and the following:

    a.   Have the interior grade elevation that is below the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation no lower than two (2) feet below the lowest adjacent grade;

    b.   Have the height of the below-grade crawlspace measured from the interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the foundation wall not to exceed four (4) feet at any point;

    c.   Have an adequate drainage system that allows floodwaters to drain from the interior area of the crawlspace following a flood;

    d.   Be constructed with materials and utility equipment that is flood proof; and

    e.   Be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding;

    6.   Manufactured Homes.

    a.   Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within a special flood hazard area on sites: (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. A registered professional engineer shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in Section 21.10.040(C) is satisfied. A certification shall be prepared based on the construction plans and second one for the finished construction prior to occupation of the structure or use of the property;

    b.   Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within a special flood hazard area that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (B)(4) of this section be elevated so that either:

    i.    The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation; or

    ii.   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement;

    7.   Recreational Vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within SFHA on the City’s FIRM either:

    a.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days;

    b.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or

    c.   Meet the permit requirements of Section 21.10.040(C), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for “manufactured homes” in Subsection (B)(4) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions;

    8.   Prior Approved Activities. Any activity for which a Floodplain Development Permit was issued by the City or a CLOMR was issued by FEMA prior to July 3, 2012 may be completed according to the standards in place at the time of the permit or CLOMR issuance and will not be considered in violation of this chapter if it meets such standards.

    C.   Standards For Subdivision Proposals.

    1.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with Section 21.10.010(B), (C), and (D) of this chapter.

    2.   All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet Floodplain Development Permit requirements of Subsection 21.10.030(C); Subsection 21.10.040(C); and the provisions of Section 21.10.050 of this chapter.

    3.   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to Subsection 21.10.030(B) or Subsection 21.10.040(B) of this chapter.

    4.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be reasonably safe from flooding. If a subdivision or other development proposal is in a flood-prone area, regardless of SFHA designation, the proposal shall minimize flood damage.

    5.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.

    6.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.

    D.  Standards For Areas of Shallow Flooding (AO/AH Zones). Located within the SFHA established in Subsection 21.10.030(B), may be areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply:

    1.   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least one foot higher than the depth number specified in feet on the City’s FIRM (at least three (3) feet if no depth number is specified);

    2.   All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures, except Critical Facilities, outlined in Section 21.10.050(H):

    a.   Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least one foot higher than the depth number specified in feet on the City’s FIRM (at least three (3) feet if no depth number is specified); or

    b.   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy;

    3.   A registered professional engineer shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this chapter, as proposed in Subsection 21.10.040(C), are satisfied;

    4.   Require within Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures.

    E.   Floodways. Floodways, located within a SFHA established in Subsection 21.10.030(B), are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply:

    1.   Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, alterations, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice by a licensed Colorado Professional Engineer that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels (No-Rise Certification) within the City during the occurrence of the base flood discharge;

    2.   Prohibited Uses:

    a.   Mobile structures for any purpose;

    b.   Residential structures;

    c.   Any mixed-use structure with residential uses on the ground level;

    d.   Any non-residential structure with lodging on the ground level;

    e.   The development or use of public and commercial overnight campgrounds and travel trailer parks;

    f.    The storing or processing of materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or otherwise potentially injurious to human, animal or plant life;

    g.   The disposal of garbage or other solid or liquid waste materials;

    h.   Activities causing potential of solid debris or waste being carried downstream; and

    i.    An obstruction or encroachment that would adversely affect the efficiency of the floodway or change the direction of flow or increase base flood heights.

    3.   If Section 21.10.050(E)(1) and (2) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 21.10.050;

    4.   Under the provisions of Title 44 CFR Chapter 1 Section 65.12, NFIP Regulations, the City may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the City first applies for a conditional FIRM and floodway revision through FEMA, fulfills the requirements for such revisions as established under the provisions of Section 65.12 and receives FEMA approval.

    F.   Alteration of a Watercourse. For all proposed developments that alter a watercourse within a SFHA, the following standards apply:

    1.   Channelization and flow diversion projects shall appropriately consider issues of sediment transport, erosion, deposition, and channel migration and properly mitigate potential problems through the project as well as upstream and downstream of any improvement activity. A detailed analysis of sediment transport and overall channel stability should be considered, when appropriate, to assist in determining the most appropriate design;

    2.   Channelization and flow diversion projects shall evaluate the residual 100-year floodplain;

    3.   Any channelization or other stream alteration activity proposed by a project proponent must be evaluated for its impact on the regulatory floodplain and be in compliance with all applicable federal, state and local floodplain rules, regulations and ordinances;

    4.   Any stream alteration activity shall be designed and sealed by a registered Colorado Professional Engineer or Certified Professional Hydrologist;

    5.   All activities within the regulatory floodplain shall meet all applicable federal, state and City floodplain requirements and regulations;

    6.   Within the Regulatory Floodway, stream alteration activities shall not be constructed unless the project proponent demonstrates through a Floodway analysis and report, sealed by a registered Colorado Professional Engineer, that there is no rise in the proposed conditions compared to existing conditions Floodway resulting from the project, otherwise known as a No-Rise Certification, unless the City first applies for a CLOMR and Floodway revision in accordance with Subsection D of this section, fulfills the requirements for such revisions as established under the applicable regulations and receives FEMA approval; and

    7.   Maintenance shall be required for any altered or relocated portions of watercourses so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.

    G.  Properties Removed From the Floodplain by Fill. A Floodplain Development Permit shall not be issued for the construction of a new structure or addition to an existing structure on a property removed from the floodplain by the issuance of a FEMA Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F), with a lowest floor elevation placed below the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation that existed prior to the placement of fill.

    H.  Standards For Critical Facilities. A Critical Facility is a structure or related infrastructure, but not the land on which it is situated, as specified in Rule 6 of the Rules and Regulations for Regulatory Floodplains in Colorado, that if flooded may result in significant hazards to public health and safety or interrupt essential services and operations for the City at any time before, during and after a flood.

    1.   Classification of Critical Facilities. Critical Facilities are classified under the following categories: (a) Essential Services; (b) Hazardous Materials; (c) At-risk Populations; and (d) Vital to Restoring Normal Services. It is the responsibility of the City to identify and confirm that specific structures in the City meet the following criteria:

    a.   Essential services facilities include public safety, emergency response, emergency medical, designated emergency shelters, communications, public utility plant facilities, and transportation lifelines. These facilities consist of:

    i.    Public safety (police stations, fire and rescue stations, emergency vehicle and equipment storage, and, emergency operation centers);

    ii.   Emergency medical (hospitals, ambulance service centers, urgent care centers having emergency treatment functions, and non-ambulatory surgical structures but excluding clinics, doctors’ offices, and non-urgent care medical structures that do not provide these functions);

    iii.  Designated emergency shelters;

    iv.  Communications (main hubs for telephone, broadcasting equipment for cable systems, satellite dish systems, cellular systems, television, radio, and other emergency warning systems, but excluding towers, poles, lines, cables, and conduits);

    v.   Public utility plant facilities for generation and distribution (hubs, treatment plants, substations and pumping stations for water, power and gas, but not including towers, poles, power lines, buried pipelines, transmission lines, distribution lines, and service lines); and

    vi.  Air Transportation lifelines (airports, municipal and larger), helicopter pads and structures serving emergency functions, and associated infrastructure (aviation control towers, air traffic control centers, and emergency equipment aircraft hangars); Specific exemptions to this category include wastewater treatment plants (WWTP), non-potable water treatment and distribution systems, and hydroelectric power generating plants and related appurtenances.

    vii. Public utility plant facilities may be exempted if it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City that the facility is an element of a redundant system for which service will not be interrupted during a flood. At a minimum, it shall be demonstrated that redundant facilities are available (either owned by the same utility or available through an intergovernmental agreement or other contract) and connected, the alternative facilities are either located outside of the 100-year floodplain or are compliant with the provisions of this section, and an operations plan is in effect that states how redundant systems will provide service to the affected area in the event of a flood. Evidence of ongoing redundancy shall be provided to the City on an as-needed basis upon request.

    b.   Hazardous materials facilities include facilities that produce or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials. These facilities may include:

    i.    Chemical and pharmaceutical plants (chemical plant, pharmaceutical manufacturing);

    ii.   Laboratories containing highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials;

    iii.  Refineries;

    iv.  Hazardous waste storage and disposal sites; and

    v.   Above ground gasoline or propane storage or sales centers.

    vi.  Facilities shall be determined to be Critical Facilities if they produce or store materials in excess of threshold limits. If the owner of a facility is required by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) to keep a Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) on file for any chemicals stored or used in the work place, and the chemical(s) is stored in quantities equal to or greater than the Threshold Planning Quantity (TPQ) for that chemical, then that facility shall be considered to be a Critical Facility. The TPQ for these chemicals is: either five hundred (500) pounds or the TPQ listed (whichever is lower) for the three hundred fifty-six (356) chemicals listed under 40 C.F.R. Section 302 (2010), also known as Extremely Hazardous Substances (EHS); or ten thousand (10,000) pounds for any other chemical. This threshold is consistent with the requirements for reportable chemicals established by the Colorado Department of Health and Environment. OSHA requirements for MSDS can be found in 29 C.F.R. Section 1910 (2010). The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regulation “Designation, Reportable Quantities, and Notification,” 40 C.F.R. Section 302 (2010) and OSHA regulation “Occupational Safety and Health Standards,” 29 C.F.R. Section 1910 (2010) are incorporated herein by reference and include the regulations in existence at the time of the promulgation of this chapter, but exclude later amendments to or editions of the regulations. Specific exemptions to this category include:

    (A) Finished consumer products within retail centers and households containing hazardous materials intended for household use, and agricultural products intended for agricultural use.

    (B) Buildings and other structures containing hazardous materials for which it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the local authority having jurisdiction by hazard assessment and certification by a qualified professional (as determined by the local jurisdiction having land use authority) that a release of the subject hazardous material does not pose a major threat to the public.

    (C) Pharmaceutical sales, use, storage, and distribution centers that do not manufacture pharmaceutical products.

    These exemptions shall not apply to buildings or other structures that also function as Critical Facilities under another category outlined in this section.

    c.   At-risk population facilities include medical care, congregate care, and schools. These facilities consist of:

    i.    Elder care (nursing homes);

    ii.   Congregate care serving twelve (12) or more individuals (day care and assisted living);

    iii.  Public and private schools (pre-schools, K-12 schools), before-school and after-school care serving twelve (12) or more children.

    d.   Facilities vital to restoring normal services including government operations. These facilities consist of:

    i.    Essential government operations (public records, courts, jails, building permitting and inspection services, public administration and management, maintenance and equipment centers);

    ii.   Essential structures for public colleges and universities (dormitories, offices, and classrooms only).

    These facilities may be exempted if it is demonstrated to the City that the facility is an element of a redundant system for which service will not be interrupted during a flood. At a minimum, it shall be demonstrated that redundant facilities are available (either owned by the same entity or available through an intergovernmental agreement or other contract), the alternative facilities are either located outside of the 100-year floodplain or are compliant with this chapter, and an operations plan is in effect that states how redundant facilities will provide service to the affected area in the event of a flood. Evidence of ongoing redundancy shall be provided to the City on an as-needed basis upon request.

    2.   Protection For Critical Facilities. All new and substantially improved Critical Facilities and new additions to Critical Facilities located within the Special Flood Hazard Area shall be regulated to a higher standard than structures not determined to be Critical Facilities. For the purposes of this chapter, protection shall include one of the following:

    a.   Location outside the SFHA; or

    b.   Elevation or floodproofing of the structure to at least two (2) feet above the Base Flood Elevation.

    3.   Ingress and Egress For New Critical Facilities. New Critical Facilities shall, when practicable as determined by the City, have continuous non-inundated access (ingress and egress for evacuation and emergency services) during a 100-year flood event.

    I.    Exemption—Nonconforming Uses. The provisions of these regulations shall not apply to a nonconforming use existing on the date the area in which the nonconforming use is located becomes subject to regulation, provided that: (1) when such nonconforming use is discontinued for six (6) months or more; or (2) a nonconforming structure is damaged or destroyed by flood, fire, wind or any other means to the extent of at least fifty percent (50%) of the market value, and reuse, reconstruction or replacement of such structure shall be deemed a new use and shall be subject to the provisions of these regulations. Substantial improvement, as herein defined, to any nonconforming structure or use must result in the permanent change of the structure or use to a conforming use or structure. (Ord. 33-2019 §§ 2—8; Ord. 12-2019 § 12)

 

21.10.060 Enforcement and penalties.
    A.  Access and Inspection of Properties and Facilities.

    1.   The Administrator is hereby empowered and directed to inspect, in or upon any premises and examine the use, occupation or development of floodplains subject to these regulations for the purpose of determining from time to time whether any use, occupation, development or activity is in violation of any of the provisions of these regulations or any permit issued or required pursuant to this or other applicable regulations or chapters. In the event that the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter has been made, the City is hereby empowered to seek assistance from a court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. The investigation may include, but is not limited to, the following: surveying; measuring; taking of photographs; interviewing persons; and access to any and all facilities or areas within the premises that may have any effect on the violation.

    2.   If the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health and public safety, the Administrator is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the violation.

    3.   If a violation is found to exist, the Administrator shall by written order direct that such remedial action be taken forthwith as will result in full compliance with the applicable provisions of these regulations; provided, however, that the issuance of such order shall in no way or manner be deemed a prerequisite to the institution of such enforcement proceedings as are set forth in these regulations; and provided further, that, compliance with such order shall not necessarily be deemed a defense to any alleged violation of these regulations, in any court action instituted seeking full compliance therewith, but evidence of compliance with such order may be introduced as pertinent to mitigation and extenuation.

    4.   If the work necessary to abate the violation is not completed as directed by the Administrator, the City may take corrective measures and charge the cost of such corrective measures to the violator. Such costs shall include the actual cost of the work deemed necessary by the Administrator, plus reasonable administrative and inspection costs and any penalties imposed pursuant to these regulations.

    B.   Violations and Remedial Actions.

    1.   In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained or any building, structure or land is used in violation of these regulations, the City, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises.

    2.   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in an amount that does not exceed the maximum fine provided for in Section 1.28.010 for each violation and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case.

    3.   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 12-2019 § 12)

