TOWN OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Anne McKibbin 
Mayor 
____________ 
Kevin Brubeck 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
Matt Solomon 
Scott Turnipseed 
Andy Jessen 
Miked "Pappy" Kerst 
Paul Witt 
Board of Trustees 
____________ 
Brandy Reitter 
Town Manager 
____________ 
Ed Sands 
Town Attorney 
____________ 
Jenny Rakow 
Town Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Town of Eagle, Colorado. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1972 Code, as supplemented through May 9, 2017, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the board of trustees. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1972 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Title, Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The title, chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of three parts separated by a decimal point. The figure before the first decimal point refers to the title number, and the figure between the first decimal point and the second decimal point refers to the chapter number. The figure appearing after the second decimal point refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of chapter 1 in title 1 is numbered 1.01.010, and the second section of chapter 1 in title 1 is 1.01.020. Under this system, each section is identified with its title and chapter, and new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 1.04.010 and 1.04.020 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 1.04.015. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a title of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the title. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Bill Sweeney, Code Attorney, and Ramona Connors, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to John Schneiger, Town Manager, Jenny Rakow, Town Clerk, and Ed Sands, Town Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the town readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the town's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Eagle, Colorado. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or 
reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Eagle, Colorado. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Eagle, Colorado. 2018. 
ORDINANCE NO. 15 
(Series of 2018) 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING BY REFERENCE AND ENACTING A NEW MUNICIPAL CODE FOR THE TOWN OF EAGLE, COLORADO; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING FOR THE ADOPTION OF SECONDARY CODES BY REFERENCE; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE TOWN OF EAGLE, COLORADO: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Eagle Municipal Code" published by Municipal Code Company, consisting of Titles 1 through 13, with tables and index, is adopted as a primary code by reference. 
    Section 2. All ordinances or portions of ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before the adoption date of this Ordinance which are inconsistent with the provisions of the Eagle Municipal Code, to the extent of such inconsistency and not otherwise saved from repeal, are hereby repealed. Provided, however, such repeal shall not affect any pending cases in the Eagle Municipal Court filed under such repealed ordinances. 
    Section 3. The repeal established in the foregoing Section shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that had been previously repealed by any ordinance which is repealed by this Ordinance. 
    Section 4. The following Codes were adopted by reference and incorporated in the Municipal Code of the Town of Eagle. One (1) copy of each such Code is on file in the Town Clerk's office: 
(1)  The Model Traffic Code for Colorado, 2010 edition, published by the Colorado Department of Transportation, as adopted and amended in Chapter 11.04. 
(2)  The International Building Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, as adopted and amended in Chapter 13.03. 
(3)  The International Residential Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, as adopted and amended in Chapter 13.04. 
(4)  The International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, as adopted and amended in Chapter 13.05. 
(5)  The International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, as adopted and amended in Chapter 13.06. 
(6)  The International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, as adopted and amended in Chapter 13.07. 
(7)  The National Electrical Code, 2017 edition, as adopted by the State of Colorado, published by the National Fire Protection Association, as adopted and amended in Chapter 13.08. 
(8)  The American National Standard Institute ANSI/ASME Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators, promulgated by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers and the International Code Council, as adopted in Chapter 13.10. 
(9)  The International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, as adopted and amended in Chapter 13.11. 
(10)  The International Fire Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, as adopted and amended in Chapter 13.12. 
    Section 5. The penalties provided by the Eagle Municipal Code are hereby adopted as follows: 
(1)  Section 1.12.010. General penalties designated. 
A.  Unless otherwise specifically provided, any person who performs or fails to perform an act where performance or failure to perform is declared in any provision of this Code, or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, shall be deemed guilty of a municipal offense, and any person who performs an act which is prohibited or fails to perform an act which is required by any provision of this Code, or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, shall be deemed guilty of a municipal offense, and any person who fails to meet a standard of conduct or behavior prescribed in a provision of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a municipal offense, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in subsection (B) of this section. 
B.  All municipal offenses are divided into three categories of offenses. The three classifications, and the maximum penalties which may be imposed for each classification, are as follows: 
Class Maximum Fine Maximum 
Imprisonment A $2,650.00 One year B $  500.00 Six months Non-criminal $  500.00 None  
If any offense carries a specific penalty, then that penalty shall apply. Any offense not otherwise classified which does not carry a specific penalty is hereby denominated as a Class B municipal offense. Upon conviction of any violation of this Municipal Code, a person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed the amount set forth above, by incarceration not to exceed the amount set forth above, if any, or by both such fine and incarceration, if applicable. 
C.  A separate and distinct offense shall be deemed to have been committed for each day, or part thereof, on which any violation of this Code, or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, shall continue. In addition to the penalties provided above, violations of this Code may be abated by the Town through injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as provided by law. 
D.  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions under the provisions of this Code or other applicable law. 
E.  Unless otherwise provided in this Code, the Municipal Judge shall have the power and authority to place any person found guilty of a violation of this Code on probation and to suspend or modify any fine or sentence as authorized in C.R.S. § 13-10-113(2). 
(2)  Section 1.12.020. Juvenile offenders, penalty. 
A.  For the purposes of this Section, a "juvenile offender" is defined as any person accused of an offense pursuant to this Code who, on the date of the alleged offense, was at least ten years of age, but had not yet attained the age of 18 years. 
B.  Any juvenile offender convicted of a violation of this Code, or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, shall be punished by a fine only as set forth in Section 1.12.010. Notwithstanding any provision of this Code to the contrary, a juvenile offender shall not be subject to imprisonment except as provided in subsection (C) of this Section. As to juvenile offenders alleged to have violated any provision of the Model Traffic Code, as adopted by reference by the Town of Eagle, such persons shall, upon conviction, not be subject to imprisonment, but shall remain subject to the fines only as set forth in Section 1.12.010. 
C.  Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed to abrogate, abolish, or otherwise limit the power of the Municipal Court to incarcerate confine a juvenile offender arrested for an alleged violation of this Code or convicted of a violation thereof, or who is before the Court for contempt of Court, whether by failure to obey a summons, subpoena, or other lawful order of the Court, including an order to pay a fine, or by personal conduct before the Court. In addition, the Municipal Court may incarcerate confine a juvenile offender for violation of probation conditions imposed by the Court. The Municipal Court shall have authority to order a juvenile offender confined in a juvenile detention facility operated or contracted by the State Department of Human Services or a temporary holding facility operated by or under contract with a municipal government. Any confinement of a child for contempt of Municipal Court or for violation of probation conditions shall not exceed 48 hours. 
D.  Upon the request of the Municipal Judge, the Prosecuting Attorney, or the defendant, the Clerk of the Municipal Court shall issue a notice of required appearance for the appearance, at any and all stages of the Court's proceedings, of the parent, guardian, or lawful custodian of any child under 18 years of age who is charged with an offense under this Code. Any person who fails to appear pursuant to such notice shall be deemed to be in contempt of the Court. 
E.  The presiding Judge of the Municipal Court may promulgate such rules or orders regarding the procedural processing of juvenile offenders appearing before the Municipal Court as he may, from time to time, deem appropriate. 
(3)  Section 2.08.200. Court fees and costs. 
    B. 2. 
    Surcharge. In addition to any docket fee or other costs imposed by this Section, a surcharge in the amount of $20.00 is hereby levied on each Municipal Court action for violation of all criminal municipal ordinances, and $10.00 for all violations under the Model Traffic Code, resulting in a conviction, plea of guilty, plea of no contest, a deferred prosecution, or in a deferred judgment and sentence. The defendant shall pay such surcharge to the Clerk of the Municipal Court at the time the fine is paid, whether the defendant appears in court, or elects to pay a fine through the mail. The Clerk of the Municipal Court shall deposit the money so received into a special fund, and all such surcharges collected shall be used exclusively for training Town police officers in their performance of their duties and for necessary police equipment. 
(4)  Section 4.04.100(P)21. Supplementary regulations and standards. 
    Penalty for violation. Any violation of the provisions of this subsection (P) or the conditions of the special use permit granted by a medical marijuana business shall be punishable by a civil fine of up to $1,000.00. Each day that a violation is committed, exists or continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition, any violation of the provisions of the subsection (P) or any conditions imposed by the special use permit may result in the revocation of the special use permit. 
(5)  Section 4.04.100(U)19. Supplementary regulations and standards. 
    Penalty for violation. Any violation of the provisions of this subsection (U) or the conditions of the special use permit granted by a retail marijuana business shall be punishable by a civil fine of up to $1,000.00. Each day that a violation is committed, exists or continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition, any violation of the provisions of the subsection (U) or any conditions imposed by the special use permit may result in the revocation of the special use permit. 
(6)  Section 5.10.080 General penalty guidelines for violations. 
    Violations of certain provisions of the Colorado Beer Code, C.R.S. § 12-46-101 et seq., and the Colorado Liquor Code, C.R.S. § 12-47-101 et seq . not involving compliance checks, as determined by the Town local licensing authority, following notice and an opportunity for hearing as provided by law, shall result in penalties which may be in accordance with the penalty guidelines provided below; provided, however, nothing contained in the following guidelines is intended to restrict the local licensing authority from issuing a greater penalty, a lesser penalty, or additional penalties as allowed by State law, up to and including revocation of a liquor license. 
A.  Presumptive penalties. 
Code Violation Penalty 1. Sale to underage persons, C.R.S. § 12-47-901 First offense 15 days total suspension, 5 days actually served and 10 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license Second offense within two years of first 
violation 30 days total suspension, 10 days actually served and 20 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license Third offense within two years of first 
violation 45 days total suspension, 15 days actually served and 30 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license Fourth and subsequent offenses within two years of first 
violation 60 days suspension to be served by actual closure; no days held in abeyance; or revocation 2. Sale to or loitering of visibly intoxicated patron or habitual drunkard, C.R.S. § 12-47-901, Regulation 47-900 First offense 15 days total suspension, 5 days actually served and 10 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of the hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license Second offense within two years of first 
violation 30 days total suspension, 10 days actually served and 20 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license Third offense within two years of first 
violation 45 days total suspension, 15 days actually served and 30 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license Fourth and subsequent offenses within two years of first 
violation 60 days suspension to be served by actual closure; no days held in abeyance; or revocation 3. Purchase of alcoholic beverages from someone other than a licensed wholesaler, C.R.S. § 12-47-901 First offense 10 days total suspension, 3 days actually served and 7 held in abeyance for a period of one year from date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license Second and subsequent offenses within one year of first violation 10 days total suspension, 5 days actually served and 5 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license 4. Failure to meet food requirements, C.R.S. § 12-47-411 (Hotel and Restaurant Licenses), C.R.S. § 12-47-412 (Tavern Licenses) First offense 15 days total suspension, 5 days actually served and 10 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations, of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license, with 30 days to come into compliance Second and subsequent offenses within two years of first 
violation 15 days total suspension, 5 days actually served and 10 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations, of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license with 30 days to come into compliance 5. Permitting use of gambling machines and devices, C.R.S. § 12-47-901, Regulation 47-922 First offense 45 days total suspension, 15 days actually served and 30 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license Second offense within one year of first violation 45 days suspension to be served by actual closure, no days held in abeyance Third and subsequent offenses within one year of first violation Revocation 6. Permitting illegal gambling, C.R.S. § 12-47-901, Regulation 47-922 First offense 10 days total suspension, 3 days actually served and 7 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license Second and subsequent offenses within one year of first violation 45 days total suspension, 15 days actually served and 30 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license; or revocation 7. Failure to maintain adequate books and records, C.R.S. § 12-47-701 First offense 15 days total suspension, 5 days actually served and 10 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license Second and subsequent offenses within one year of first violation 30 days total suspension, 10 days actually served and 20 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license; or revocation 8. Sale or consumption of alcohol beverages after legal hours, C.R.S. § 12-47-901, Regulation 47-910 First offense 10 days total suspension, 3 days actually served and 7 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license Second and subsequent offenses within one year of first violation 30 days total suspension for each offense, 10 days actually served and 20 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of Respondent's license; or revocation 9. Permitting improper conduct within establishment, other than serving or loitering of visibly intoxicated persons or habitual drunkard, Regulation 47-900 First offense 30 days total suspension, 10 days actually served and 20 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license Second offense within two years of first 
violation 45 days total suspension, 15 days actually served and 30 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license Third and subsequent offenses within two years of first violation 45 days suspension, to be served by actual closure, no days held in abeyance; or revocation 10. Failure to report manager, corporate or financial change, C.R.S. §§ 12-47-111 and 12-47-112, Regulation 47-304 First offense 5 days total suspension, all 5 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license Second and subsequent offenses within one year of first violation 10 days total suspension, 3 days actually served, and 7 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license 11. Underage employee selling or serving alcoholic beverages, C.R.S. § 12-47-901(5)(a), Regulation 47-913 First offense 7 days total suspension, 2 days actually served and 5 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license Second offense within one year of first violation 14 days total suspension, 4 days actually served, and 10 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license Third and subsequent offenses within one year of first violation 30 days total suspension, 10 days actually served, and 20 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license  
(7)  Section 5.10.090. Penalty guidelines for violations involving compliance check. 
    When the local licensing authority finds that a licensee has sold alcohol beverages to a person under the legal age limit and that said violation was investigated or detected by using a person under 21 years of age to purchase alcohol beverages from the licensee, the local licensing authority may consider the following penalties to be imposed for the violation. 
A. First offense (within one year): 
1. A written warning up to a 15-day suspension. The local licensing authority may hold a portion of the suspension time in abeyance for a period of time. 
2. As an inducement for licensees to provide training for servers, because server training has proven to be an aid in the reduction of violations, it is recommended that, where there are no aggravating circumstances, a licensee who has provided training to its staff members be issued only a warning on the first violation. 
B. Second offense (within one year): A five day to 30-day suspension. If no suspension was served at the time of the first offense, it is within the discretion of the licensing authority to hold a portion of the suspension time in abeyance for a period of time. 
C. Third offense (within one year): A 20- to 45-day suspension shall be imposed. 
D. The fourth offense (within two years): A minimum 45-day suspension up to and including revocation shall be imposed. 
E. Aggravating and mitigating circumstances. The local licensing authority may also consider aggravating and mitigating factors when considering the imposition of the penalty for violations involving compliance checks. These factors may include: 
1. Action taken by the licensee to prevent violations, i.e., training of servers. 
2. Licensee's past history of success or failure with compliance checks. 
3. Corrective action(s) taken by the licensee. 
4. Prior violations/prior corrective action(s) and its effectiveness. 
5. Willfulness or deliberateness of the violation. 
6. Likelihood of recurrence of the violation. 
7. Factors which might make the situation unique, such as: 
a. Prior notification letter to the licensee that a compliance check would be forthcoming. 
b. The dress or appearance of the underage operative, i.e., the operative was wearing a high school letter jacket. 
8. Licensee or the manager is the violator or has directed an employee or other individual to violate the law. 
F. General provisions concerning imposition of penalty. 
1. In the event a second or subsequent action is brought before the local licensing authority for a violation of the Colorado Beer Code or Colorado Liquor Code involving a compliance check, and the licensee is found to have committed such violation, days suspended but held in abeyance in a previous action shall automatically be imposed, plus any additional suspension for the new violation as determined by the local licensing authority. 
2. Any period of actual closure imposed as part of a suspension by the local licensing authority must run consecutive to any previously imposed period of closure. 
3. In the event a license for the retail sale of malt, vinous or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption is suspended, and an actual closure is ordered, there shall be a mandatory closure of at least one day commencing at 12:01 a.m. or 2:01 a.m. on a Saturday and ending at 12:00 midnight the same day. In the event a license for the retail sale of malt, vinous or spirituous liquor for off-premises consumption is suspended, suspension days shall not include Sundays. 
4. Notwithstanding the presumptive penalties set forth above, the Town Attorney reserves the right to request revocation of a license for any violation. 
5. The local licensing authority shall have the power to impose on a licensee as a condition of a period of suspension held in abeyance, or as a condition of renewal of a license, any condition(s) reasonably related to the offenses leading to the suspension or the conduct of the business whose license is to be renewed. 
(8)  Section 13.03.040. Penalties. 
    The Section of the International Building Code, 2015 Edition, entitled Violations, which contains a penalty clause is herewith amended and adopted as follows: 
    Section 114.4: Section 114.4, entitled Violation Penalties: Any person who violates a provision of this Code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a Class A municipal offense and each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed, continued or permitted. Any municipal offense under this Section shall be deemed one of "strict liability." 
(9)  Section 13.05.040. Penalties. 
    The Section of the International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition, Section 108, entitled Violations, which contains a penalty clause is herewith amended and adopted as follows: 
    Section 108.4: Section 108.4, entitled Violation Penalties: Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of the International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, or who fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair mechanical work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code, shall be deemed guilty of a Class A municipal offense and each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed, continued or permitted. Any such offense shall be deemed one of "strict liability." 
(10)  Section 13.06.050. Penalties. 
    The following section of the International Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition, Section 108, entitled Violations, which contains a penalty clause is herewith amended and adopted as follows: 
    Section 108.4: Section 108.4, entitled Violation Penalties, states: Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this Code, or who fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, or repair plumbing work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code, shall be deemed guilty of a Class A municipal offense. Each separate day or portion thereof, during which any violation of this Code occurs or continues, shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as herein provided. The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for, and approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this Code. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this Code shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use, which is authorized is lawful. 
(11)  Section 13.07.040. Penalties. 
    The following Section of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 Edition, Section 108, entitled Violations, which contains a penalty clause is herewith amended and adopted as follows: 
    Section 108.4: Section 108.4, entitled Violation Penalties: Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this Code, or who fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or who erects, installs, alters or repairs work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code, shall be deemed guilty of a Class A municipal offense. Each separate day or portion thereof, during which any violation of this Code occurs or continues, shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as herein provided. The issuance or granting of a permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this Code shall not be valid, except insofar as the work or use, which is authorized, is lawful. 
(12)  Section 13.08.040. Penalties. 
    The following Article of the National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, Article 90.4 entitled Enforcement, is hereby amended to include the following new Section 90.4.1, Violations and Penalties, which contains the violation and penalty clause, is herewith set forth in full and hereby adopted as: 
    Article 90.4.1: Article 90.4.1, entitled Violation and Penalties, states: Whenever the authority having jurisdiction determines that there are violations of this Code, a written notice shall be issued to confirm such findings. 
    Any order or notice issued pursuant to this Code shall be served upon the owner, operator, occupant, or other person responsible for the condition or violation, either by personal service or mail or by delivering the same to, and leaving it with, some person of responsibility upon the premises. For unattended or abandoned locations, a copy of such order or notice shall be posted on the premises in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to such premises and the order or notice shall be mailed by registered or certified mail, with return receipt requested, to the last known address of the owner, occupant, or both. 
    Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this Code or who fails to carry out an order made pursuant to this Code or violates any condition attached to a permit, approval, or certificate shall be subject to the penalties established by this jurisdiction. 
    Failure to comply with the time limits of an abatement notice or other corrective notice issued by the authority having jurisdiction shall result in each day that such violation continues being regarded as a new and separate offense. 
    Any person, firm or corporation who shall willfully violate any of the applicable provisions of this Article shall be deemed guilty of a Class A municipal offense. Each separate day, or portion thereof, during which any violation of said Code occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as herein provided. The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for, and approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of the National Electrical Code. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of said Code shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use, which is authorized, is lawful. Any municipal offense under the National Electrical Code, 2014 Edition, shall be deemed one of "strict liability." 
(13)  Section 13.10.030. Penalties. 
A.  Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of the American National Standard Institute ANSI/ASME Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators ASME A17.1-2013, ASME Guide for inspection of Elevators, Escalators, Moving Walks A17.2-2014, ASME Safety Code for Existing Elevators and Escalators A17.3-2011, ASME Safety Standard for Platform Lifts and Stairway Chair Lifts A18.1-2014, and ICC/ANSI Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities A117.1-2009, or any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions of these Codes or fails to carry out an order made pursuant to this Code or who violates any condition attached to a permit, approval or certificate shall be deemed guilty of a Class A municipal offense. Each separate day, or portion thereof; during which any violation of said Code occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as herein provided. The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for, and approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of the above referenced Codes. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of said Codes shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use, which is authorized, is lawful. Any municipal offense under the said Codes shall be deemed one of "strict liability." 
B.  The imposition of the penalties herein described shall not prevent the legal officer of the jurisdiction from instituting the appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation; or to prevent illegal occupancy of a structure or premises; or to stop an illegal act, conduct of business or occupancy of a structure on or about any premises. 
(14)  Section 13.11.040. Penalties. 
    It shall be a Class A municipal offense for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, renovate, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, convert, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the Town or cause or permit the same to be done contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this Code. Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed, continued or permitted. Any municipal offense under this Section shall be deemed one of "strict liability." 
(15)  Section 13.12.040. Penalties. 
The Section of the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, Section 109 entitled Violations, which contains a penalty clause is herewith amended and adopted as follows: 
    D.  Section 109.4 . Section 109.4, entitled Violation Penalties: Any person who violates a provision of this Code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the Building Official or Fire Code Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provision of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a Class A municipal offense and each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the Code is committed, continued or permitted. Any municipal offense under this Section shall be deemed on of "strict liability." 
    Section 6. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the Town to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 7. Ordinances adopted after this Ordinance that amend or refer to Ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to those provisions of the Code. 
    This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect following adoption and approval by the Board of Trustees, thirty (30) days following its publication. 
    INTRODUCED, READ and PUBLIC NOTICE ORDERED PUBLISHED at a regular meeting of the Board of Trustees of the Town of Eagle, Colorado, this 22 nd day of May 2018. 
Public Notice Publication Dates: 
FIRST READING: June 7 and 14, 2018 Eagle Valley Enterprise 
SECOND READING: July 5, 2018 Eagle Valley Enterprise 
July 3, 5, 6 and 8, 2018 in the Vail Daily 
    INTRODUCED A SECOND TIME at a regular meeting of the Board of Trustees of the Town of Eagle, Colorado held on June 26, 2018, PASSED, ADOPTED AND ORDERED PUBLISHED. 
TOWN OF EAGLE, COLORADO, 
  
By: _____
   Anne McKibbin, Mayor ATTEST: 
  
_____
Jenny Rakow, Town Clerk  
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Legislation Date 
Adopted Included/Omitted Supp. No. 1 Ord. No. 03-2017  2-14-2017 Included Ord. No. 01-2018  1-23-2018 Included Ord. No. 11-2018  4-10-2018 Included Ord. No. 12-2018  4-24-2018 Included Ord. No. 14-2018  5- 8-2018 Included Ord. No. 15-2018  5-22-2018 Included Ord. No. 16-2018  8-14-2018 Included Ord. No. 17-2018  6-12-2018 Included Ord. No. 18-2018  6-12-2018 Included Ord. No. 19-2018  6-12-2018 Included Ord. No. 20-2018  7-24-2018 Included Ord. No. 21-2018  6-12-2018 Included Ord. No. 23-2018  7-24-2018 Included Ord. No. 28-2018  8-14-2018 Included Ord. No. 29-2018  8-14-2018 Included Supp. No. 2 Ord. No. 30-2018  9-11-2018 Included Supp. No. 3 Ord. No. 36-2018 11-27-2018 Included Ord. No. 37-2018 11-27-2018 Included Ord. No. 38-2018 12-11-2018 Included Ord. No. 41-2018 12-11-2018 Included Ord. No. 42-2018 12-11-2018 Included Ord. No. 04-2019  2-12-2019 Included Supp. No. 4 Ord. No. 07-2019  4- 9-2019 Included Ord. No. 10-2019  5-14-2019 Included Ord. No. 11-2019  5-14-2019 Included Ord. No. 12-2019  5-14-2019 Included  
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
CHAPTER 1.01. - TITLE AND SCOPE 

Section 1.01.010. - Title; citation; reference. 
    This Code shall be known as the "Eagle Municipal Code" and it shall be sufficient to refer to said Code as such in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition or amendment to, or as a correction or repeal of, the "Eagle Municipal Code." Further, reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the "Eagle Municipal Code" and such reference shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the Code. 
(Code 1972, § 1.01.020; Ord. No. 157, § 2, 1972) 
Section 1.01.020. - Codification authority. 
    This Code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the Town codified pursuant to the provisions of C.R.S. § 31-16-201 et seq. 
(Code 1972, § 1.01.030; Ord. No. 157, § 3, 1972) 
State Law reference- Municipalities power to make and publish ordinances, C.R.S. § 31-15-103. 
Section 1.01.030. - Reference applies to all amendments. 
    Whenever a reference is made to this Code as the "Eagle Municipal Code," or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinances of the Town, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. 
(Code 1972, § 1.01.040; Ord. No. 157, § 4, 1972) 
Section 1.01.040. - Title, chapter and section headings. 
    Title, chapter and section headings contained herein, or any amendments thereto, shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section. The history notes appearing in parenthesis after each section and the references and any editor's notes are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 1972, § 1.01.050; Ord. No. 157, § 5, 1972) 
Section 1.01.050. - Reference to specific ordinances. 
    The provisions of this Code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with, ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the Code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this Code. 
(Code 1972, § 1.01.060; Ord. No. 157, § 6, 1972) 
Section 1.01.060. - Effect of Code on past actions and obligations. 
    Neither the adoption of this Code nor the repeal or amendments hereby of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the Town shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee, or penalty, on the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Code 1972, § 1.01.070; Ord. No. 157, § 7, 1972) 
Section 1.01.070. - Constitutionality. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. The Board of Trustees declares that it would have passed this Code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this Code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances comprising the same shall be in full force and effect. 
(Code 1972, § 1.01.100; Ord. No. 157, § 10, 1972) 
Section 1.01.080. - Amendments to Code. 
A.  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of repealed titles, chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by their omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the Board of Trustees. 
B.  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code. 
C.  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Eagle Municipal Code is hereby amended by adding a section, chapter or title to be numbered _____, which section, chapter or title reads as follows:...." The new section, chapter or title may then be set out in full as desired. 
D.  All sections, chapters, titles or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, chapter or title number, as the case may be. 
Section 1.01.090. - Supplementation of Code. 
A.  By contract or by Town personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared at least on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the Board of Trustees during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete; and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
B.  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by their omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
C.  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
1.  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
2.  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
3.  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
4.  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this Title," "this chapter," or "this section," as the case may be, or to "sections _____ through _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
5.  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Section 1.01.100. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the Town to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions of pages, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Town to be misrepresented thereby, unless so authorized by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the Board of Trustees. Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in Section 1.12.010. 
Section 1.01.110. - Ordinances not affected by adoption of the Code. 
A.  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
1.  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
2.  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the Town or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the Town or any evidence of the Town's indebtedness; 
3.  Any contract or obligation assumed by the Town; 
4.  Any ordinance or resolution establishing or fixing the salaries, retirement and pension plans, benefits, personnel policy, civil service rules and regulations, and/or administrative procedures for Town officers or employees not otherwise enumerated in this Code; 
5.  Any right or franchise granted by the Town; 
6.  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the Town; 
7.  Any appropriation or budget ordinance; 
8.  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
9.  Any ordinance rezoning specific property or amending the zoning map; 
10.  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat or providing for subdivision regulations; 
11.  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the Town; 
12.  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the Town not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
13.  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code; 
14.  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the Town; 
15.  Any ordinance or regulation prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations concerning through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones, not in conflict or inconsistent with this Code; 
16.  Any ordinance or resolution of agreement with another political subdivision; 
17.  Any ordinance or resolution establishing or imposing any municipal rates, charges or fees for the Town, that are not otherwise enumerated in this Code; 
18.  Any other ordinance or resolution, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; or which is referred to elsewhere in this Code as continuing in effect; 
19.  Any ordinance or resolution that is temporary, although general in effect; 
20.  Any ordinance or resolution that is special, although permanent in effect; or 
21.  Any ordinance or resolution the purpose of which has been accomplished. 
B.  No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
CHAPTER 1.04. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 1.04.010. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the Town, shall be construed as defined in this section, unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases: 
    Board means the Board of Trustees, consisting of one Mayor and six Trustees, of the Town. "All its members" or "all Board members" means the total number on the Board entitled to vote in any particular circumstances upon any question, as provided by the general laws of the State. 
    Code means the "Municipal Code of the Town of Eagle," or "Eagle Municipal Code." 
    County means the County of Eagle, Colorado. 
    C.R.S. means the Colorado Revised Statutes. 
    Day means a calendar day of 24 hours. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the Town to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection, unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
    Governing body means the Board of Trustees of the Town of Eagle, Colorado. 
    Law denotes applicable Federal law, the constitution and statutes of the State, the ordinances of the Town, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder. 
    May is permissive. 
    Month means a calendar month. 
    Must; shall are both mandatory. 
    Oath includes affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Ordinance means a permanent law of the Town. A temporary or special law, administrative action, order or directive, or declaration of intent, may be in the form of a resolution of the Town. 
    Owner as applied to land or a building, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, or joint tenant, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person means natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, firm, club, company, corporation, business, estate, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer, director, member, or employee of any of them. 
    Seal means the official seal of the Town of Eagle. 
    State means the State of Colorado. 
    Street includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in this Town which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this State. 
    Title. The use of the title of any officer, employee, board, commission, office, or ordinance shall mean such officer, employee, office, board, commission, or ordinance of the Town, unless otherwise specifically designated. 
    Town means the Town of Eagle, Colorado, or the area within the territorial limits of the Town and such territory outside of the Town over which the Town has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision. 
    Week means a calendar week of seven days. 
    Written; in writing means any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year means a calendar year. 
(Code 1972, § 1.04.010; Ord. No. 139, § 1, 1971) 
Section 1.04.020. - Grammatical interpretation. 
    The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the Town: 
A.  Gender. Any gender includes the other genders; 
B.  Singular and plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular; 
C.  Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses. Words used in the future tense include the present and the past tenses. Words used in the past tense include the future and the present tenses; 
D.  Use of words and phrases. Words and phrases not specifically defined shall be construed according to the context and approved usage of the language. 
(Code 1972, § 1.04.020; Ord. No. 139, § 2, 1971) 
Section 1.04.030. - Prohibited acts include causing, permitting. 
    Whenever in this Code any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of, such act or omission. 
(Code 1972, § 1.04.030; Ord. No. 139, § 3, 1971) 
Section 1.04.040. - Construction. 
    The provisions of the Code and all proceedings under it are to be construed with a view to effect its objects and to promote justice. 
(Code 1972, § 1.04.040; Ord. No. 139, § 4, 1971) 
CHAPTER 1.08. - RIGHT OF ENTRY 

Section 1.08.010. - Inspections. 
    Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any ordinance or resolution, or whenever there is reasonable cause to believe there exists in any building or upon any premises within the jurisdiction of the Town, a violation of any ordinance or resolution, any authorized official of the Town may, upon presentation of proper credentials, enter such building or premises at any and all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon him by ordinance, provided that, except in emergency situations, he shall give the occupant, or the owner if there is no occupant, if he can be located after reasonable effort, 24 hours' written notice of the authorized official's intention to inspect. In the event the occupant, or the owner if there is no occupant, refuses entry, said official is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
(Code 1972, § 1.08.010) 
CHAPTER 1.12. - PENALTY FOR MUNICIPAL ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Fines and penalties in municipal courts, C.R.S. § 13-10-113; penalties for ordinance violations, C.R.S. § 31-16-101. 

Section 1.12.010. - General penalties designated. 
A.  Unless otherwise specifically provided, any person who performs or fails to perform an act where performance or failure to perform is declared in any provision of this Code, or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, shall be deemed guilty of a municipal offense, and any person who performs an act which is prohibited or fails to perform an act which is required by any provision of this Code, or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, shall be deemed guilty of a municipal offense, and any person who fails to meet a standard of conduct or behavior prescribed in a provision of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a municipal offense, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in Subsection (B) of this section. 
B.  All municipal offenses are divided into three categories of offenses. The three classifications, and the maximum penalties which may be imposed for each classification, are as follows: 
Class Maximum Fine Maximum Imprisonment A $2,650.00 One year B $500.00 Six months Non-criminal $500.00 None  
If any offense carries a specific penalty, then that penalty shall apply. Any offense not otherwise classified which does not carry a specific penalty is hereby denominated as a Class B municipal offense. Upon conviction of any violation of this Code, a person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed the amount set forth above, by incarceration not to exceed the amount set forth above, if any, or by both such fine and incarceration, if applicable. 
C.  A separate and distinct offense shall be deemed to have been committed for each day, or part thereof, on which any violation of this Code, or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, shall continue. In addition to the penalties provided above, violations of this Code may be abated by the Town through injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as provided by law. 
D.  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions under the provisions of this Code or other applicable law. 
E.  Unless otherwise provided in this Code, the Municipal Judge shall have the power and authority to place any person found guilty of a violation of this Code on probation and to suspend or modify any fine or sentence as authorized in C.R.S. § 13-10-113(2). 
(Code 1972, § 1.12.010; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 1(part), 2001) 
Section 1.12.020. - Juvenile offenders, penalty. 
A.  For the purposes of this section, a "juvenile offender" is defined as any person accused of an offense pursuant to this Code who, on the date of the alleged offense, was at least ten years of age, but had not yet attained the age of 18 years. 
B.  Any juvenile offender convicted of a violation of this Code, or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, shall be punished by a fine only as set forth in Section 1.12.010. Notwithstanding any provision of this Code to the contrary, a juvenile offender shall not be subject to imprisonment except as provided in Subsection (C) of this section. As to juvenile offenders alleged to have violated any provision of the Model Traffic Code, as adopted by reference by the Town, such persons shall, upon conviction, not be subject to imprisonment, but shall remain subject to the fines only as set forth in Section 1.12.010. 
C.  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to abrogate, abolish, or otherwise limit the power of the Municipal Court to confine a juvenile offender arrested for an alleged violation of this Code or convicted of a violation thereof, or who is before the Court for contempt of Court, whether by failure to obey a summons, subpoena, or other lawful order of the Court, including an order to pay a fine, or by personal conduct before the Court. In addition, the Municipal Court may confine a juvenile offender for violation of probation conditions imposed by the Court. The Municipal Court shall have authority to order a juvenile offender confined in a juvenile detention facility operated or contracted by the State Department of Human Services or a temporary holding facility operated by or under contract with a municipal government. Any confinement of a child for contempt of Municipal Court or for violation of probation conditions shall not exceed 48 hours. 
D.  Upon the request of the Municipal Judge, the Prosecuting Attorney, or the defendant, the Clerk of the Municipal Court shall issue a notice of required appearance for the appearance, at any and all stages of the Court's proceedings, of the parent, guardian, or lawful custodian of any child under 18 years of age who is charged with an offense under this Code. Any person who fails to appear pursuant to such notice shall be deemed to be in contempt of the Court. 
E.  The presiding Judge of the Municipal Court may promulgate such rules or orders regarding the procedural processing of juvenile offenders appearing before the Municipal Court as he may, from time to time, deem appropriate. 
(Code 1972, § 1.12.020; Amended Ord. No. 12, § 2, 2004) 
CHAPTER 1.16. - TOWN SEAL 

Section 1.16.010. - Declaration. 
    A seal, the word "Seal" being in the center thereof and the words "Town of Eagle, Colorado," being around the word "Seal" and near the outer edge of said seal, is declared to be the legal seal of the Town. 
(Code 1972, § 1.16.010) 
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Organizational structure and officers of statutory towns, C.R.S. § 31-4-301 et seq. 

CHAPTER 2.02. - TOWN MANAGER 

Section 2.02.010. - Appointment. 
    The Board of Trustees of the Town shall appoint a Town Manager who shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of the Town. 
(Code 1972, § 2.02.010; Ord. No. 169, art. I, § 1, 1974) 
Section 2.02.020. - Tenure and qualifications. 
    The Town Manager shall serve at the pleasure of and during such period of time as may be determined by a majority of the Board of Trustees. He shall be selected on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his actual experience in and knowledge of the accepted practice with respect to the duties of the office of Town Manager. 
(Code 1972, § 2.02.020; Ord. No. 169, art. I, § 2, 1974) 
Section 2.02.030. - Administrative relations. 
    The Board of Trustees shall deal with the administrative functions of the Town through the Town Manager. Neither the Board of Trustees, nor any individual member thereof, shall give direction or orders to any subordinate of the Town Manager, except through him. 
(Code 1972, § 2.02.030; Ord. No. 169, art. I, § 3, 1974) 
Section 2.02.040. - Powers and duties. 
    The Town Manager shall be responsible to the Board of Trustees for the efficient administration of all affairs of the Town placed in his charge, and to that end he shall have the power, duty and responsibility to: 
A.  Enforce the laws and ordinances of the Town, and the statutes of the State as they may be applicable to the Town; 
B.  To oversee the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the Town. The Town Manager shall have the authority to appoint all heads of departments of the Town and to appoint acting department heads to act in case of temporary absence or disability of a department head. Such appointment shall be made by him on the basis of the ability, training and experience of such appointees in the work to be performed by them and in the position to be occupied by them. The Town Manager may remove, discharge, suspend (with or without pay), demote or discipline any department head in the manner set forth in the Town of Eagle Personnel Handbook. The Town Manager shall have the authority to recommend to the Board of Trustees personnel rules and policies subject to adoption, revision or amendment by the Board of Trustees. The Town Manager may also, at any time deemed to be necessary or proper for the purpose of enforcement or implementation of the Town of Eagle Personnel Handbook, adopt, amend or rescind written administrative procedures consistent with the Town of Eagle Personnel Handbook; 
C.  Prepare a proposed budget annually and submit the same to the Board of Trustees for its approval, and be responsible for the administration of the budget subsequent to its adoption; 
D.  Prepare and submit to the Board of Trustees at the end of each fiscal year a complete written report on the finances and administrative activities of the Town during the next preceding year, and from time to time when deemed necessary, or upon the request of the Board of Trustees, to make a written or verbal report concerning the finances, affairs and administration of the Town; 
E.  Exercise supervision and control of and over all executive and administrative departments of the Town, and to recommend to the Board of Trustees any proposal he may deem advisable or necessary to establish, consolidate or abolish any such administrative department; 
F.  Enforce all terms and conditions of any contract, including any public utility franchise, to which the Town is a part or party, and upon knowledge of any breach or violation thereof, promptly report the same to the Board of Trustees for such action as may be deemed necessary by it; 
G.  Attend all meetings of the Board of Trustees and participate therein in an advisory capacity, and to make such recommendations to the Board of Trustees as he may deem necessary or expedient; 
H.  Be responsible for the establishment, control and maintenance of a system of accounts for the Town as may be required by the Board of Trustees, the same to comply with generally accepted principles and procedures of governmental accounting; 
I.  Act as the purchasing agent for the Town; 
J.  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance, resolution, or direction of the Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1972, § 2.02.040; Amended Ord. No. 20-2003, § 1, 2003) 
Section 2.02.050. - Absence. 
    The Board of Trustees may appoint or designate an acting Town Manager during any period of vacancy in the office, or during the absence of the Town Manager. Such acting Town Manager shall have all the responsibilities, duties, functions, and authority of the Town Manager. 
(Code 1972, § 2.02.050) 
Section 2.02.060. - Compensation. 
    The Board of Trustees may, by resolution, duly adopted, establish and modify the compensation to be paid the Town Manager. 
(Code 1972, § 2.02.060) 
Section 2.02.070. - Statutory duties of Board of Trustees. 
    Nothing herein contained shall be construed as an abrogation or nullification of the duties, powers, functions, and responsibilities imposed upon the Board of Trustees by the applicable statutes of the State or by any applicable provision of the Constitution of the State. 
(Code 1972, § 2.02.070) 
CHAPTER 2.04. - TOWN OFFICERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Appointment and compensation of officers, C.R.S. § 31-4-304; Colorado Open Meetings Law, C.R.S. § 24-6-401 et seq. 

Section 2.04.010. - Board of Trustees-Appointment. 
    The Board of Trustees shall appoint a Clerk, Treasurer, Town Attorney, and Town Manager within 30 days after compliance with C.R.S. § 31-4-304 following each regular municipal election. No appointment of any such officer shall continue beyond 30 days after compliance with C.R.S. § 31-4-304 by the members of the succeeding Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1972, § 2.04.010) 
Section 2.04.020. - Same-Terms. 
    Trustees shall be elected to serve a four-year term of office. 
(Code 1972, § 2.04.011) 
Section 2.04.030. - Same-Vacancies. 
A.  The Board of Trustees has the power, by appointment, to fill all vacancies in the Board, and the person so appointed shall hold his office until the next regular election and until his successor is elected and has complied with C.R.S. § 31-4-401, as amended. If the term of the person creating the vacancy was to extend beyond the next regular election, the person elected to fill the vacancy shall be elected for the unexpired term only. Where a vacancy or vacancies exist in the office of Trustee, and a successor or successors are to be elected at the next election to fill the unexpired term or terms, the three candidates for Trustee receiving the highest number of votes shall be elected to four-year terms and the candidate or candidates receiving the next highest number of votes, in descending order, shall be elected to fill the unexpired term or terms. 
B.  The Board of Trustees also has the power to fill a vacancy in the Board by ordering a special election, subject to the requirements of the Colorado Municipal Election Code, to fill the vacancy until the next regular election and until a successor has been elected and has complied with C.R.S. § 31-4-401. 
C.  If a vacancy in the Board is not filled by appointment or an election is not ordered within 60 days after the vacancy occurs, the Board of Trustees shall order a special election, subject to the requirements of the Colorado Municipal Election Code, to be held as soon as practicable to fill the vacancy until the next regular election and until a successor has been elected and has complied with C.R.S. § 31-4-401. 
(Code 1972, § 2.04.012) 
Section 2.04.040. - Same-Compensation. 
    Compensation for members of the Board of Trustees shall be determined from time to time by resolution or ordinance adopted by the Board in accordance with State law, which will be on file in the office of the Town Clerk and available for public inspection during normal business hours. 
(Code 1972, § 2.04.013; Amended Ord. No. 13-2004, § 1(part), 2004; Ord. No. 11-2016, § 1, 4-12-2016) 
Section 2.04.050. - Oath, surety bond-Required. 
A.  Each of the officers appointed under Section 2.04.010, before entering upon the duties as such officer, shall make an oath before some qualified officer by law to administer such oath, that he will support the Constitution and the laws of the United States and of the State, and the ordinances of the Town, and faithfully perform the duties of his office. Such oath shall be made and subscribed substantially in the following form: 
"I, ___________, do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution and laws of the United States, the Constitution and laws of the State of Colorado, and the ordinances of the Town of Eagle, and that I will faithfully perform all the duties of the office of ________, upon which I am about to enter. 
Sworn to and subscribed before me this ________ day of ________, A.D., 20___. 
___________ 
Official Title" 
B.  The Town Treasurer and Town Manager shall also execute a bond with sureties approved by the Board of Trustees in the amounts determined by the Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1972, § 2.04.020; Amended Ord. No. 12-2004, § 3(part), 2004) 
State Law reference- Board may require oath and bond of appointed officers, C.R.S. § 31-4-304. 
Section 2.04.060. - Same-Filing. 
    The oath and bond provided for in Section 2.04.050, of each of the said officers except the Clerk shall be filed with and kept by the Clerk. The oath and bond, as provided for in Section 2.04.050, of the Clerk shall be filed with and kept by the Treasurer. 
(Code 1972, § 2.04.030) 
Section 2.04.070. - Mayor, duties; term. 
A.  The Mayor or, in his absence, one of the Trustees, who may be elected Mayor Pro Tem, shall preside at all meetings of the Board of Trustees and shall have the same voting powers as any member of said Board. The Mayor shall be considered a member of the Board of Trustees for all purposes. 
B.  The Mayor shall be recognized as the political head of Town government and together with other members of the Board of Trustees shall supervise all appointed officers of the Town, examine the grounds of all reasonable complaints made against any of them, and cause any violations or neglect of duty to be promptly corrected or reported to the proper tribunal for action. The Mayor shall sign all documents on behalf of the Town which by statute, ordinance, or custom may require his signature, and shall also perform such other duties compatible with the nature of his office as the Board of Trustees may from time to time require. 
C.  At its first meeting following any regular municipal election, the Board of Trustees shall choose one of the Trustees as Mayor Pro Tem who, in the absence of the Mayor from any meeting of said Board, or during the Mayor's absence from the Town, or his inability to act, shall perform the duties of Mayor. 
D.  Unless otherwise required by a vacancy in the office, a Mayor shall be elected at a regularly held election to serve a four-year term. 
E.  The Mayor shall receive compensation in an amount determined from time to time by resolution or ordinance adopted by the Board of Trustees, which will be on file in the office of the Town Clerk and available for public inspection during normal business hours. 
(Code 1972, § 2.04.035; Amended Ord. No. 13-2004, § 2(part), 2004; Ord. No. 11-2016, § 2(2.04.035(E)), 4-12-2016) 
State Law reference- Board shall choose one of trustees as mayor pro tem, C.R.S. § 31-4-303. 
Section 2.04.080. - Clerk, duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the Clerk to make and keep in a book provided by the Board of Trustees, an accurate record of all the official acts of the Board. He shall be the custodian of the Town seal and shall affix the Town seal to such documents as the law or the Board of Trustees requires. He shall keep an accurate record of all his official acts in such manner as the Board of Trustees may provide. 
(Code 1972, § 2.04.050) 
Section 2.04.090. - Town Attorney, duties. 
    The duties of the Town Attorney shall be as follows: 
A.  Town Attorney shall act as legal advisor to, and be attorney and counsel for, the Board of Trustees and shall be responsible solely to the Board. Town Attorney shall advise any officer or department head of the Town in matters relating to their official duties when so requested by the Board; 
B.  Town Attorney shall prepare and review all ordinances, contracts, bonds, and other written instruments which are submitted to them by the Board and shall promptly give their opinion as to the legal consequences thereof; 
C.  Town Attorney shall call to the attention of the Board all matters of law, and changes or development therein, affecting the Town; 
D.  Town Attorney shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for them by the Board. 
(Code 1972, § 2.04.060; Ord. No. 17-2018 , § 1, 6-12-2018) 
Section 2.04.095. - Town Prosecutor, duties. 
    The duties of the Town Prosecutor shall be as follows: 
A.  Town Prosecutor shall prosecute ordinance violations and shall represent the Town in cases in Municipal Court and any appeals of decisions of the Municipal Court. They shall file with the Town Clerk copies of such records and files relating thereto as the Board of Trustees shall request. 
(Ord. No. 17-2018 , § 2, 6-12-2018) 
Section 2.04.100. - Compensation. 
    All appointed officers shall receive compensation to be fixed by the Board of Trustees for services rendered. 
(Code 1972, § 2.04.080) 
Section 2.04.110. - Regular meetings. 
    The Board of Trustees shall hold not less than two regular meetings per month. The Board shall provide by resolution the days and time fixed for said meetings, as well as the place where said meetings shall be held. 
(Code 1972, § 2.04.090) 
Section 2.04.120. - Special meetings. 
    The Mayor may convene the Board at any time. Whenever a special meeting shall be called, a summons or a notice in writing signed by the Mayor shall be served upon each member of the Board either in person or by notice left at his place of residence, stating the date and hour of the meeting and the purpose for which such meeting is called, and no business shall be transacted thereat, except such as is stated in the notice. If the Mayor is absent from the Town, a special meeting may be convened by a majority of the Board. 
(Code 1972, § 2.04.100) 
Section 2.04.130. - Public notice of meetings. 
A.  Any meetings at which the adoption of any proposed policy, position, resolution, rule, regulation, or formal action occurs or at which a majority or quorum of the Board of Trustees is in attendance, or is expected to be in attendance, shall be held only after full and timely notice to the public. 
B.  In addition to any other means of full and timely notice, the Board shall be deemed to have given full and timely notice if the notice of the meeting is posted in a designated public place within the Town no less than 24 hours prior to the holding of the meeting. The posting shall include specific agenda information when possible. 
C.  The public place or places for posting of meeting notices shall be designated annually at the first regular meeting of the Board of Trustees in January of each calendar year. 
(Code 1972, § 2.04.105) 
Section 2.04.140. - Quorum. 
    No action shall be taken unless a quorum is present. A majority of the Trustees shall constitute a quorum. A lesser number may adjourn from time to time and compel the attendance of absent members. Any member of the Board, at any regular or special meeting, may, in writing, demand the attendance of the absent members, which demand shall be entered on the record forthwith by the Clerk, who shall thereupon notify the absent members of the time and place of the meeting. 
(Code 1972, § 2.04.110) 
CHAPTER 2.06. - TREASURER 

Section 2.06.010. - Appointment. 
    The Board of Trustees of the Town shall appoint a Treasurer of the Town. 
(Code 1972, § 2.06.010; Ord. No. 169, art. II, § 1, 1974) 
Section 2.06.020. - Tenure. 
    The Treasurer shall serve at the pleasure of and during such period of time as may be determined by a majority of the Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1972, § 2.06.020; Ord. No. 169, art. II, § 2, 1974) 
Section 2.06.030. - Consolidation of offices. 
    The Board of Trustees may appoint as Treasurer the person then appointed and serving as Town Manager. 
(Code 1972, § 2.06.030; Ord. No. 169, art. II, § 3, 1974) 
Section 2.06.040. - Powers and duties. 
    The Treasurer shall have the following powers, responsibilities and duties: 
A.  Keep and supervise all accounts, receive and have custody of all monies of the Town, collect special Town taxes, trash and water fees and charges, issue licenses and collect fees therefor, make and keep public records of the Town, and shall render to the Board of Trustees an account of all of the above funds whenever required by it; 
B.  Pay all bills incurred by the Town subsequent to their approval by the Board of Trustees; 
C.  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance, resolution or direction of the Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1972, § 2.06.040; Ord. No. 169, art. II, § 4, 1974) 
Section 2.06.050. - Compensation. 
    The Board of Trustees may, by resolution duly adopted, establish and modify the compensation to be paid the Treasurer. In the event that the Town Manager shall also be appointed by the Board of Trustees to perform the duties of the Town Treasurer, the Town Manager shall receive no additional compensation therefor. 
(Code 1972, § 2.06.050; Ord. No. 169, art. II, § 5, 1974) 
CHAPTER 2.08. - MUNICIPAL COURT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal courts, C.R.S. § 13-10-101 et seq. 

Section 2.08.010. - Established. 
    In order to provide a simple and expeditious method for the prosecution of alleged violations of Town ordinances, but one which guarantees to defendants a method of exercising their constitutional rights, the Board of Trustees of the Town hereby establishes a Municipal Court for the Town. 
(Code 1972, § 2.08.010; Ord. No. 9-2001, § 1(part), 2001) 
Section 2.08.020. - Qualified Court of Record. 
    Whenever a Judge of the Eagle Municipal Court has been admitted to, and is currently licensed in the practice of law in the State, the Municipal Court shall keep a verbatim record of the proceedings and evidence at trial by either electronic devices or stenographic means, and the Court thus shall be a qualified Municipal Court of Record pursuant to the provisions of State law. 
(Code 1972, § 2.08.020; Ord. No. 9-2001, § 1(part), 2001) 
Section 2.08.030. - Jurisdiction. 
    The Municipal Court shall have original jurisdiction in all cases arising under the ordinances of the Town, with full power to punish violators thereof by the imposition of such fines and penalties as are prescribed by ordinance or Court rule, and permitted pursuant to State law. 
(Code 1972, § 2.08.030; Ord. No. 9-2001, § 1(part), 2001) 
Section 2.08.040. - Sessions. 
    There shall be regular sessions of the Eagle Municipal Court for the trial of cases. The Municipal Judge may hold a special session of Court at any time. All sessions of Court shall be open to the public, unless otherwise provided by law or Court rule. 
(Code 1972, § 2.08.040; Ord. No. 9-2001, § 1(part), 2001) 
Section 2.08.050. - Practice and procedure. 
    The practice and procedure in the Eagle Municipal Court shall be in accordance with the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure, as promulgated by the State Supreme Court, and applicable statutes of the State. The presiding Municipal Judge of the Court shall have authority to issue local rules of procedure consistent with the rules promulgated by the Supreme Court and State law. 
(Code 1972, § 2.08.050; Ord. No. 9-2001, § 1(part), 2001) 
Section 2.08.060. - Municipal Judges-Appointment; term; qualifications. 
    The Board of Trustees shall appoint the Municipal Judge, who shall be licensed to practice law in the State, within 30 days after compliance with C.R.S. § 31-4-401 following each regular municipal election. No appointment of such Judge shall continue beyond 30 days after compliance with C.R.S. § 31-4-401 by the members of the succeeding Board of Trustees. The person appointed need not be a resident of the Town, and, subject to State law, may hold other judicial offices and may practice law. The Municipal Judge may be reappointed for a subsequent term. Any vacancy in the office of Municipal Judge shall be filled by appointment of the Board of Trustees for the remainder of the unexpired term. The Board of Trustees may appoint such additional associate Municipal Judges or assistant Judges as may be necessary to act in case of temporary absence, sickness, disqualification, or other inability of the presiding Municipal Judge to act. 
(Code 1972, § 2.08.060; Ord. No. 9-2001, § 1(part), 2001) 
Section 2.08.070. - Same-Removal from office. 
    The Municipal Judge or any assistant or associate Municipal Judge may be removed during his term of office only for cause following a hearing, and only after the Judge has been given written notification of the charges against him, and a reasonable opportunity to prepare for a hearing before the Board of Trustees. The Judge may be removed for cause if: 
A.  He is found guilty of a felony or any other crime involving moral turpitude; 
B.  He has a disability which interferes with the performance of his duties, and which is or is likely to become permanent; 
C.  He has willfully or persistently failed to perform the duties of his office; or 
D.  He is habitually intemperate. 
(Code 1972, § 2.08.070; Ord. No. 9-2001, § 1(part), 2001) 
Section 2.08.080. - Same-Compensation. 
A.  The Board of Trustees shall provide by ordinance for the salary of the Municipal Judge. Such salary shall be a fixed annual compensation and payable on a monthly or other periodic basis. Payment of any fees or other compensation based directly on the number of individual cases handled or heard by the Municipal Judge is prohibited. 
B.  An associate or assistant Municipal Judge may be compensated based upon the number of Court sessions served by such Judge. If an assistant or associate Municipal Judge acts in the absence of the Municipal Judge, his salary may be adjusted so as to compensate the assistant or associate Municipal Judge. 
(Code 1972, § 2.08.080; Ord. No. 9-2001, § 1(part), 2001) 
Section 2.08.090. - Same-Oath. 
    Before entering upon the duties of his office, the Municipal Judge, or any associate or assistant Judge, shall take an oath or affirmation that he will support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State and the laws of the Town, and that he will faithfully perform the duties of his office. 
(Code 1972, § 2.08.090; Ord. No. 9-2001, § 1(part), 2001) 
Section 2.08.100. - Same-Powers. 
A.  The presiding Municipal Judge and any assistant or associate Municipal Judge shall have all judicial powers relating to the operation of the Municipal Court, subject to any rules of procedure governing the operation or conduct of Municipal Courts promulgated by the State Supreme Court. In sentencing or fining a violator, a Judge shall not exceed the sentence or fine limitations established by an applicable ordinance. Except as may otherwise be provided by law, a Judge may defer the prosecution or a judgment and sentence of any violator, or suspend the sentence or fine of any violator, and place such violator on probation for a period not to exceed one year. 
B.  A Judge shall assess the costs and fees set forth in Section 2.08.200. 
(Code 1972, § 2.08.100; Ord. No. 9-2001, § 1(part), 2001) 
Section 2.08.110. - Court Clerk-Position established. 
    There is hereby established the position of Clerk of the Municipal Court; provided, however, the Municipal Judge may serve as ex officio Clerk if the business of the Court is insufficient to warrant a separate full-time or part-time Clerk. 
(Code 1972, § 2.08.110; Ord. No. 9-2001, § 1(part), 2001) 
Section 2.08.120. - Same-Appointment. 
    The Clerk of the Municipal Court shall be appointed by the Municipal Judge. In addition, the Municipal Judge shall exercise supervisory powers concerning the job performance of the Clerk, and shall have the power to discipline or terminate the Clerk in accordance with the Town's personnel policies and procedures. 
(Code 1972, § 2.08.120; Ord. No. 9-2001, § 1(part), 2001) 
Section 2.08.130. - Same-Duties. 
    The Clerk of the Municipal Court shall have such duties as are delegated to him by ordinance, Court rule, or by the Municipal Judge. The Clerk shall file monthly reports with the Town Clerk of all fines and costs collected or received by the Municipal Court, and on the last day of each month shall pay to the Town Treasurer said fines and costs which shall be deposited in the general fund of the Town. 
(Code 1972, § 2.08.130; Ord. No. 9-2001, § 1(part), 2001) 
Section 2.08.140. - Same-Compensation. 
    The Board of Trustees shall provide by ordinance for the salary of the Clerk of Municipal Court, except that if the Municipal Judge serves as ex officio Clerk, he shall not receive any additional compensation. 
(Code 1972, § 2.08.140; Ord. No. 9-2001, § 1(part), 2001) 
Section 2.08.150. - Same-Bond. 
    The Clerk of the Municipal Court shall give a performance bond in the sum of not less than $2,000.00 to the Town. The performance bond shall be approved by the Board of Trustees and be conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties, and for the faithful accounting for, and payment of, all funds deposited with or received by the Court. When the Municipal Judge serves as ex officio Clerk of the Municipal Court, he shall execute the performance bond required by this section. 
(Code 1972, § 2.08.150; Ord. No. 9-2001, § 1(part), 2001) 
Section 2.08.160. - Court facilities and supplies; appropriations. 
    The Board of Trustees shall furnish the Municipal Court with suitable courtroom facilities and sufficient funds for the acquisition of all necessary books, supplies, and furniture for the proper conduct of the business of the Court. The Board of Trustees shall, on an annual basis, budget and appropriate funds to pay the annual salary of the Municipal Court Judge and any assistant or associate Judges, the salary of the Municipal Court Clerk, together with the other expenses as may be necessary for the proper operation of the Municipal Court. 
(Code 1972, § 2.08.160; Ord. No. 9-2001, § 1(part), 2001) 
Section 2.08.170. - Penalty assessments procedure. 
    In order to provide for the expeditious handling of certain minor criminal offenses and non-criminal municipal offenses, the Eagle Municipal Court is authorized to accept penalty assessment fines and penalties in accordance with the provisions of this section. This section shall not be construed as limiting or otherwise modifying the Model Traffic Code, adopted by reference by the Town. 
A.  At the time that any person is arrested or charged for the commission of a Class A or B municipal offense set forth pursuant to Section 2.08.180, or as set forth pursuant to Court order, the arresting officer may offer to give a penalty assessment notice to the defendant. If any person is charged with a non-criminal municipal offense, the citing officer shall issue a penalty assessment notice to the defendant, unless otherwise provided by law. This notice shall be made by notation upon the summons and complaint issued in conformance with law. 
B.  If a person charged with a Class A or B municipal offense does not possess a valid State driver's license, such person, in order to secure release, as provided in this section, must give his written acknowledgment of guilt or give his written promise to appear in Court by signing the penalty assessment notice prepared by the charging officer. Should the person to whom the penalty assessment notice is tendered accept the notice by acknowledging his guilt in writing, said acceptance shall constitute a promise on such person's part to pay the fine or penalty specified in the schedule issued pursuant to Section 2.08.180, or specified in a schedule issued by Court order, for the violation involved at the office of the Clerk of the Eagle Municipal Court, either in person or by mail within 20 days of the date of issuance. Any person who accepts a penalty assessment notice for a Class A or B municipal offense, which constitutes a criminal violation, by acknowledgment of guilt, but who does not furnish satisfactory evidence of identity, or who the officer has reasonable and probable grounds to believe will disregard a written promise to pay the specified fine, may be taken by the officer to the nearest post office facility, and required to remit the amount of the specified fine to the Town immediately by mail in United States currency or legal tender, or by money order, or personal check. Refusal or inability to remit the specified fine by mail when required shall constitute a refusal to accept a penalty assessment notice, by acknowledgment of guilt. Should a person cited for a Class A or B municipal offense violation refuse to give his written acknowledgment of guilt or give his written promise to appear in Court by signing the penalty assessment notice, the officer shall proceed to issue a summons and complaint in accordance with State law. Should such person accept the notice, by acknowledgment of guilt, but fail to pay the prescribed fine within 20 days thereafter, the notice shall be construed to be a summons and complaint, and the prosecution for said violation shall thereafter be heard in the Municipal Court, in which event such person shall be privileged to answer the charge made against him in the same manner as if he had not been tendered a penalty assessment notice. In such event, the maximum penalty which may be imposed may exceed the penalty assessment amount. 
C.  If the person cited for a Class A or B municipal offense does possess a valid State driver's license, the person shall not be required to give his written acknowledgment of guilt or written promise to appear on the penalty assessment notice. For the purposes of this section, tender by an arresting officer of the penalty assessment notice to such a person shall constitute notice to the violator to appear in Court at the time specified on such notice or to pay the required fine. Should such person fail to pay the prescribed penalty within 20 days thereafter, the notice shall be construed to be a summons and complaint, and the prosecution for said violation shall thereafter be heard in the Municipal Court, in which event such person shall be privileged to answer the charge made against him in the same manner as if he had not been tendered a penalty assessment notice. In such event, the maximum penalty which may be imposed may exceed the penalty assessment amount. 
D.  Payment of the prescribed penalty assessment within 20 days shall be deemed a complete satisfaction for the violation. Checks tendered by the violator to, and accepted by, the Municipal Court, and upon which payment is received by the Municipal Court, shall be deemed sufficient receipt. 
E.  Penalty assessment notices issued for non-criminal violations shall also be in accordance with Section 2.08.190. 
F.  Nothing contained herein shall be construed as requiring a law enforcement officer to issue a penalty assessment notice for a Class A or B municipal offense which constitutes a criminal violation. Penalty assessment notices for criminal violations shall not be issued in the event of an offense involving property damage, injury to any person, or in the event the complaint is made by a private party. Penalty assessment notices shall be issued in all cases involving non-criminal municipal offenses, unless otherwise provided by law. 
(Code 1972, § 2.08.170; Ord. No. 9-2001, § 1(part), 2001) 
Section 2.08.180. - Penalty assessment schedule for criminal offenses. 
    A penalty assessment schedule for criminal offenses may be established by the Board of Trustees. In the event the Board of Trustees has not established such a schedule, the Court may promulgate such a schedule. 
(Code 1972, § 2.08.180; Ord. No. 9-2001, § 1(part), 2001) 
Section 2.08.190. - Non-criminal municipal offenses procedure. 
A.  Pursuant to C.R.S. §§ 16-10-101 and 16-10-109, the right of a trial by jury shall not be available at a hearing where the cited person is charged with a non-criminal municipal offense. In addition, no person charged with a non-criminal municipal offense shall be afforded the right of Court appointed Counsel. 
B.  The Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure shall apply to any hearing where the cited person is charged with a non-criminal municipal offense, unless any of the rules are clearly inapplicable. The burden of proof shall be upon the people, and the Court shall dismiss charges against an alleged violator if the alleged violator is not proven to be liable or guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. 
C.  An appeal from final judgment on a non-criminal municipal offense shall be made in accordance with Rule 237 of the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure. 
D.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person against whom a judgment has been entered for a non-criminal municipal offense shall collaterally attack the validity of that judgment unless such attack is commenced within three months after the date of entry of the judgment. The only exceptions to such time limitations shall be: 
1.  A case in which the Court did not have jurisdiction over the subject matter of the alleged non-criminal municipal violation; 
2.  A case in which the Court did not have jurisdiction over the person of the violator; 
3.  Where the Court finds by the preponderance of the evidence that the failure to seek relief within the applicable time period was caused by an adjudication of incompetence or by commitment of the violator to an institution for treatment as a mentally ill person; or 
4.  Where the Court finds that failure to seek relief within the applicable time period was the result of circumstances amounting to justifiable excuse or excusable neglect. 
E.  At any time that a person is cited for the commission of any non-criminal municipal offense, the citing officer shall give a notice to such person, which notice shall be in the form of a penalty assessment notice as described in Section 2.08.170. 
F.  The penalty assessment notice tendered by the citing officer shall contain the name and address of the alleged violator, the license number of the vehicle involved, if any, the number of such person's driver's license, if applicable, the nature of the offense, the amount of the penalty prescribed for such offense, the date of the notice, the time and place and when and where such person shall appear in Court in the event such penalty is not paid, and a place for such person to execute and sign the acknowledgment of guilt or liability and an agreement to pay the penalty prescribed within 20 days, as well as such other information as may be required by law to constitute such notice as a summons and complaint to appear in Court, if the prescribed penalty is not paid within the time period. 
G.  One copy of the notice shall be given to the violator by the citing officer. 
H.  The time specified in the notice to appear shall be at least 14 days, but not more than 45 days, after the date of such citation, unless otherwise provided by law or the person cited requests an earlier hearing. 
I.  Whenever the alleged violator refuses to sign or accept the penalty assessment notice, tender of such notice by the citing officer to the alleged violator shall constitute service of a summons and complaint. 
J.  If an alleged violator is cited for a non-criminal municipal offense, he shall be privileged to answer the complaint made against him in the manner provided in the Colorado Municipal Court Rules and Procedure. The maximum penalty which may be imposed shall not exceed the penalties set forth in the penalty assessment notice. 
K.  In the event a person who has been cited for a non-criminal municipal offense fails to pay the penalty assessment notice, he shall be permitted to make an appearance and answer the complaint against him. If the alleged violator answers that he is guilty or liable, judgment shall be entered against him and he shall be assessed the appropriate penalty and applicable Court costs and fees. If the alleged violator denies the allegations in the complaint, a final hearing on the complaint shall be held within the time period prescribed in Rule 248 of the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure. If the alleged violator fails to appear for a final hearing, a default judgment shall be entered against him, and he shall be assessed the appropriate penalty and applicable Court costs and fees. 
L.  In the event a person who has been cited for a non-criminal municipal offense fails to pay the penalty assessment within the time period specified in the penalty assessment notice and fails to appear at the time and place specified in the notice, a default judgment shall be entered against him and he shall be assessed the appropriate penalty and Court costs and fees. 
M.  Whenever the Judge of the Municipal Court imposes a monetary penalty for a non-criminal municipal offense, if the person who committed the offense is unable to pay the amount at the time of the Court hearing or if he fails to pay any penalty imposed for the commission of such offense within the time permitted by the Court, in order to guarantee the payment of such penalty, the Judge may compel collection of the penalty in the manner provided in C.R.S. § 18-1.3-506. 
N.  An officer coming upon an unattended vehicle which is an apparent violation of any provision of the Model Traffic Code may place upon the vehicle a penalty assessment notice indicating the non-criminal traffic offense and directing the owner/operator of the vehicle to remit the penalty assessment to the Municipal Court within 20 days. If the penalty assessment is not paid within 20 days of the issuance of such notice, the Court shall mail a notice to the registered owner of the vehicle, setting forth the non-criminal traffic offense and the time and place where it occurred and directing the payment of the penalty assessment within 20 days from the issuance of such notice. If the penalty assessment is not paid within such 20 days, the Court shall request the officer who issued the original penalty assessment notice to file a complaint with the Court and serve upon the registered owner of the vehicle a summons to appear in Court at a time and place specified therein. 
O.  The provisions of this section shall not apply when it appears the alleged violator has, in the course of the same transaction or episode, committed one or more non-criminal municipal offenses and has also committed one or more Class A or B municipal offenses and the charging officer charges such alleged violator with two or more violations, any one of which is a non-criminal municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 2.08.190; Ord. No. 9-2001, § 1(part), 2001) 
Section 2.08.200. - Court fees and costs. 
    All fees and costs, as established by resolution of the Board of Trustees, shall be taxed and paid in all Municipal Court proceedings. All fees and costs shall be paid to the Town. When judgment is entered against a defendant, all fees and costs shall be taxed as part of the judgment, unless otherwise provided in this chapter. Costs shall be paid by the Town when a defendant is acquitted, when charges are dismissed against a defendant, or when a defendant is convicted and the Court determines he is unable to pay them. 
    If any private person complainant, in any action before the Municipal Court, requests dismissal of the prosecution of said action, or willfully absents himself from trial or fails to appear at trial after being subpoenaed, and said action is dismissed, the Court shall give judgment against said private person complainant for all applicable fees and costs. In addition, if charges against an accused pursuant to a private person complaint are dismissed, and it appears to the Court there were no reasonable grounds for the complaint, or that it was maliciously made, the Court shall give judgment against said complainant for all applicable fees and costs. 
(Code 1972, § 2.08.200; Ord. No. 9-2001, § 1(part), 2001; Ord. No. 08, series 2015, § 1; Ord. No. 18-2016, § 1(2.08.200(K)), 6-14-2016; Ord. No. 07-2019 , § 1, 4-9-2019) 
Section 2.08.205. - Collection of fines, fees, penalties and restitution. 
A.  The Town Manager is authorized to use any lawful method of collecting fines, fees, default judgments, personal recognizance bond forfeitures, restitution and civil penalties due from any person assessed such sums by the Eagle Municipal Court, including reasonable costs of collection. The Town shall be entitled to receive the reasonable costs of collection in addition to the amounts otherwise due and payable, and interest at the statutory rate for unpaid civil judgments. "Reasonable costs of collection" shall include, without limitation, the fees and costs of the Town Attorney, or a private counsel retained by the Town, or a collection agency retained by the Town, but such fees and costs shall not exceed 25 percent of the amount collected. 
B.  In the event a defendant fails to pay any fine, fee, penalty, cost, restitution, or other amount assessed by the Municipal Judge by the date so ordered, the Municipal Judge may refer a portion or all of the unpaid amount to a collection agency for collection, and the Municipal Judge may order the defendant to pay an additional amount not to exceed 25 percent of the amount collected as reasonable costs of collection. The Municipal Judge shall have such authority regardless of the date upon which the fine, penalty, cost, fee, or restitution order was issued. 
(Ord. No. 23-2017, § 1, 9-26-2017) 
Section 2.08.210. - Witness immunity. 
A.  Whenever a witness refuses, on the basis of his privilege against self-incrimination, to testify or provide other information in a proceeding before the Municipal Court, and the Judge presiding over the preceding communicates to the witness an order as specified in Subsection (B) of this section, the witness may not refuse to comply with the order on the basis of his privilege against self-incrimination; except that no testimony or other information compelled under the order, or any information directly or indirectly derived from such testimony or other information, may be used against the witness in any Municipal Court case, except for prosecution for perjury, for false statement or otherwise failing to comply with the order. 
B.  In the case of any individual who has been or may be called to testify or provide other information in any proceeding before the Municipal Court, the Municipal Court may issue, upon request of the prosecuting Attorney, an order requiring such individual to give testimony or provide other information which he refuses to give or provide on the basis of his privilege against self-incrimination, such order to become effective as provided in Subsection (A) of this section. 
C.  The prosecuting Attorney may request an order as specified in Subsection (B) of this section when, in his judgment, the testimony or other information from any individual may be necessary to the public interest and such individual has refused or is likely to refuse to testify or provide other information on the basis of his privilege against self-incrimination. 
(Code 1972, § 2.08.210; Ord. No. 9-2001, § 1(part), 2001) 
CHAPTER 2.11. - CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER 

Section 2.11.010. - Established. 
    There is hereby established the position of Town Code Enforcement Officer which shall be under the administrative and operational control of the Town Manager. Such Code Enforcement Officer shall have the power, together with the Town Planner and the Town Attorney, to enforce all terms and provisions contained in Title 4 concerning Land Use and Development, as well as the terms and conditions of any permits or other land use approvals granted pursuant to Title 4. Such Code Enforcement Officer shall also have the authority, together with the Town Attorney and members of the Eagle Police Department, to enforce provisions contained within Title 7 concerning health and sanitation and Title 8 concerning animals, and Chapter 9.24 concerning public nuisances, as well as such other provisions of this Code as may be determined from time to time by the Board of Trustees. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to issue notices of violation, compliance orders, and may issue citations or summons and complaints in Eagle Municipal Court; provided, however, such Code Enforcement Officer need not be a "peace officer," as defined in C.R.S. Title 18, and if the Code Enforcement Officer is not a peace officer, he shall not be permitted to carry a firearm or conduct arrests. 
(Code 1972, § 2.11.010) 
Section 2.11.020. - Designation. 
    The Town Manager shall designate one or more persons to serve as the Town Code Enforcement Officer(s). The Board of Trustees may also authorize the Town Manager to serve in the capacity of Code Enforcement Officer. Compensation for the person(s) serving as Code Enforcement Officer shall be as determined from time to time by the Board of Trustees pursuant to the Town's personnel policies and annual budget. 
(Code 1972, § 2.11.020) 
Section 2.11.030. - Liability. 
    The Code Enforcement Officer, acting in good faith and without malice in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against the Code Enforcement Officer because of such act or omission performed by him in the enforcement of Town ordinances shall be defended by the Town until final termination of such proceedings, and any judgment resulting therefrom shall be assumed by the Town. 
(Code 1972, § 2.11.030; Ord. No. 10, § 1(part), 1997) 
CHAPTER 2.16. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Section 2.16.010. - Created. 
    There is created a Police Department of the Town which shall consist of one Chief of Police and as many police officers as may from time to time be determined necessary by the Board of Trustees for the safety and good order of the Town. 
(Code 1972, § 2.16.010) 
Section 2.16.020. - Chief-Appointment, tenure, powers and duties. 
A.  The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Town Manager and shall serve under the supervision, direction, and control of the Town Manager. The Chief of Police may be removed or discharged in accordance with the Town's personnel policies governing department heads. 
B.  The Chief of Police shall, in such capacity, and by such name and title, be vested with all powers and duties set forth in C.R.S. § 31-4-306, and as otherwise provided under the laws of the State. 
(Code 1972, § 2.16.020) 
Section 2.16.030. - Same-Oath and bond. 
    The Chief of Police shall, upon entering upon his duties, take such oath as may be required by the statutes of the State, or as otherwise determined by the Board of Trustees, and shall provide such security bond as may be required by the Board of Trustees or the Town's personnel policies. 
(Code 1972, § 2.16.030) 
Section 2.16.040. - Reports and accounting. 
    The Chief of Police shall render such accounts of the Police Department, his duties, reports, and receipts as may be required from time to time by the Town Manager or by resolution of the Board of Trustees, and shall keep the records of his office open to inspection by the Board of Trustees and the Town Manager at any time, unless otherwise provided by the laws of the State. 
(Code 1972, § 2.16.040) 
Section 2.16.050. - Membership. 
    Members of the Police Department, other than the Chief of Police, shall be appointed by the Chief of Police, or as otherwise may be provided in the Town's personnel policies. Said members shall be removed or discharged by the Chief of Police, or as otherwise provided in the Town's personnel policies. Said members shall only be removed or discharged in the manner provided by the Town's personnel policies. The members of the Police Department shall be under the direct control and supervision of the Chief of Police, who may adopt further personnel policies, such as probationary periods of employment, grievance and disciplinary procedures, and the like, so long as said policies are not inconsistent with the Town's general personnel policies. The Town Manager and the Board of Trustees shall be advised of any such policies promulgated by the Chief of Police, and shall have the power to amend or set them aside. 
(Code 1972, § 2.16.050) 
Section 2.16.060. - Rules and regulations. 
    The Police Department shall be operated and managed in accordance with such departmental rules and regulations as may from time to time be promulgated by the Chief of Police with the approval of the Town Manager, or as otherwise promulgated by the Town Manager or the Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1972, § 2.16.060) 
Section 2.16.070. - Disposition of marijuana found on persons taken into custody. 
    In the event a member of the Eagle Police Department arrests a person, or takes into custody a person, and such individual has on his person marijuana that such person is permitted to possess under State law, the police officer shall make a good faith effort to have the individual arrested or taken into custody and leave the marijuana at his residence or in his vehicle. As an alternative, the person arrested or taken into custody shall be given the opportunity to place a telephone call to another person who can respond and pick up the marijuana and transport it in a lawful manner. Otherwise, with the owner of the marijuana present, along with a witnessing police officer or other person, the marijuana shall be destroyed by the police officer at the scene of the arrest or custody site. 
(Code 1972, § 2.16.070; Ord. No. 17, § 1, 2013) 
CHAPTER 2.20. - PROCEDURE FOR HEARINGS 

Section 2.20.010. - Purpose and applicability. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide a uniform, consistent, and expeditious method of procedure for the conduct of all quasi-judicial hearings held before the Board of Trustees; any board, commission, official or employee of the Town; or any Hearing Officer appointed to hear and receive evidence and render a decision on the law and facts. The provisions of this chapter shall be applied uniformly in all applicable hearings; provided, however, the rules contained in this chapter may be supplemented by the adoption of further rules of procedure by the hearing body, official, employee, or Hearing Officer, not inconsistent therewith. All rules adopted to supplement the provisions of this chapter by any board, commission, official, employee, or Hearing Officer shall be reduced to writing and copies thereof shall be made available to the public. 
(Code 1972, § 2.20.010) 
Section 2.20.020. - Quasi-judicial hearings. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable only to those hearings where the Board of Trustees, board, commission, official, employee, or duly-appointed Hearing Officer is called upon to exercise powers of a judicial or quasi-judicial nature, which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
A.  Hearings before the Board of Trustees upon application for the issuance of, or hearings for the suspension or revocation of, a liquor or fermented malt beverage license. 
B.  Hearings before any board, commission, or official appealing the issuance, suspension, or revocation of other licenses issued by the Town, where such an appeal is otherwise authorized, and which requires an evidentiary hearing to determine such appeal. 
C.  All Land Use and Development hearings conducted pursuant to Title 4. 
D.  Personnel hearings. 
E.  Appeals from any decision of the Building Official. 
F.  All appeals from the decisions of any Town official, board, or commission, where such an appeal is otherwise authorized, and which requires an evidentiary hearing to determine such appeal. 
(Code 1972, § 2.20.020) 
Section 2.20.030. - Rules of procedure. 
    All quasi-judicial hearings shall be conducted under procedures designed to ensure all interested parties due process of law and shall, in all cases, provide for the following: 
A.  The board, commission, official, employee, or duly-appointed Hearing Officer conducting the hearing shall have authority to administer oaths and affirmations; rule upon offers of proof; compel testimony; receive evidence; dispose of motions relating to discovery and production of relevant documents and things for inspection, copying, or photocopying; regulate the course of the hearing; fix the time for filing of briefs and other documents; direct the parties to appear and confer to consider simplification of issues, admissions of facts, or documents to avoid unnecessary proof, and limitation of the number of witnesses; issue appropriate orders to control the subsequent course of the proceedings; dispose of motions; and control the decorum and conduct of the proceeding. 
B.  Any Town Board, commission, official, employee, or duly-appointed Hearing Officer conducting a quasi-judicial hearing shall have the power to issue subpoenas compelling testimony or the production of documents. Pursuant to C.R.S. § 13-10-112(2), the Eagle Municipal Judge shall have the power to enforce said subpoenas. 
C.  The hearing need not be conducted according to the technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. 
D.  Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence, but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding, unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this State. 
E.  Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence on which responsible parties are accustomed to rely on in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law, statute, or Court rules which might make improper the admission of such evidence. Evidence which is reasonably reliable and calculated to aid the hearing body, official, or officer in reaching an accurate determination of the issues involved may be considered. 
F.  Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. 
G.  The board, commission, official, employee, or Hearing Officer conducting the hearing shall be permitted at the hearing to continue the hearing, for good cause, to another date, time, and place. In such an event, no advertised public notice of such continued hearing shall be required. 
H.  In reaching a decision, official notice may be taken, whether before or after submission of the case for decision, of any fact which may be judicially noticed by the courts of this State, or of official records of the Town, and ordinances, rules, and regulations of the Town. Interested parties present at the hearing shall be informed of the matters to be noticed and these matters shall be noted in the record, referred to therein, or appended thereto. Interested parties shall be given a reasonable opportunity, upon request, to refute the officially noticed matters by evidence or by written or oral presentation of authority. 
I.  All hearings shall be open to the public unless otherwise authorized or permitted by applicable law. 
J.  A record of the entire proceedings shall be made by tape recording, or any other means of permanent recording determined to be appropriate by the Town Board, commission, official, employee, or duly-appointed Hearing Officer conducting the hearing. 
(Code 1972, § 2.20.030; Amended Ord. No. 21, § 1-2, 2014) 
Section 2.20.040. - Rights of participants. 
    Each interested party participating in a quasi-judicial hearing shall have these rights, among others to: 
A.  Call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing. 
B.  Introduce documentary and physical evidence. 
C.  Cross examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing. 
D.  Rebut the evidence presented. 
E.  Represent himself or to be represented by anyone of his choice who is lawfully permitted to do so. 
(Code 1972, § 2.20.040) 
Section 2.20.050. - Order of procedure. 
    In all quasi-judicial hearings, the following order of procedure shall be followed, unless otherwise determined by the body or person conducting the hearing: 
A.  Presentation of those documents showing the regularity of the commencement of the proceedings and the form of the public notice given, if required. 
B.  Presentation of evidence by the applicant, petitioner, appealing party, or complainant. 
C.  Presentation of evidence in support of the applicant, petitioner, appealing party, or complainant by any other person. 
D.  Presentation of evidence from any person opposing the application, petition, appeal, or complaint. 
E.  Presentation of evidence in rebuttal to the matters presented by the opposing party. 
F.  All documents or other items of physical evidence shall be marked as exhibits with such identifying symbols as may be necessary to determine the exhibit referred to by any witness or other person. 
(Code 1972, § 2.20.050) 
Section 2.20.060. - Appointment of Hearing Officer. 
    In any hearing upon application for the issuance of, or hearing for the suspension or revocation of, a liquor or fermented malt beverage license; any personnel hearing; and any other hearing when it is necessary to avoid a conflict of interest, the Town Board, commission, official, or employee called upon to render a decision may appoint one or more Hearing Officers who have not determined the factual issues in controversy and have no personal financial interest in the outcome of the hearing to conduct the required hearing. The Hearing Officer shall hear and receive evidence and render a decision on the applicable law and the facts. The Hearing Officer shall have all the authority possessed by the Town Board, commission, official, or employee to render decisions, except, if required by applicable law, only the Town Board, commission, official, or employee possessing the authority shall take formal action on the matters at issue, following issuance of the Hearing Officer's decision on the law and facts. 
(Code 1972, § 2.20.060) 
Section 2.20.070. - Deliberation and notice of decision. 
    If the final decision or formal action is required to be made by a Town Board or commission, no decision or formal action shall be effective, except upon a vote of the members of said board or commission, conducted in an open session thereof, which shall be duly recorded in the minutes of the Town Board or commission. No member of a board or commission who did not hear the evidence or has not read the entire record of proceedings shall vote or take part in the factual determination. The Town Board, commission, official, employee, or duly-appointed Hearing Officer may issue an oral decision immediately upon conclusion of the evidentiary hearing. If no decision is issued at the hearing, said decision shall be rendered in writing within the time limits provided by applicable law. If no specific time limit is provided, the decision shall be rendered no later than 20 days following the conclusion of the hearing. Said written decision shall contain findings of fact and conclusions of law, setting forth the grounds of the decision, based on the evidence presented at the hearing. Copies of the written decision shall be delivered to the applicant, petitioner, appellant, complainant, and other interested parties requesting the same, unless otherwise prohibited by applicable law. 
(Code 1972, § 2.20.070) 
Section 2.20.080. - Judicial enforcement and review. 
    Any party aggrieved by any decision rendered by the hearing body, official, employee, or duly-appointed Hearing Officer in any quasi-judicial hearing, may apply to have said decision reviewed by a court of competent jurisdiction, in accordance with the provisions of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure, and any other applicable law. Said appeal shall be filed with the Court within 30 days following the issuance of the final decision or the formal action. 
(Code 1972, § 2.20.080) 
CHAPTER 2.24. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Planning commission, C.R.S. § 31-23-201 et seq.; zoning commission, C.R.S. § 31-23-301 et seq. 

Section 2.24.010. - Created, statutory authority. 
    Pursuant to the authority conferred by C.R.S. § 31-23-201 et seq., there is created a Planning Commission and a Zoning Commission for the Town. The members of the Planning Commission shall also serve, and are appointed as, the Zoning Commission. 
(Code 1972, § 2.24.010) 
State Law reference- Planning commission to exercise power and rights granted to zoning commission, C.R.S. § 31-23-211. 
Section 2.24.020. - Composition and terms of office. 
A.  The Town Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the Board of Trustees. The term of each appointed member of the Commission shall be for four years or until his successor takes office. 
B.  The Board of Trustees may also appoint alternate members of the Town Planning and Zoning Commission, to serve in the event any regular member is temporarily unable to act due to absence from a meeting, illness, a personal interest in any matter before the Commission, or any other cause. Alternate members shall be designated by rank (i.e., first alternate, second alternate) in order to determine which alternate members shall serve in the absence of regular members of the Commission. The term of each alternate member shall be four years, or until his successor takes office. 
C.  Regular and alternate members of the Commission may voluntarily resign with good cause or may be removed by the Board of Trustees for inefficiency, neglect of duty, malfeasance in office, removal of their residence from the Town, or for other good cause. Provided, however, no such removal shall be made without a charge in writing and an opportunity of a public hearing being given unless the member against whom the charge is made has ceased to reside in the Town or resigned voluntarily. 
D.  Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of a term shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by the Board of Trustees. If the vacancy is of a regular member, the First Alternate shall fill the remainder of the unexpired term and a new First Alternate shall be appointed by the Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1972, § 2.24.020; Ord. No. 1-1985, § 1, 1985; Amended Ord. No. 9, §§ 1, 2, 2010; Ord. No. 06-2018, § 1, 3-13-2018; Ord. No. 12-2018 , § 1, 4-24-2018) 
Section 2.24.030. - Qualifications; restrictions; and compensation. 
    All members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be bonafide residents of the Town, and if any members cease to reside in the Town, his membership shall immediately terminate. All members of the Commission shall receive compensation in the amount of $100.00 per month during each member's term of office. Except for those members who are elected officers, members of the Commission shall hold no other municipal office. 
(Code 1972, § 2.24.030; Ord. No. 1-1985, § 2, 1985; Amended Ord. No. 14-2004, § 1, 2004; Amended Ord. No. 9, § 3, 2010; Ord. No. 38-2015, § 1, 12-8-2015; Ord. No. 06-2018, § 2, 3-13-2018) 
Section 2.24.040. - Organization; meetings; rules and regulations. 
    Each Commission shall elect its chairman from among the appointed members and create and fill such other of its offices as it may determine. The term of the chairman shall be one year, with eligibility for reelection. Each Commission shall hold at least one regular meeting in each month and such meetings may be held consecutively on the same date. Each Commission shall adopt rules for transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. 
(Code 1972, § 2.24.040; Ord. No. 184, § 4, 1975; Ord. No. 06-2018, § 3, 3-13-2018) 
Section 2.24.050. - Staff and finances. 
    The Planning and Zoning Commission may appoint such employees as it deems necessary to assist the Planning and Zoning Commission in its work, subject to Board of Trustees approval. The Planning and Zoning Commission may also, with the consent of the Board of Trustees, contract with planners, engineers and architects, and other consultants, for such services as it may require. The expenditures of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be within the amounts appropriated for such purposes by the Board of Trustees, which shall provide the funds, equipment and accommodations necessary for the Planning and Zoning Commission's work. 
(Code 1972, § 2.24.050; Ord. No. 184, § 5, 1975; Amended Ord. No. 9, § 4, 2010) 
Section 2.24.060. - Powers and duties. 
    Each Commission shall have all of the powers and perform each and all of the duties specified by C.R.S. § 31-23-201 et seq., together with any other duties or authority which may hereafter be conferred upon them by the laws of the State. The performance of such duties and the exercise of such authority is to be subject to each and all of the limitations expressed in such legislative enactments. 
(Code 1972, § 2.24.060; Ord. No. 184, § 6, 1975) 
Section 2.24.070. - Planning Commission master plan preparation, considerations. 
    In the preparation of a master plan, the Planning Commission shall make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of present conditions and future growth of the municipality with due regard to its relations to neighboring territory. The plan shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the municipality and its environs, which will, in accordance with present and future needs, best promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development; including, among other things, adequate provision for traffic, the promotion of safety from fire and other dangers, adequate provision for light and air, the promotion of healthful and convenient distribution of population, the promotion of good civic design and arrangement, wise and efficient expenditure of public funds, and the adequate provision of public utilities and other public requirements. 
(Code 1972, § 2.24.070; Ord. No. 184, § 7, 1975) 
Section 2.24.080. - Land use regulations preparation, considerations. 
    The Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend to the Board of Trustees land use regulations in accordance with a comprehensive plan designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to promote health and general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; and to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, wastewater, schools, parks and other public requirements. Such regulations shall be made with reasonable consideration, among other things, as to the character of the district and its particular suitability for particular uses, and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the Town. 
(Code 1972, § 2.24.080; Ord. No. 184, § 8, 1975; Amended Ord. No. 12-2004, § 4(part), 2004; Amended Ord. No. 9, § 6, 2010) 
CHAPTER 2.26. - MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal Election Code, C.R.S. § 31-10-101 et seq. 

Section 2.26.010. - Cancellation of municipal election. 
    The Town Clerk is hereby authorized to cancel a regular municipal election of the Town in accordance with C.R.S. § 31-10-507 if the only matter before the voters is the election of persons to office and if, at the close of business on the 64th day before the election, there are not more candidates than offices to be filled at such election, including write-in candidates filing affidavits of intent. As required by said statute, the Board of Trustees shall instruct the Town Clerk by resolution to cancel any future election and declare the candidates elected if the only matter before the voters is the election of persons to office and there are not more candidates than offices to be filled at such election. 
(Code 1972, § 2.26.010) 
Section 2.26.020. - Write-in candidate affidavit required. 
    In accordance with C.R.S. § 31-10-306, no write-in vote for any Town office shall be counted unless an affidavit of intent has been filed with the Town Clerk by the person whose name is written in prior to 64 days before the election indicating that such person desires the office and is qualified to assume the duties of that office if elected. 
(Code 1972, § 2.26.020; Ord. No. 5, § 1, 2014) 
CHAPTER 2.32. - PARK REGULATIONS 

Section 2.32.010. - Establishment authority. 
    The Town shall have authority to acquire, establish and maintain in the manner provided for by State law, public parks or pleasure grounds, boulevards, parkways, avenues and roads. 
(Code 1972, § 2.32.010; Ord. No. 1-1978(part), 1978) 
Section 2.32.020. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Park means a park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other area in the Town, either now existing or which shall be subsequently acquired in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, owned or used by the Town, and devoted to active or passive recreation, or other aesthetic purposes. 
    Party means any person, firm, partnership, association corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
(Code 1972, § 2.32.020; Ord. No. 1-1978(part), 1978) 
Section 2.32.030. - Daily park hours. 
    The parks shall be open daily to the public from 5:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m., and no party not an employee of the parks shall remain in them at any other time, except that persons may remain at the tennis courts to play tennis; provided, however, that the Town Manager may, by permit issued pursuant to this chapter, extend or limit the time herein specified. Any person who knowingly violates this section commits a non-criminal municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 2.32.030; Ord. No. 1-1978(part), 1978; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 3, 2001) 
Section 2.32.040. - Destruction of park property. 
    It is unlawful to cut, mark, remove, or break, or in any way injure, damage or deface the trees, shrubs, plants, turf, or any of the buildings, fences, bridges, or other structures or property within or upon park premises; or in any other way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any park or recreation area. Any person who knowingly, intentionally, or willfully violates this section commits a Class A municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 2.32.040; Ord. No. 1-1978(part), 1978; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 4, 2001) 
Section 2.32.050. - Erection of tents and buildings. 
    It is unlawful to build or place any tent, building, booth, stand, or other structure in or upon any of the parks, parkways, or other recreational facilities without first having obtained a permit to do so from the Town Manager. Any person who knowingly violates this section commits a non-criminal municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 2.32.050; Ord. No. 1-1978(part), 1978; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 5, 2001) 
Section 2.32.060. - Fires prohibited. 
    It is unlawful to light, make or use any unenclosed picnic or trash fire within the parks, parkways, or other recreation facilities owned or operated by the Town; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to authorized park employees. Fires may only be built in fireplaces or on grills constructed for that purpose in such areas and under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the Town Board. Any person who knowingly violates this section commits a non-criminal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 2.32.060; Ord. No. 1-1978(part), 1978; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 6, 2001) 
Section 2.32.070. - Riding of animals in public parks. 
    It is unlawful for any person to ride or lead any horse or other livestock in any public park or recreational area except upon paths or other ways expressly provided and posted for that purpose. Any person who knowingly violates this section commits a non-criminal municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 2.32.070; Ord. No. 1-1978(part), 1978; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 7, 2001) 
Section 2.32.080. - Permits and regulation authority. 
    The Town Manager is empowered and authorized to issue permits described in this chapter for such fees as set forth by resolution of the Board of Trustees; to impose reasonable conditions to ensure that the activity which is the subject of the permit is not likely to cause damage to public or private property, or to cause a nuisance or disturbance; and to require reasonable deposits of money to ensure compliance with the terms of such permits. 
(Code 1972, § 2.32.080; Ord. No. 1-1978(part), 1978) 
CHAPTER 2.34. - ESTABLISHMENT OF FEES FOR SERVICES 

Section 2.34.010. - Schedule of fees. 
    At least once annually, following recommendations from the Town Manager and Town Clerk, the Board of Trustees shall adopt one or more resolutions containing a schedule of fees charged by the Town of Eagle for licensing fees, registration fees, services rendered and facilities provided for use by members of the general public. 
(Ord. No. 01-2017, § 1(2.34.010), 1-10-2017) 
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal financial powers, C.R.S. § 31-15-302; Colorado Local Government Budget Law, C.R.S. § 29-1-101 et seq.; municipal audits required, C.R.S. § 29-1-603; authority for municipal imposition of sales tax, C.R.S. § 29-2-101 et seq.; contents of use tax ordinances, C.R.S. § 29-2-109. 

CHAPTER 3.04. - SALES TAX 

Section 3.04.010. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to impose a tax on the sale of tangible personal property at retail and the furnishing of services in the Town. 
(Code 1972, § 3.04.010) 
Section 3.04.020. - Definitions. 
A.  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Auction sale means any sale conducted or transacted at a permanent place of business operated by auctioneer or a sale conducted and transacted at any location where tangible personal property is sold by an auctioneer when such auctioneer is acting either as agent for the owner of such personal property or is in fact the owner thereof. For purposes of this chapter, the auctioneer at any sale defined in this chapter, except when acting as an agent for a duly licensed retailer or vendor or when selling only tangible personal property which is exempt under the provisions of C.R.S. § 39-26-716(4)(a) and (b), is a retailer or vendor as defined in this section, and the sale made by him is a retail sale as defined in this section, and the business conducted by said auctioneer in accomplishing such sale is the transaction of a business as defined by this section. 
    Business includes all activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage, direct or indirect. 
    Charitable organization means any entity organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific, testing for public safety, literary, or educational purposes, or to foster national or international amateur sports competition (but only if no part of its activities involve the provision of athletic facilities or equipment), or for the prevention of cruelty to children or animals, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual, no substantial part of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or otherwise attempting to influence legislation, and which does not participate in, or intervene in (including the publishing or distributing of statements), any political campaign on behalf of any candidate for public office, or any veterans' organization registered under Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, for the purpose of sponsoring a special event, meeting, or other function in the State so long as such event, meeting, or function is not part of such organization's regular activities in the State. 
    Doing business in this State means the selling, leasing, or delivering in this State, or any activity in this State in connection with the selling, leasing or delivering in this State, of tangible personal property by a retail sale as defined in this chapter, for use, storage, distribution, or consumption within this State. The term "doing business in the State" affects the imposition, application or collection of sales and use taxes only. The term "doing business in this State" includes, but shall not be limited to, the following acts or methods of transacting business: 
1.  The maintaining within this State, directly or indirectly or by a subsidiary, an office, distributing house, salesroom or house, warehouse, or other place of business, including the employment of a resident of this State who works from a home office in this State; 
2.  The soliciting, either by direct representatives, indirect representatives, manufacturers' agents, or by distribution of catalogues or other advertising, or by use of any communication media, or by use of the newspaper, radio, or television advertising media, or by any other means whatsoever, of business from persons residing in this State, and by reason thereof receiving orders from, or selling or leasing tangible personal property to, such persons residing in this State for use, consumption, distribution, and storage for use or consumption in this State; and 
3.  A remote seller doing business in this State with respect to any remote sale subject to tax in accordance with C.R.S. § 39-26-104(2). 
    Farm close out sale means a sale by auction or private treaty, of all tangible personal property of a farmer or rancher previously used by him in carrying on his farming or ranching operations. Unless said farmer or rancher is making or attempting to make full and final disposition of all property used in his farming or ranching operations and is abandoning the said operations on the premises whereon they were previously conducted, such sale shall not be deemed a farm close out sale within the meaning of this chapter. 
    Food. 
1.  "Food" means food for domestic home consumption as defined 7 USC 2012(k), as amended, for purposes of the federal food stamp program, or any successor program, as defined in 7 USC 2012(1), as amended; except that the term "food" does not include carbonated water marketed in containers; chewing gum; seeds and plants to grow foods; prepared salads and salad bars; packaged and unpackaged cold sandwiches; deli trays; and hot or cold beverages served in unsealed containers or cups that are vended by or through machines or non-coin-operated coin-collecting food and snack devices on behalf of a vendor. 
2.  In determining whether a food product is for domestic home consumption, unless the vendor is described in C.R.S. § 39-26-104(1)(e), no inference shall be drawn from the type of vendor selling the product, the location of the product within a store, or the manner in which the product is marketed. 
    Gross taxable sales means the total amount received in money, credits, or property, excluding the fair market value of exchanged property which is to be sold thereafter in the usual course of the retailer's business, or other consideration valued in money from sales and purchases at retail within this State and embraced within the provisions of C.R.S. § 39-26-101 et seq. The taxpayer may take credit in this report of gross sales for an amount equal to the sale price of property returned by the purchaser when the full sale price thereof is refunded whether in cash or by credit. The fair market value of any exchanged property which is to be sold thereafter in the usual course of the retailer's business, if included in the full price of a new article, shall be excluded from the gross sales. On all sales at retail, valued in money, when such sales are made under conditional sales contract, or under other forms of sale where the payment of the principal sum thereunder be extended over a period longer than 60 days from the date of sale thereof, only such portion of the sale amount thereof may be counted for the purpose of imposition of the tax imposed by C.R.S. § 39-26-101 et seq., as has actually been received in cash by the taxpayer during the period for which the tax imposed by C.R.S. § 39-26-101 et seq., is due and payable. Taxes paid on gross sales represented by accounts found to be worthless and actually charged off for income tax purposes may be credited upon a subsequent payment of the tax herein provided, but if any such accounts are thereafter collected by the taxpayer, a tax shall be paid upon the amounts so collected. 
    Person includes any individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, corporation, estate or trust, or any group or combination acting as a unit and the plural as well as the singular number. 
    Purchase price means the price to the consumer, exclusive of any direct tax imposed by the Federal government or by C.R.S. § 39-26-101 et seq., and, in the case of all retail sales involving the exchange of property, also exclusive of the fair market value of the property exchanged at the time and place of the exchange, if: 
1.  Such exchanged property is to be sold thereafter in the usual course of the retailer's business; or 
2.  Such exchanged property is a vehicle and is exchanged for another vehicle and both vehicles are subject to licensing, registration, or certification under the laws of this State, including, but not limited to, vehicles operating upon public highways, off-highway recreation vehicles, watercraft and aircraft. 
    Retail marijuana means "marijuana" as defined in Section 16(2)(f) of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution that is cultivated, manufactured, distributed or sold by a licensed retail marijuana establishment. 
    Retail marijuana products means "marijuana products" as defined in Section 16(2)(k) of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution that are produced at a retail marijuana products manufacturer. 
    Retail sale includes all sales made within the State except wholesale sales. 
    Retailer or vendor means a person doing business in this State, including a remote seller, known to the trade and public as such, and selling to the user or consumer, and not for resale. 
    Sale or sale and purchase. 
1.  "Sale" or "sale and purchase" includes installment and credit sales and the exchange of property as well as the sale thereof for money; every such transaction, conditional or otherwise, for a consideration, constituting a sale; and the sale or furnishing of electrical energy, gas, steam, telephone, or telegraph services taxable under the terms of C.R.S. § 39-26-101 et seq. Neither term includes: 
a.  A division of partnership assets among the partners according to their interest in the partnership; 
b.  The formation of a corporation by the owners of a business and the transfer of their business assets to the corporation in exchange for all the corporation's outstanding stock, except qualifying shares, in proportion to the assets contributed; 
c.  The transfer of assets of shareholders in the formation or dissolution of professional corporations; 
d.  The dissolution and pro rata distribution of the corporation's assets to its shareholders; 
e.  The transfer of assets from a parent corporation to a subsidiary corporation or corporations which are owned at least 80 percent by the parent corporation, which transfer is solely in exchange for stock or securities of the subsidiary corporation; 
f.  The transfer of assets from a subsidiary corporation or corporations which are owned at least 80 percent by the parent corporation to a parent corporation or to another subsidiary which is owned at least 80 percent by the parent corporation, which transfer is solely in exchange for stock or securities of the parent corporation or the subsidiary which received the assets; 
g.  A transfer of a partnership interest; 
h.  The transfer in a reorganization qualifying under Section 368(a)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended; 
i.  The formation of a partnership by the transfer of assets to the partnership or transfers to a partnership in exchange for proportionate interests in the partnership; 
j.  The repossession of personal property by a chattel mortgage holder or a foreclosure by a lienholder; 
k.  The transfer of assets between parent and closely held subsidiary corporations, or between subsidiary corporations closely held by the same parent corporation, or between corporations which are owned by the same shareholders in identical percentage of stock ownership amounts, computed on a share-by-share basis, when a tax imposed by C.R.S. § 39-26-101 et seq., was paid by the transferor corporation at the time it acquired such assets, except to the extent provided by Subsection (3) of this definition. For the purposes of this subsection, a closely held subsidiary corporation is one in which the parent corporation owns stock possessing at least 80 percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote and owns at least 80 percent of the total number of shares of all other classes of stock. 
2.  "Sale" or "sales and purchases," in addition to Subsection (1) of this definition, includes the transaction of furnishing rooms or accommodations by any person, partnership, association, corporation, estate, receiver, Trustee, assignee, lessee, or any person acting in a representative capacity or any other combination of individuals by whatever name known to a person, or persons who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any room or rooms in a hotel, apartment hotel, lodginghouse, motor hotel, guesthouse, guest ranch, mobile home, auto camp, trailer court and park, under any concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
3.  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the sales tax is imposed on the full purchase price of articles sold after manufacture or after having been made to order and includes the full purchase price for materials used and the service performed in connection therewith, excluding, however, such articles as are otherwise exempted in this chapter. In connection with the transactions referred to in Subsection (1)(k) of this definition, the sales tax is imposed only on the amount of any increase in the fair market value of such assets resulting from the manufacturing, fabricating, or physical changing of the assets by the transferor corporation. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the sales price is the gross value of all materials, labor, and service, and the profit thereon, included in the price charged to the user or consumer. 
    School means any educational institution having a curriculum comparable to grade, grammar, junior high, high school, or college, or any combination thereof, requiring daily attendance, having an enrollment of at least 40 students, and charging a tuition fee. 
    State Treasurer or Treasurer means the State Treasurer of the State of Colorado. 
    Tangible personal property. 
1.  "Tangible personal property" means corporeal personal property, excluding newspapers as legally defined by C.R.S. § 24-70-102, preprinted newspaper supplements that become attached to or inserted in and distributed with such newspapers, or direct mail advertising materials that are distributed in the State by any person engaged solely and exclusively in the business of providing cooperative direct mail advertising; except that, commencing March 1, 2010, for purposes of the State sales or use tax, the term "tangible personal property" shall include direct mail advertising materials that are distributed in the State by any person engaged solely and exclusively in the business of providing cooperative direct mail advertising. 
2.  a.  "Tangible personal property," commencing July 1, 2012, shall include computer software if the computer software meets all of the following criteria: 
i.  The computer software is pre-packaged for repeated sale or license; 
ii.  The use of the computer software is governed by a tear-open non-negotiable license agreement; and 
iii.  The computer software is delivered to the customer in a tangible medium. Computer software is not delivered to the customer in a tangible medium if it is provided through an application service provider, delivered by electronic computer software delivery, or transferred by load and leave computer software delivery. 
b.  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in Subsection (B)(1) of this definition, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Application service provider or ASP means an entity that retains custody over or hosts computer software for use by third parties. Users of the computer software hosted by an ASP typically will access the computer software via the internet. The ASP may or may not own or license the computer software, but generally will own and maintain hardware and networking equipment required for the user to access the computer software. Where the ASP owns the computer software, the ASP may charge the user a license fee for the computer software or a fee for maintaining the computer software or hardware used by its customer. 
    Computer software means a set of coded instructions designed to cause a computer or automatic data processing equipment to perform a task. 
    Electronic computer software delivery means computer software transferred by remote telecommunications to the purchaser's computer, where the purchaser does not obtain possession of any tangible medium in the transaction. 
    Load and leave computer software delivery means delivery of computer software to the purchaser by use of a tangible medium where the title to or possession of the tangible medium is not transferred to the purchaser, and where the computer software is manually loaded by the vendor, or the vendor's representative, at the purchaser's location. 
    Pre-packaged for repeated sale or license means computer software that is pre-packaged for repeated sale or license in the same form to multiple users without modification, and is typically sold in a shrink-wrapped box. 
    Tangible medium means a tape, disk, compact disc, card, or comparable physical medium. 
    Tear-open non-negotiable license agreement means a license agreement contained on or in the package, which by its terms becomes effective upon opening of the package and accepting the licensing agreement. The term "tear-open non-negotiable license agreement" does not include a written license agreement or contract signed by the licensor and the licensee. 
c.  The internalized instruction code that controls the basic operations, such as arithmetic and logic, of the computer causing it to execute instructions contained in system programs is an integral part of the computer and is not normally accessible or modifiable by the user. Such internalized instruction code is considered part of the hardware and considered tangible personal property that is taxable pursuant to C.R.S. § 39-26-104(1)(a). The fact that the vendor does or does not charge separately for such code is immaterial. 
d.  If a retailer sells computer software to a State purchaser that is considered tangible personal property taxable pursuant to C.R.S. § 39-26-104(1)(a) and the State purchaser pays the retailer for a quantity of computer software licenses with the intent to distribute the computer software to any of the purchaser's locations outside of the State, the measure of State sales tax due is the total of the license fees associated only with the licenses that are actually used in the State. The State purchaser shall provide a written statement to the retailer, attesting to the amount of the license fees associated with the State and with points outside of the State. The written statement shall relieve the retailer of any liability associated with the proration. 
    Tax means either the tax payable by the purchaser of a commodity or service subject to tax, or the aggregate amount of taxes due from the vendor of such commodities or services during the period for which he is required to report his collections, as the context may require. 
    Taxpayer means any person obligated to account to the director of revenue for taxes collected or to be collected under the terms of C.R.S. § 39-26-101 et seq. 
    Wholesale sale. 
1.  "Wholesale sale" means a sale by wholesalers to retail merchants, jobbers, dealers or other wholesalers for resale and does not include a sale by wholesalers to users or consumers, not for resale; and the latter sales shall be deemed retail sales, and subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
2.  "Wholesale sale" includes sales of all pre-press preparation printing materials, as defined in C.R.S. § 39-26-102(6.7), that are used by a printer for a specific printing contract where the printed product is sold at retail to a customer accepting delivery within this State. 
3.  "Wholesale sale" includes sales of agricultural compounds and spray adjuvants to be consumed by, administered to, or otherwise used in caring for livestock and all sales of semen for agricultural or ranching purposes. 
a.  For purposes of this Subsection (3), the term "agricultural compounds" means: 
i.  Insecticides, fungicides, growth-regulating chemicals, enhancing compounds, vaccines, and hormones; 
ii.  Drugs, whether dispensed in accordance with a prescription or not, that are used for the prevention or treatment of disease or injury in livestock; 
iii.  Animal pharmaceuticals that have been approved by the food and drug administration. 
b.  For purposes of this Subsection (3), the term "spray adjuvants" means products that are used to increase the effectiveness of a pesticide. 
4.  "Wholesale sale" includes sales of pesticides that are registered by the Commissioner of Agriculture for use in the production of agricultural and livestock products pursuant to the Pesticide Act, C.R.S. Title 35, Art. 9, and offered for sale by dealers licensed to sell such pesticides pursuant to C.R.S. § 35-9-115. 
    Wholesaler means a person doing a regularly, organized wholesale or jobbing business, and known to the trade as such and selling to retail merchants, jobbers, dealers or other wholesalers, for the purpose of resale. 
B.  1.  Sales to and purchases of tangible personal property by a person engaged in the business of manufacturing, compounding for sale, profit, or use, any article, substance, or commodity, which tangible personal property enters into the processing of or becomes an ingredient or component part of the product or service which is manufactured, compounded, or furnished, and the container, label, or the furnished shipping case thereof, shall be deemed to be wholesale sales and shall be exempt from taxation under this chapter. 
2.  As used in Subsection (B)(1) of this section with regard to food products, tangible personal property enters into the processing of such products and is therefore exempt from taxation when: 
a.  It is intended that such property become an integral or constituent part of a food product which is intended to be sold ultimately at retail for human consumption; or 
b.  Such property, whether or not it becomes an integral or constituent part of a food product, is a chemical, solvent, agent, mold, skin casing, or other material; is used for the purpose of producing or inducing a chemical or physical change in a food product or is used for the purpose of placing a food product in a more marketable condition; and is directly utilized and consumed, dissipated, or destroyed, to the extent it is rendered unfit for further use, in the processing of a food product which is intended to be sold ultimately at retail for human consumption. 
C.  Sales and purchases of electricity, coal, gas, fuel oil, coke, or nuclear fuel, for use in processing, manufacturing, mining, refining, irrigation, construction, telegraph, telephone, and radio communication, street and railroad transportation services and all industrial uses, and newsprint and printers' ink for use by publishers of newspapers and commercial printers shall be deemed to be wholesale sales and shall be exempt from taxation under this chapter. 
D.  Should a dispute arise between the purchaser and seller as to whether or not any such sale is exempt from taxation hereunder, the seller shall nevertheless collect and the purchaser shall pay such tax and the seller shall thereupon issue to the purchaser a receipt or certificate, on forms prescribed by the director of revenue of the State, showing the names of the seller and purchaser, the items purchased, the date, price, amount of tax paid, and a brief statement of the claim of exemption. The purchaser thereafter may apply to said director of revenue for a refund of such taxes, and it shall then be the duty of said director of revenue to determine the question of exemption, subject to review by the courts, as hereinafter provided. It shall be Class A municipal offense for any seller to fail to collect, or purchaser to fail to pay, the tax levied by this chapter, and on sales on which an exemption is disputed. 
E.  Except as provided in C.R.S. § 39-26-713(1)(a), when right to continuous possession or use for more than three years of any article of tangible property is granted under a lease or contract and such transfer of possession would be taxable if outright sale were made, such lease or contract shall be considered the sale of such article, and the tax shall be computed and paid by the vendor upon the rentals paid. 
(Code 1972, § 3.04.020; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 8, 2001; Ord. No. 28-2017, § 1, 11-28-2017) 
Section 3.04.030. - Property and services taxed; general provisions. 
A.  There is hereby levied and there shall be collected and paid a sales tax in the amount provided in this chapter, upon the sale at retail of all tangible personal property and the furnishing of all services taxable pursuant to The Emergency Retail Sales Tax Act of 1935, set forth in C.R.S. § 39-26-101 et seq., and any amendment thereto enacted after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
B.  There is hereby levied and there shall be collected and paid a sales tax in the amount provided in this chapter, upon the sales of food, purchases of machinery or machine tools, and upon all sales and purchases of electricity, coal, wood, gas, fuel oil, or coke sold, but not for resale, for domestic and commercial consumption. 
C.  The amount subject to tax shall not include the amount of any sales or use tax imposed by C.R.S. § 39-26-101 et seq. 
D.  For the purpose of this chapter, all retail sales shall be considered consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to a destination outside of the Town or to a common carrier for delivery to a destination outside the limits of the Town. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to the State sales and use tax imposed by C.R.S. § 39-26-101 et seq., regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
E.  If a retailer has no permanent place of business in the Town, or has more than one place of business, the place at which the retail sales are consummated for the purpose of a sales tax imposed by this chapter shall be determined by the provisions of C.R.S. § 39-26-101 et seq., and by rules and regulations promulgated by the department of revenue of the State. 
(Code 1972, § 3.04.030) 
Section 3.04.040. - Exemptions from taxation. 
A.  There shall be exempt from taxation under the provisions of this chapter, all of the tangible personal property and services which are exempt under the provisions of The Emergency Retail Sales Act of 1935, as set forth in C.R.S. § 39-26-101 et seq., which exemptions are incorporated herein by this reference, except the exemption allowed by C.R.S. § 39-26-706(1), as amended, for purchases of machinery or machine tools; the exemption of sales and purchases of electricity, coal, wood, gas, fuel oil, or coke as provided in C.R.S. § 39-26-707(1)(e); and the exemption for sales of food specified in C.R.S. § 39-26-707(1)(e). 
B.  All sales of tangible personal property on which a specific ownership tax has been paid or payable shall be exempt from sales tax when such sales meet both of the following conditions: 
1.  The purchaser is a nonresident of, or has his principal place of business outside of, the Town; and 
2.  Such tangible personal property is registered or required to be registered outside the limits of the Town under the laws of the State. 
C.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the value of construction and building materials on which a use tax has previously been collected by another incorporated Town, city, or county shall be exempt from the Town sales tax if the materials are delivered by the retailer or his agent to a site within the limits of such Town, city, or county. 
(Code 1972, § 3.04.050) 
Section 3.04.050. - Amount of sales tax and schedule. 
A.  There is hereby imposed and there shall be collected and paid a sales tax equal to 41/2 percent of gross receipts, upon the sale at retail of tangible personal property and the furnishing of certain services as provided in this chapter and The Emergency Retail Sales Tax Act of 1935, set forth in C.R.S. § 39-26-101 et seq. 
B.  The imposition of the tax on the sale at retail of tangible personal property and the furnishing of certain services shall in accordance with specific schedules set forth in the rules and regulations promulgated by the department of revenue of the State. 
(Code 1972, § 3.04.060; Ord. No. 14-2016, § 1, 2-23-2016) 
Section 3.04.060. - Tax credit against payment of public improvement fees in the Eagle River Station Planned Unit Development. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, and in order to implement the provisions of the reimbursement agreement entered into by the Town of Eagle Urban Renewal Authority, the Eagle River Station Metropolitan District, and the Town of Eagle, dated March 27, 2012 (the "reimbursement agreement"), there is hereby granted to each person or entity obligated to pay, collect or remit the sales tax on the sale or provision of goods or services described in this chapter occurring within the property known as the Eagle River Station Planned Unit Development, and more particularly described in Exhibit "A" of the Development Agreement for Eagle River Station entered into by Trinity Red Eagle Development, LLC, the Town of Eagle and the Eagle River Station Metropolitan District on March 27, 2012, a tax credit in the 
amount of 2.55 percent of PIF sales on which a public improvement fee has been collected in an amount equal to or greater than 2.55 percent ("Credit PIF"), as such term is defined in the declaration of covenants imposing and implementing the Credit PIF ("PIF Covenant"). Such sales tax credit shall be granted in an amount equal to the amount of revenues generated from the imposition and collection of the Credit PIF with respect thereto, and shall attach to a particular sales transaction only to the extent that the Credit PIF revenues are received by the PIF collection agent, as described in the reimbursement agreement, for such transaction. The amount of the sales tax credit granted hereunder shall be equal to the amount of the Credit PIF revenues collected by the application and imposition of the Credit PIF at the rate of 2.55 percent of applicable PIF sales, as such term is defined in the PIF Covenant. The tax credit shall be automatic and shall take effect immediately upon the applicable retailer's (as reflected on the retailer's or vendor's periodic sales tax report) remittance to and receipt by the PIF collection agent of the Credit PIF revenues in accordance with the PIF Covenant and the reimbursement agreement. Upon receiving such sales tax credit, the retailer shall only collect and remit 1.45 percent of gross receipts upon the sale at retail of personal property and the furnishing of certain services as provided in this chapter, as and for Town sales tax, to the State Department of Revenue. The tax credit provided in this section shall be granted during the sales tax credit term as set forth in Section 7.1 of the reimbursement agreement and shall terminate at the end of such term as described therein. 
(Code 1972, § 3.04.062; Amended Ord. No. 12-2012, § 1) 
Section 3.04.066. - Levy of special sales tax on the sale of retail marijuana and retail marijuana products. 
    In addition to the regular municipal sales tax described in this chapter, there is hereby imposed and there shall be collected and paid a special sales tax on retail marijuana and retail marijuana products equal to three percent of gross receipts upon the sale at retail of retail marijuana and retail marijuana products commencing January 1, 2019. Said rate shall increase .5 percent each year thereafter so long as such rate does not exceed five percent. 
(Ord. No. 28-2017, § 2, 11-28-2017; Ord. No. 37-2018 , § 1, 11-27-2018) 
Section 3.04.067. - Collection, administration and enforcement of special sales tax on the sale of retail marijuana and retail marijuana products. 
    The collection, administration and enforcement of the special sales tax on the sale of retail marijuana and retail marijuana products imposed by Section 3.04.066 shall be performed by the Town Treasurer in the same manner as the collection, administration and enforcement of the regular sales tax except that tax returns and tax payments shall be submitted to the Town Treasurer instead of the Colorado Department of Revenue. If the retailer or vendor pays its regular sales tax on an annual basis, said special sales tax on the sale of retail marijuana and retail marijuana products shall be remitted no later than January 20 of each year. If the retailer or vendor pays its regular sales tax on a monthly basis, the special sales tax on the sale of retail marijuana and retail marijuana products shall be remitted no later than the 20th day of each month. If the retailer or vendor pays its regular sales tax on a quarterly basis, the special sales tax on the sale of retail marijuana and retail marijuana products shall be remitted no later than April 20 for the months of January through March, no later than July 20 for the months of April through June, no later than October 20 for the months of July through September, and no later than January 20 for the months of October through December of the previous year. Such sales tax revenues collected by the retailer or vendor shall be submitted with special sales tax return forms promulgated by the Town Treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 28-2017, § 3, 11-28-2017) 
Section 3.04.070. - Collection, administration and enforcement. 
A.  The collection, administration and enforcement of the sales tax imposed by this chapter shall be performed by the director of revenue of the State in the same manner as the collection, administration and enforcement of the State sales tax. Accordingly, the provisions of C.R.S. Title 29, Art. 2 and C.R.S. Title 39, Arts. 21 and 26, as amended, and all rules and regulations promulgated by the director of revenue pertaining to such collection, administration and enforcement, to the extent applicable, shall govern the collection, administration and enforcement of the sales tax imposed by this chapter. 
B.  Every retailer or vendor subject to the provisions of this chapter is entitled, as collecting agent of the Town, to withhold monthly a collection fee for his services as such agent, in the amount of 3 1/3 percent of the total amount of sales tax due from such retailer or vendor to the Town each month. Said fee shall be known as a "local vendor's expense fee." 
C.  If any retailer or vendor is delinquent in remitting said tax, other than in unusual circumstances shown to the director of revenue, he shall not be allowed to retain any amounts to cover his expense in collecting and remitting said tax. 
(Code 1972, § 3.04.065) 
Section 3.04.080. - Amendments. 
    Except as to the rate of tax herein imposed, the Board of Trustees may, by majority vote, amend, alter or change the ordinances codified herein. Such amendment, alteration or change need not be submitted to the electors of the Town for their approval; provided, however, the sales tax imposed herein shall continue in effect until repealed by the registered electors of the Town in an election held for such purpose. 
(Code 1972, § 3.04.070) 
Section 3.04.090. - Penalty. 
    Any person who knowingly violates any provision of this chapter, or fails to perform an act required by any provision of this chapter, commits a Class A municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 3.04.080; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 9, 2001) 
Section 3.04.100. - Use of sales tax revenues. 
    All revenues derived from the two percent increase in the sales tax imposed by Ordinance No. 6, series of 1981, as approved by a majority of the registered electors voting at a special election held on September 22, 1981, shall be deposited to the general fund of the Town and used for any municipal purpose. 
(Code 1972, § 3.04.090) 
CHAPTER 3.05. - USE TAX 

Section 3.05.010. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to raise revenue for capital construction and improvements purposes and provide a complimentary tax to the Town's sales tax. The taxes imposed in this chapter are on the privilege of using or consuming in the Town any construction and building materials not otherwise subject to municipal sales taxes. 
(Code 1972, § 3.05.010) 
Section 3.05.020. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, words not otherwise defined herein shall have the meanings set forth in C.R.S. § 39-26-201, as it currently exists or may hereafter be amended, and said definitions are incorporated herein by specific reference. 
(Code 1972, § 3.05.020) 
Section 3.05.030. - Use tax imposed. 
    There is hereby imposed, which shall be paid and collected, a use tax on the privilege of using or consuming within the Town construction and building materials of every kind and form purchased outside the Town at retail on or after April 8, 1998, for the purpose of use or consumption within the Town, in the amount of four percent of the retail purchase price of said construction and building materials. 
(Code 1972, § 3.05.030) 
Section 3.05.040. - Exemptions. 
    In no event shall the use tax apply to: 
A.  The storage, use or consumption of any tangible personal property, the sale of which is subject to a retail sales tax imposed by the Town; 
B.  The storage, use, or consumption of any tangible personal property purchased for resale in the Town, either in its original form or as an ingredient of a manufactured or compounded product, in the regular course of business; 
C.  The storage, use, or consumption of tangible personal property brought into the Town by a nonresident thereof for his own storage, use, or consumption while temporarily within the Town; however, this exemption does not apply to the storage, use, or consumption of tangible personal property brought into this State by a nonresident to be used in the conduct of business in this State; 
D.  The storage, use, or consumption of tangible personal property by the United States government, or the State, or its institutions, or its political subdivisions in their governmental capacities only, or by religious or charitable corporations in the conduct of their or charitable functions; 
E.  The storage, use, or consumption of tangible personal property by a person engaged in the business of manufacturing or compounding for sale, profit, or use any article, substance or commodity, which tangible personal property enters into the processing of or becomes an ingredient or component part of the product or service which is manufactured, compounded, or furnished and the container, label, or the furnished shipping case thereof; 
F.  The storage, use, or consumption of any article of tangible personal property, the sale or use of which has already been subjected to a legally imposed sales or use tax of another statutory or home rule Town, city, or city and county equal to or in excess of the use tax imposed herein. A credit shall be granted against the use tax with respect to a person's storage, use or consumption in the Town of tangible personal property purchased by him in a previous statutory or home rule Town, city, or city and county. The amount of the credit shall be equal to the tax paid by him by reason of the imposition of a sales or use tax of the previous statutory or home rule Town, city, or city and county on his purchase or use of the property. The amount of the credit shall not exceed the amount of the use tax imposed herein; 
G.  The storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property and household effects acquired outside of the Town and brought into it by a nonresident acquiring residency; 
H.  The storage, use, or consumption of any construction and building materials if a written contract for the purchase thereof was entered into prior to the effective date of the use tax imposed herein; 
I.  The storage, use, or consumption of any construction and building materials required or made necessary in the performance of any construction contract bid, let or entered into at any time prior to the effective date of the use tax imposed herein; and 
J.  The storage of construction and building materials. 
(Code 1972, § 3.05.040) 
Section 3.05.050. - Collection and administration. 
A.  The collection, administration and enforcement of the use tax imposed herein shall be performed by the Town Treasurer. The Board of Trustees is authorized to adopt all rules and regulations which may be necessary or appropriate for the collection, administration or enforcement of the use tax. 
B.  The Use Tax shall be initially paid by estimate through the payment of the tax at or prior to the time any permit is necessary for building or construction within the Town is issued. The estimated tax shall be based on the average cost figures per square foot shown in the most current Building Valuation Data Chart published bi-annually in the Building Safety Journal of the International Code Council using a 1.2 multiplier of such figures, representing the above average cost of construction and building materials in the Eagle area. No permit shall be issued by the Town Building Official to any person requesting a permit for construction within the Town until such estimated use tax has been paid. 
C.  Before a final building inspection is allowed and a certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy is issued, all use taxes due to the Town must be paid. If such person is entitled to a refund, such refund shall be paid at the time the certificate of occupancy is issued. 
D.  Upon completion of construction, the taxpayer may apply to the Town Treasurer for a refund for any overpayment of the taxes, the tax having been computed upon in estimation of value, when such application is supported by the documentation required by the regulations adopted hereunder, for construction and building materials actually used or consumed in the project for which the building permit was issued and upon which the tax was paid. 
(Code 1972, § 3.05.050; Ord. No. 17-2017, § 1, 6-27-2017) 
Section 3.05.060. - Interest and penalties for deficiencies. 
A.  If any amount of the use tax is not paid on or before the last date prescribed for payment, interest on such amount at the rate of interest established by the State Commissioner of Banking pursuant to C.R.S. § 39-12-103(3) shall be paid for the period from such last date to the date paid. The last date prescribed for payment shall be determined without regard to any extension of time for payment granted and shall be determined without regard to any notice and demand for payment issued. In the case of tax in which the last date for payment is not otherwise prescribed, the last date for payment shall be deemed to be the date the liability for the tax arises, and in no event shall be later than the date notice and demand for the tax is made by the Town Treasurer. Interest shall be paid upon notice and demand and shall be assessed, collected, and paid in the same manner as the tax to which it is applicable. 
B.  If any portion of the tax is satisfied by credit of an overpayment, then no interest shall be imposed under this section on the portion of the tax so satisfied for any period during which, if the credit had not been made, interest would have been allowed with respect to such overpayment. 
C.  If any part of a deficiency is due to negligence, but without intent to defraud, there shall be added ten percent of the total amount of the deficiency from the time the addition becomes due and payable and following ten days after written notice and demand is issued by the Town Treasurer. 
D.  If any part of a deficiency is due to the intent by the taxpayer to evade the tax, or fraud, then there shall be added 50 percent of the total amount of the deficiency, and in such case the whole amount of the tax unpaid, including the additions, shall become due and payable ten days after written notice and demand is issued by the Town Treasurer, and an additional one percent per month on said amount shall be added from the date the tax was due until paid. 
E.  If a person neglects or refuses to make a return in payment of the use tax or to pay any use tax as required, the Town Treasurer shall make an estimate, based upon such information as may be available, of the amount of taxes due for the period for which the taxpayer is delinquent and shall add thereto interest on such delinquent taxes at the rate prescribed under this section, plus the penalties prescribed under this section. 
(Code 1972, § 3.05.060) 
Section 3.05.070. - Delinquency, lien on property. 
    If any tax imposed by this chapter is not paid within ten days after it is due, the Town Treasurer shall issue a notice setting forth the name of the taxpayer, the amount of the tax, the date of the accrual thereof, and that the Town claims a first and prior lien therefor on real and personal property of the taxpayer, except as to pre-existing liens of a bona fide mortgagee, pledgee, judgment creditor, or purchaser whose right has attached prior to the filing of the notice as hereafter provided. This notice shall be on forms prepared by the Town Treasurer, and, when filed in the office of the Clerk and Recorder of any county in this State in which the taxpayer owns real or personal property, such notice shall create a lien as aforesaid on such property in that county and constitutes notice thereof. 
(Code 1972, § 3.05.070) 
Section 3.05.080. - Deficiency notice, alternative dispute resolution procedures. 
    Any taxpayer subject to the use tax pursuant to this chapter may elect to have a State hearing on the Town's final decision on a deficiency notice or claim for refund pursuant to the procedure set forth in this section. 
A.  As used in this section, the term "State hearing" means a hearing before the executive director of the department of revenue or delegate thereof, as provided in C.R.S. § 29-2-106.1. 
B.  When the Town asserts that use taxes are due in an amount greater than the amount paid by a taxpayer, the Town Treasurer shall mail a deficiency notice to the taxpayer by certified mail. The deficiency notice shall state the additional use taxes due. The deficiency notice shall contain notification, in clear and conspicuous type, that the taxpayer has the right to elect a State hearing on the deficiency pursuant to C.R.S. § 29-2-106.1. The taxpayer shall also have the right to elect a State hearing upon the Town's denial of such taxpayer's claim for a refund of use tax previously paid. 
C.  The taxpayer shall request the State hearing within 30 days after the taxpayer's exhaustion of local remedies. The taxpayer shall have no right to such hearing if he has not exhausted local remedies or if he fails to request such hearing within the time period provided for in this subsection. The term "exhaustion of local remedies" means: 
1.  The taxpayer has timely requested in writing a hearing before the Town Manager, and the Town Manager has held such hearing and issued a final decision thereon. The hearing shall be informal and no transcript, rules of evidence, or filing of briefs shall be required; but the taxpayer may elect to submit a brief, and in such case the Town may submit a brief. The Town Manager shall hold such hearing and issue the final decision thereon within 180 days after the Town's receipt of the taxpayer's written request therefor, except the Town may extend such period if the delay in holding hearing or issuing the decision thereon was occasioned by the taxpayer, but, in such event, the Town Manager shall hold such hearing and issue the decision thereon within 180 days of the taxpayer's request in writing therefor; or 
2.  The taxpayer has timely requested in writing a hearing before the Town Manager and the Town Manager has failed to hold such hearing or has failed to issue a final decision thereon within the time periods prescribed in this subsection. 
D.  If a taxpayer has exhausted his local remedies as provided in Subsection (C) of this section, the taxpayer may request a State hearing on such deficiency notice or claim for refund, and such request shall be made and such hearing shall be conducted in the same manner as set forth in C.R.S. § 29-2-106.1(3)-(7). 
E.  If the deficiency notice or claim for refund involves only the Town, in lieu of requesting State hearing, the taxpayer may appeal such deficiency notice or denial of a claim for refund to the County District Court, as provided in C.R.S. § 29-2-106.1(8), provided the taxpayer complies with the procedures set forth in Subsection (C) of this section. 
F.  If the Town reasonably finds that the collection of the use tax will be jeopardized by delay, the Town may utilize the procedures set forth in C.R.S. § 39-21-111. 
(Code 1972, § 3.05.080) 
Section 3.05.090. - Use tax, capital improvement fund. 
A.  Pursuant to C.R.S. § 29-2-111, there is hereby established a special fund of the Town to be known as the "Town of Eagle Sales and Use Tax Capital Improvement Fund." Immediately upon the receipt and collection of the revenues derived from the use tax imposed under this chapter, the revenues derived from such use tax net of the Town's cost of collection and administration shall be deposited into such capital improvement fund and shall be used solely to provide capital improvements or to pay debt service on bonds or other obligations issued for the purpose or providing capital improvements, including, without limitation, the payment of all costs associated with the construction, installation, acquisition of land, provision, design, completion, improvement, replacement and financing of capital improvements of every character and the acquisition, replacement and financing of equipment, machinery and vehicles. 
B.  Amounts deposited to the capital improvement fund shall not be available to be pledged or expended for general municipal purposes. 
(Code 1972, § 3.05.090) 
Section 3.05.100. - Amendments. 
    Except as to the use tax rate provided for in this chapter, the items taxed and exempted from the use tax hereunder, and the application of use tax revenues provided for herein, the Board of Trustees may amend, alter, delete or change the provisions of this chapter by the adoption of an amending ordinance in accordance with law, and such amendment, alteration, deletion or change need not be submitted to the electors of the Town for their approval. 
(Code 1972, § 3.05.100) 
Section 3.05.110. - Violations, penalty. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to make any false or fraudulent return or false statement on any return, or for any person to fail or refuse to pay the use tax as set forth in this chapter, or evade the payment thereof, or to aid or abet another in any attempt to evade the payment of such tax. 
B.  Any person who knowingly violates any provision of this chapter or who knowingly fails to perform an act required by any provision of this chapter commits a Class A municipal offense. 
C.  Each and every 24-hour continuation of any violation shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. 
(Code 1972, § 3.05.120; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 10, 2001) 
CHAPTER 3.06. - MARIJUANA EXCISE TAX 

Section 3.06.010. - Purpose. 
    The Board of Trustees of the Town intends that a municipal excise tax be imposed on the first sale or transfer of unprocessed retail marijuana by a retail marijuana cultivation facility to a retail marijuana store or retail marijuana products manufacturer within the Town. The purpose of this tax is to increase the revenue base for the Town to fund the enforcement of regulations on the retail marijuana industry, other costs related to enforcement of marijuana laws, education and public health programs associated with marijuana consumption, and other Town expenses. All revenues from the tax shall be deposited in the Town's general fund. The excise tax levied by this chapter was approved by a majority vote of registered Eagle electors voting at the November 7, 2017 coordinated election. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1(3.06.010), 12-12-2017) 
Section 3.06.020. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Average market rate means the amount determined by the State pursuant to C.R.S. § 39-28.8-101(1) as the average price of unprocessed retail marijuana that is sold or transferred from a retail marijuana cultivation facility to a retail marijuana store or retail marijuana products manufacturer. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1(3.06.020), 12-12-2017) 
Section 3.06.030. - Imposition and rate of tax. 
    There is hereby levied an excise tax of 21/2 percent upon the average market rate of unprocessed retail marijuana that is sold or transferred from a retail marijuana cultivation facility located in the Town to a retail marijuana store or retail marijuana products manufacturer. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1(3.06.030), 12-12-2017) 
Section 3.06.040. - Vendor liable for tax. 
    Each retail marijuana cultivation facility within the Town shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter upon every sale or transfer of unprocessed retail marijuana from the cultivation facility. The person charged with the duty to collect taxes also has the burden of proving that any transaction is not subject to the tax imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1(3.06.040), 12-12-2017) 
Section 3.06.050. - Taxes collected are held in trust. 
    All sums of money paid by any person or facility to a cultivation facility as excise taxes pursuant to this chapter are public monies that are the property of the Town. The person required to collect and remit municipal retail marijuana excise taxes shall hold such monies in trust for the sole use and benefit of the Town until paying them to the Town's Treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1(3.06.050), 12-12-2017) 
Section 3.06.060. - Licensing and reporting procedures. 
A.  Every person with the duty to collect the excise tax imposed by this chapter shall obtain an excise tax license from the Town Clerk and shall report such taxes collected on forms prescribed by the Town Clerk and remit such taxes to the Town on or before the tenth day of the month for the preceding month or months under the report. An excise tax license shall be valid so long as: 
1.  The business remains in continuous operation; and 
2.  The license is not cancelled by the licensee or revoked by the Town; and 
3.  The business holds a valid retail marijuana license issued by the State. 
The excise tax license may be cancelled or revoked by the Town as provided in this chapter. 
B.  Whenever a business entity that is required to be licensed under this chapter is sold, purchased, or transferred, so that the ownership interest of the purchaser or seller changes in any respect, the purchaser shall obtain a new excise tax license. 
C.  Every person engaged in a retail marijuana cultivation business in the Town shall keep books and records according to the standards of the Town Clerk and this chapter and subject to the Town Treasurer's right to audit as set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1(3.06.060), 12-12-2017) 
Section 3.06.070. - Collection of tax. 
A.  If the accounting methods regularly employed by the vendor in the transaction of business, or other conditions, are such that the returns aforesaid made on a calendar month basis will impose unnecessary hardship, the Town Clerk may, upon request of the vendor, accept returns at such intervals as will, in the Town Clerk's opinion, better suit the convenience of the vendor and will not jeopardize the collection of the tax; provided, however, the Town Clerk may by rule permit a vendor whose monthly tax obligation is less than $100.00 to make returns and pay taxes at intervals not greater than three months. 
B.  It shall be the duty of every vendor to maintain, keep and preserve suitable records of all sales made by the vendor and such other books or accounts as may be required by the Town Clerk in order to determine the amount of the tax of which the vendor is liable under this chapter. It shall be the duty of every such vendor to keep and preserve for a period of three years all such books, invoices and other records and the same shall be open for examination by the Town Clerk, Town Treasurer or their designees. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1(3.06.070), 12-12-2017) 
Section 3.06.080. - Audit of records. 
A.  For the purpose of ascertaining the correct amount of the excise tax due and owing to the Town, the Town Treasurer or an authorized agent, may conduct an audit by examining any relevant books, accounts and records of such person. 
B.  All books, invoices, accounts and other records shall be made available within the Town limits and be open at any time during regular business hours for examination by the Town Clerk, Town Treasurer or an authorized agent. If any taxpayer refuses to voluntarily furnish any of the foregoing information when requested, the Town Clerk may issue a subpoena to require that the taxpayer or its representative attend a hearing or produce any such books, accounts and records for examination. Any such subpoena may be enforced by the Municipal Court. 
C.  Any person claiming an exemption under the provisions of this chapter is subject to audit in the same manner as any other person engaged in the sale or transfer of unprocessed retail marijuana in the Town. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1(3.06.080), 12-12-2017) 
Section 3.06.090. - Tax overpayments and deficiencies. 
    An application for refund of tax monies paid in error or by mistake shall be made within three years after the date of payment for which the refund is claimed. If the Town Clerk determines that within three years of the due date, a vendor overpaid the excise tax upon the sale or transfer of unprocessed retail marijuana, she shall process a refund or allow a credit against a future remittance from the same taxpayer. If at any time the Town Clerk determines the amount paid is less than the amount due under this chapter, the difference together with interest shall be paid by the retail marijuana cultivation facility within ten days after receiving written notice and demand from the Town Clerk. The Town Clerk may extend that time for good cause. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1(3.06.090), 12-12-2017) 
Section 3.06.100. - Tax information confidential. 
A.  All specific information gained under the provisions of this chapter which is used to determine the tax due from a taxpayer, whether furnished by the taxpayer or obtained through audit, shall be treated by the Town and its officers, employees or legal representatives as confidential. Except as directed by judicial order or as provided in this chapter, no Town officer, employee, or legal representative shall divulge any confidential information. If directed by judicial order, the officials charged with the custody of such confidential information shall be required to provide only such information as is directly involved in the action or proceeding. Any Town officer or employee who shall knowingly divulge any information classified herein as confidential, in any manner, except in accordance with proper judicial order, or as otherwise provided in this chapter or by law, shall be guilty of a violation hereof. 
B.  The Town Clerk may furnish to officials of any other governmental entity who may be owed sales tax or excises taxes any confidential information, provided that said jurisdiction enters into an agreement with the Town to grant reciprocal privileges to the Town. 
C.  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit the delivery to a taxpayer or its duly authorized representative a copy of such confidential information relating to such taxpayer, the publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular taxpayers, or the inspection of such confidential information by an officer, employee, or legal representative of the Town. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1(3.06.100), 12-12-2017) 
Section 3.06.110. - Forms and regulations. 
    The Town Clerk is hereby authorized to prescribe forms and promulgate rules and regulations to aid in the making of returns, the ascertainment, assessment and collection of said excise tax on the sale or transfer of unprocessed retail marijuana and in particular and without limiting the general language of this chapter, to provide for: 
A.  A form of report on the sale or transfer of unprocessed retail marijuana to be supplied to all vendors; 
B.  The records which retail marijuana cultivation facilities are to keep concerning the tax imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1(3.06.110), 12-12-2017) 
Section 3.06.120. - Enforcement and penalties. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly fail to pay the tax imposed by this chapter, or to make any false or fraudulent return, or for any person to otherwise violate any provisions of this chapter. Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a municipal offense, punishable by a fine of up to $1,000.00 and one year imprisonment or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day, or portion thereof, that any violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
B.  A penalty in the amount of ten percent of the tax due or the sum of $10.00, whichever is greater, shall be imposed upon the retail marijuana cultivation facility and become due in the event the tax is not remitted by the tenth day of the month as required by this chapter, or such other date as prescribed by the Town Clerk, and 11/2 percent interest shall accrue each month on the unpaid balance. The Town Clerk is hereby authorized to waive, for good cause shown, any penalty assessed. 
C.  If any part of a deficiency is due to negligence or intentional disregard of regulations, but without intent to defraud, there shall be added ten percent of the total amount of the deficiency, and interest, from the retail marijuana cultivation facility required to file a return. If any part of the deficiency is due to fraud with the intent to evade the tax, then there shall be added 50 percent of the total amount of the deficiency together with interest and in such case, the whole amount of the unpaid tax, including the additions, shall become due and payable ten days after written notice and demand by the Town Clerk. 
D.  If any retail marijuana cultivation facility fails to make a return and pay the tax imposed by this chapter, the Town may make an estimate, based upon available information of the amount of tax due and add the penalty and interest provided above. The Town shall mail notice of such estimate, by certified mail, to the retail marijuana cultivation facility at its address as indicated in the Town records. Such estimate shall thereupon become an assessment, and such assessment shall be final and due and payable from the taxpayer to the Town Clerk ten days from the date of service of the notice or the date of mailing by certified mail; provided, however, that within the ten day period such delinquent taxpayer may petition the Town Clerk for a revision or modification of such assessment and shall, within such ten day period, furnish the Town Clerk the documents, facts and figures showing the correct amount of such taxes due and owing. 
E.  Such petition shall be in writing and the facts and figures submitted shall be submitted in writing, and shall be given by the taxpayer under penalty of perjury. Thereupon, the Town Clerk may modify such assessment in accordance with the facts submitted in order to effectuate the provisions of this chapter. Such assessment shall be considered the final order of the Town Clerk, and may be reviewed by a court of competent jurisdiction under the Rule 106(a)(4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure, provided that the taxpayer gives written notice to the Town Clerk of such intention within ten days after receipt of the final order of assessment. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1(3.06.120), 12-12-2017) 
Section 3.06.130. - Tax lien. 
A.  The tax imposed by this chapter, together with the interest and penalties herein provided and the costs of collection which may be incurred, shall be, and until paid, remain a first and prior lien superior to all other liens on all of the tangible personal property of a taxpayer within the Town and may be foreclosed by seizing under distraint warrant and selling so much thereof as may be necessary to discharge the lien. Such distraint warrant may be issued by the Town Clerk whenever the taxpayer is in default in the payment of the tax, interest, penalty or costs. Such warrant may be served and the goods subject to such lien seized by any police officer, the County Sheriff or any duly authorized employee of the Town. The property so seized may be sold by the agency seizing the same or by the Town Clerk at public auction after ten days have passed following an advertised notice in a newspaper published in the Town, in the same manner as is prescribed by law in respect to executions against property upon judgment of a Court of Record, and the remedies of garnishment shall apply. 
B.  The tax imposed by this chapter shall be, and remain, a first and prior lien superior to all other liens on the real property and appurtenant premises at which the taxable transactions occurred. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1(3.06.130), 12-12-2017) 
Section 3.06.140. - Recovery of unpaid tax. 
A.  The Town Clerk may also treat any such taxes, penalties, costs or interest due and unpaid as a debt due the Town from the taxpayer. 
B.  In case of failure to pay the taxes, or any portion thereof, or any penalty, costs or interest thereon, when due, the Town Clerk may recover at law the amount of such taxes, penalties, costs, the reasonable value of any salaried attorney's time, including legal assistant's time, or the reasonable attorney's fees, including legal assistant's fees, charged, plus interest, in any County or District Court of the county wherein the taxpayer resides or had a principal place of business (at the time the tax became due) having jurisdiction of the amount sought to be collected. 
C.  The return of the taxpayer or the assessment made by the Town Clerk shall be prima facie proof of the amount due. 
D.  Such actions may be actions in attachment, and writs of attachment may be issued to the County Sheriff, as the case may be, and in any such proceeding no bond shall be required of the Town Clerk, nor shall any Town police officer or Sheriff require of the Town Clerk an indemnifying bond for executing the writ of attachment or writ of execution upon any judgment entered in such proceedings. The Town Clerk may prosecute appeals in such cases without the necessity of providing a bond therefor. 
E.  It shall be the duty of the Town Attorney, when requested by the Town Clerk, to commence an action for the recovery of taxes due under this chapter and this remedy shall be in addition to all other existing remedies, or remedies provided in this chapter. 
F.  The Town may certify the amount of any delinquent tax, plus interest, penalties and the costs of collection, as a charge against the property at which the taxable transaction occurred to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as delinquent ad valorem taxes pursuant to C.R.S. § 31-20-105. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1(3.06.140), 12-12-2017) 
Section 3.06.150. - Status of unpaid tax in bankruptcy and receivership. 
    Whenever the business or property of a taxpayer subject to this chapter shall be placed in receivership, bankruptcy or assignment for the benefit of creditors, or seized under distraint for taxes, all taxes, penalties and interest imposed by this chapter and for which the taxpayer is in any way liable under the terms of this chapter shall be a prior and preferred lien against all the property of the taxpayer, except as to other tax liens which have attached prior to the filing of the notice, and no sheriff, receiver, assignee or other officer shall sell the property of any person subject to this chapter under process or order of any court, without first ascertaining from the Town Clerk the amount of any taxes due and payable under this chapter, and if there be any such taxes due, owing and unpaid, it shall be the duty of such officer to first pay the amount of the taxes out of the proceeds of such sale before making payment of any monies to any judgment creditor or other claimants of whatsoever kind or nature, except the costs of the proceedings and other preexisting tax liens as above provided. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1(3.06.150), 12-12-2017) 
Section 3.06.160. - Hearings, subpoenas and witness fees. 
A.  Hearings before the Town Clerk pursuant to provisions in this chapter shall be held in a manner that provides due process of law. Any subpoena issued pursuant to this chapter may be enforced by the Eagle Municipal Judge pursuant to C.R.S. § 13-10-112(2). The fees of witnesses for attendance at hearings shall be the same as the fees of witnesses before the District Court, such fees to be paid when the witness is excused from further attendance. When the witness is subpoenaed at the instance of the Town Clerk, such fees shall be paid in the same manner as other expenses under the terms of this chapter, and when a witness is subpoenaed at the instance of any party to any such proceeding, the Town Clerk may require that the cost of service of the subpoena and the fee of the witness be borne by the party at whose instance the witness is summoned. In such case, the Town Clerk, at his discretion, may require a deposit to cover the cost of such service and witness fees. A subpoena issued as aforesaid shall be served in the same manner as a subpoena issued out of a Court of Record. 
B.  The Eagle Municipal Judge, upon the application of the Town Clerk, may compel the attendance of witnesses, the production of books, papers, records or memoranda, and the giving of testimony before the Town Clerk or any duly authorized Hearing Officers, by an action for contempt, or otherwise, in the same manner as production of evidence may be compelled before the Court. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1(3.06.160), 12-12-2017) 
Section 3.06.170. - Depositions. 
    The Town Clerk or any party in an investigation or hearing before the Town Clerk may cause the deposition of witnesses residing within or without the State to be taken in the manner prescribed by law for like depositions in civil actions in courts of this State and to that end compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers, records or memoranda. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1(3.06.170), 12-12-2017) 
Section 3.06.180. - Statute of limitation. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, the taxes for any period, together with interest thereon and penalties with respect thereto, imposed by this chapter shall not be assessed, nor shall notice of lien be filed, or distraint warrant be issued, or suit for collection be instituted, or any other action to collect the same be commenced, more than three years after the date on which the tax was or is payable, nor shall any lien continue after such period, except for taxes assessed before the expiration of such three year period when the notice of lien with respect to which has been filed prior to the expiration of such period. 
B.  In case of a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade taxation, the tax, together with interest and penalties thereon, may be assessed, or proceedings for the collection of such taxes may be commenced at any time. 
C.  Before the expiration of such period of limitation, the taxpayer and the Town Clerk may agree in writing to an extension thereof, and the period so agreed on may be extended by subsequent agreements in writing. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1(3.06.180), 12-12-2017) 
Section 3.06.190. - Exemption from revenue limitation. 
    In accordance with the approval of the registered electors voting at the November 7, 2017 coordinated election, the revenues derived from the tax imposed by this chapter shall be collected and spent as a voter approved revenue change, notwithstanding any revenue or expenditure limitations contained in Article X, Section 20, of the Colorado Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1(3.06.190), 12-12-2017) 
CHAPTER 3.08. - FISCAL YEAR 

Section 3.08.010. - Established. 
    January 1, 1934, and January 1 of each and every year thereafter, is hereby fixed and established as the beginning of the fiscal year for the Town. 
(Code 1972, § 3.08.010) 
Section 3.08.020. - Purposes. 
    Computation of the levies required for Town purposes will be made more accurate, and a more complete financial plan will be presented in the budget to be prepared for the Town, for the ensuing budget year, by fixing and establishing January 1, 1934, and January 1 of each and every year thereafter as the beginning of the fiscal year for the Town. 
(Code 1972, § 3.08.020) 
Title 4 - LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Planning and zoning, C.R.S. § 31-23-101 et seq.; municipal annexation, C.R.S. § 31-12-101 et seq.; PUD Unit Development Act of 1972, C.R.S. § 24-67-101 et seq.; local government control of land use, C.R.S. § 29-20-101 et seq.; subdivision regulations, C.R.S. § 31-23-214. 

CHAPTER 4.03. - GENERAL 

Section 4.03.010. - Purpose. 
    This title is drawn in accordance with the master plan for the Town and is designed for the purpose of promoting the health, safety and welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the community, including: 
A.  Lessening congestion in the streets and reducing the waste of excessive amounts of roads. 
B.  Securing safety from fire, flood and other dangers. 
C.  Providing adequate light and air. 
D.  Protection of the tax base. 
E.  Securing economy in governmental expenditures. 
F.  Fostering industries. 
G.  Protecting both urban and non-urban development and conserving the value of property. 
H.  Preventing the overcrowding of land and avoiding undue concentration of population. 
I.  Separating incompatible uses and densities so as to avoid negative impacts of uses on each other. 
J.  Providing for a variety of housing and neighborhood types and densities and a range of housing costs. 
K.  Facilitating adequate provision of transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks and other public services and utilities, 
L.  Avoiding the effects of public nuisances such as noxious odors, fumes, air pollution, visibility impairment, noise, and potential hazards such as fire, explosion, irradiation, chemical and nuclear pollution. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.03.010, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.03.020. - Authority. 
    This title is authorized by C.R.S. (as amended) Title 24, Art. 67; Title 29, Art. 20; and Title 31, Arts. 12 and 23. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.03.020, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.03.030. - Title. 
    This title shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the "Town of Eagle Land Use and Development Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.03.030, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.03.040. - Definitions. 
    In the construction of this Title, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning was intended by the Town Board. For words not defined, dictionary definitions shall apply. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Title, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory apartment to owner-occupied single-family dwelling means an individual dwelling unit subordinate to, and contained within or adjacent to, a single-family dwelling. 
    Accessory building or structure means a detached subordinate building located on the same lot as the principal building, the use of which is incidental and subordinate to and customarily associated with the principal building or use of the lot. 
    Accessory use means a use subordinate to and customarily associated with the use of the lot. 
    Adjacent land means a piece of real property which shares any common property line or point. 
    Alley means a public right-of-way providing only secondary access to the rear of a property and not intended for general travel. 
    Bed and breakfast facility means an owner-occupied, single-family residential dwelling unit that contains no more than three guest bedrooms where overnight lodging, with or without meals, is provided for compensation. Kitchen and dining facilities serve only residents and guests and are not operated or used for any commercial activity other than that necessary for bed and breakfast purposes. 
    Board, Town Board or Town Board of Trustees means the Board of Trustees of the Town of Eagle. 
    Building means any permanent structure built for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind, not including a mobile home as defined herein, a porch, deck, fence, retaining wall or similar non-enclosed structure. 
    Building envelope means lines enclosing a horizontal space in which a building is to be constructed, which lines indicate the maximum exterior dimensions of the proposed building but which do not necessarily depict the shape of the exterior walls of the building. 
    Building height. 
A.  The maximum height allowed is 35 feet to any point on the building, except in the Broadway District (see Section 4.07.060) and as further defined in Subsection (B) of this definition. 
B.  On a flat or shed roof, any selected reference point on the roof surface that sits directly above the interior of the building must be measured from existing grade to the highest point of the roof structure. On a gable, hip, or gambrel roof, any selected reference point on the roof surface that sits directly above the interior of the building must be measured from the existing grade to the average distance between the eaves and the apex of the roof. If the selected reference point is outside of the building footprint (such as eaves and overhangs), then the height measurement is from the existing or proposed finished grade, whichever is more restrictive. "Existing grade" is defined as the natural topography that exists prior to any improvements being made. "Finished grade" means the final elevation of the surface material that adjoins the building. Parapet walls may exceed applicable zone district height limitations by four feet. Stacks, vents, cooling towers, elevator structures and similar mechanical equipment and spires, domes, cupolas, towers and similar non-inhabitable appurtenances may exceed applicable zone district height limitations by up to 30 percent. 
    Building lot means a lot which meets the applicable zone district requirements for construction of a building in the zone district, and upon which one principal building may sit. 
    Canopy means a permanent roof-like structure affording shelter or shading and constructed of a durable material such as metal, glass, rigid plastic, or canvas. 
    Child care facility means a facility for child care in a building which is maintained for the whole or part of a day for the care of seven or more children under the age of 16 years and not related to the owner, whether such facility is operated with or without compensation for such care and with or without stated education purposes. The term shall include facilities commonly known as "day care centers," "day nurseries," "nursery schools," "kindergartens," "pre-schools," "play groups," "day camps," "summer camps," "centers for mentally retarded children" and any facilities which give 24-hour care for dependent and neglected children. The term shall include those facilities for children under the age of six years with stated educational purposes operated in conjunction with a public, private, or parochial college or a private or parochial elementary school system of at least six grades. "Kindergarten" shall mean any facility providing an educational program for children only for the year preceding their entrance to the first grade, whether such facility is called a kindergarten, nursery school, pre-school, or any other name. 
    Collector or collector street means a street so designated in the Town's major street plan which is designed to facilitate movement of traffic from local streets to arterial streets. 
    Commission or Planning Commission means the Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Eagle. 
    Common open space means open areas of land or water or a combination thereof within a development designed and intended primarily for the use and enjoyment of residents, owners, employees or customers of the development. 
    Condominium unit means an individual air space unit consisting of any enclosed room(s) occupying all or part of a floor(s) in a building of one or more floors used for residential, professional, commercial, or industrial purposes, together with the interest in the common elements appurtenant to that unit. 
    County means Eagle County, Colorado. 
    Development means construction of a building(s) or structure(s) within a contiguous land area or establishment of a mobile home park or RV park by laying out mobile home sites or campsites for the purpose of sale, rent or lease. 
    Development permit means a permit issued by the Town which certifies that a proposed development has undergone and completed the required development review procedures and which confers permission to apply for a building permit. The development permit may include one or more conditions, which conditions shall apply to any future development of the land, regardless of ownership changes, unless a new development permit is obtained. 
    Dwelling means a building or portion thereof or a mobile home used for residential occupancy, not including motels, hotels, or other overnight lodging accommodations. 
    Dwelling, high density multiple-family, means one building containing three or more dwelling units, allowed as a special use at a density as set forth in Chapters 4.04 and 4.05, provided certain other conditions or standards are met, as set forth therein. 
    Dwelling, multifamily, means one building containing three or more dwelling units. 
    Dwelling, single-family, means one building containing only one dwelling unit. 
    Dwelling, two-family, means one structure containing two dwelling units sharing a common wall(s) which comprises at least ten percent of the linear measurement around the perimeter of each unit. 
    Dwelling unit means one or more rooms designed to be occupied by one family living independently of any other family and having no more than one kitchen facility, including a mobile home. 
    Easement means an ownership interest in real property entitling the holder thereof to use, but not possess, that real property. 
    Face of sign means the entire area or combination of areas of a sign on which a message is placed. 
    Family means one or more persons living together in a dwelling unit, which shall not include more than four persons unrelated by blood, marriage, or adoption. 
    Floor area means the total gross horizontal area of all floors in a building. 
    Floor area ratio means the relationship of the floor area of a building to the total lot area. 
    Frontage or property frontage means the entire length of the boundary line of any one tract of real property adjacent to a public right-of-way. 
    Gross area means the horizontal area within the exterior boundaries of the subject property, including any streets and required improvements, easements, reservations or dedications. 
    Group home means a residential facility housing a maximum of eight persons, 60 years or older; or housing eight clients or patients with physical or mental disabilities; or housing eight persons released from incarceration and under the supervision of a law enforcement agency or the criminal justice system, plus appropriate staff, for supervision and training, health care and/or counseling are provided by a public or private organization. 
    Height of sign means the vertical distance measured from ground level to the top of the sign measured at its highest point above undisturbed natural ground level. 
    High water mark means waterline at the point of high discharge with a recurrence interval of ten years. 
    Home occupation means any use for gain or compensation carried on within a dwelling in accordance with the provisions of this Title. 
    Landscaping, landscaped area, landscape materials is as defined in Chapter 4.07. 
    Licensed marijuana premises means the premises specified in an application for a license pursuant to the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code or Colorado Retail Marijuana Code that are owned or in possession of the marijuana licensee and within which the marijuana licensee is authorized to cultivate, manufacture, distribute, sell, or test medical or retail marijuana in accordance with the provisions of this Code, Colorado Medical Marijuana Code and/or Colorado Retail Marijuana Code. 
    Lodging, extended stay, means overnight sleeping accommodations which are managed with the intent of providing extended stay occupancy, generally more than three weeks, to fee-paying transients. Extended stay lodging accommodations may be leased on a daily or week to week basis only, and no transient is permitted to reside in an extended stay lodging accommodation for more than 150 days within a consecutive 12-month period. 
    Lodging, temporary, means overnight sleeping accommodations which are managed with the intent of providing short-term occupancy, generally less than three weeks, to fee-paying transients. 
    Lot means a piece, plot or parcel of land or assemblage of contiguous parcels of land as established by survey, plat or deed. 
    Lot area means the total horizontal land area within the boundaries of a lot. 
    Lot or site coverage means the portion of a lot or site covered by materials forming any unbroken surface impervious to water, including: 
A.  Buildings, decks, patios, structures; 
B.  Streets, driveways, parking lots, and other impervious materials. 
    Lot line, front, means the property line of a lot dividing said lot from the adjoining street. On a corner lot, the property owner may elect which street frontage shall be the designated front lot line for the purpose of determining the rear yard only. 
    Lot line, rear, means the property line of a lot opposite the front lot line. 
    Lot line, side, means any lot property line other than a front or rear lot line. 
    Major street plan means an advisory planning document officially adopted by resolution of the Town Board, which document classifies existing and proposed streets according to size and use. 
    Manufactured home means a single-family dwelling which is partially or entirely manufactured in a factory and designed for long-term residential or nonresidential use and transported to its occupancy site; and is not less than 24 feet in width and 36 feet in length; and is installed on an engineered permanent foundation; and has brick, wood, or cosmetically equivalent exterior siding and a pitched roof; and is certified pursuant to the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC 5401 et seq., as amended, and bears such certification label. 
    Marijuana shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 16(2)(f) of Article XVIII of the State Constitution. 
    Marijuana accessories shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 16 (2)(g) of Article XVIII of the State Constitution. 
    Marijuana licensee means any person licensed or registered pursuant to the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code and/or Colorado Retail Marijuana Code. 
    Marijuana testing facility means a public or private laboratory licensed and certified, or approved by the State marijuana enforcement division, to conduct research and analyze medical and/or retail marijuana, medical and/or retail marijuana infused products, and medical and/or retail marijuana concentrate for contaminants and potency. 
    Medical marijuana business or medical marijuana establishment means a medical marijuana center, an optional medical marijuana cultivation premises, a medical marijuana infused products manufacturer, or a medical marijuana testing facility. For the purpose of this definition, a patient that cultivates, produces, possesses or transports medical marijuana, or a primary caregiver that cultivates, produces, sells, distributes, possesses, transports, or makes available marijuana in any form to one or more patients shall not be deemed a medical marijuana business. 
    Mobile home means a structure manufactured partially or entirely in a factory, designed for long-term residential use and transported to its occupancy site, which is 12 feet or more in width, is a minimum of 600 square feet and constructed in accordance with the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 and is licensed by the State Department of Motor Vehicles as a mobile home. 
    Mobile home lot means an area of ground intended to accommodate one mobile home, the mobile home pad, a minimum of two parking spaces, a storage shed, utility connections, and open space. 
    Mobile home lot, doublewide, means a mobile home lot intended to accommodate one mobile home which has been transported and placed in two sections forming one whole and which is generally 24 feet in width. 
    Mobile home lot, singlewide, means a mobile home lot intended to accommodate a mobile home which may not exceed 16 feet in width. 
    Mobile home pad means an area of land in the mobile home space on which a mobile home and appurtenant structures directly sits. 
    Mobile home subdivision means a mobile home park which meets the requirements of Chapter 4.09 and in which individual lots are sold separately, with or without common ownership in the areas outside the mobile home spaces. Pursuant to Chapter 4.11, every mobile home subdivision shall be designed as and meet all requirements for planned unit development. 
    Outside storage means items, including, but not limited to, vehicles, excavation equipment, machinery, utility service supplies, fabrication materials, and general supplies, which are stored outside on a regular, permanent, semi-permanent, or seasonal basis and which occupies more than 1,000 square feet on any one lot. 
    Owner of record means the owner of real property within the Town as recorded by the County Clerk. 
    Parking area means the total square footage within a contiguous area provided for parking, including driveways, access ways, turnaround space, areas of landscaping, snow storage areas, and other ancillary space, in addition to actual vehicle parking spaces. 
    Phasing means a plan for construction of a development in portions over time, which time ranges shall be specified in the development permit. 
    Planned unit development means an area of land, controlled by one or more landowners, to be developed under unified control or unified plan of development for a number of dwelling units, commercial, educational, recreational, or industrial uses, or any combination of the foregoing, the plan for which does not correspond in lot size, bulk, or type of use, density, lot coverage, open space, or other restriction to the existing land use regulations. 
    Plat or subdivision plat means a map and supporting materials of certain described land, prepared in accordance with applicable regulations as an instrument for recording of real estate interests with the County Clerk and Recorder. 
    Print shop means a retail establishment that provides duplicating services using off-set printing equipment. 
    Proof of ownership means a notarized affidavit executed by fee simple title holder. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicular-type unit designed primarily as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, which either has its own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle, and which is licensed in any state as a recreational vehicle, travel trailer, camping trailer, truck camper, motor home, or similar title. 
    Retail marijuana shall have the same meaning as defined in Section 16(2)(f) of Article XVIII of the State Constitution that is cultivated, manufactured, distributed, or sold by a licensed retail marijuana establishment. 
    Retail marijuana business or retail marijuana establishment means a retail marijuana store, a retail marijuana cultivation facility, a retail marijuana products manufacturer, or a retail testing facility. 
    Retail marijuana cultivation facility shall have the same meaning as "marijuana cultivation facility" as in Section 16(2)(h) of Article XVIII of the State Constitution that is licensed pursuant to the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, C.R.S. § 44-12-101, et seq. 
    Retail marijuana products means "marijuana products" as defined in Section 16(2)(k) of Article XVIII of the State Constitution that are produced at a retail marijuana products manufacturer. 
    Retail marijuana products manufacturer shall have the same meaning as a "marijuana product manufacturing facility" as in Section 16(2)(j) of Article XVIII of the State Constitution that is licensed pursuant to the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, C.R.S. § 44-12-101, et seq. 
    Retail marijuana store shall have the same meaning as in Section 16(2)(n) of Article XVIII of the State Constitution that is licensed pursuant to the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, C.R.S. § 44-12-101, et seq. 
    Retail marijuana testing facility shall have the same meaning as a "marijuana testing facility" as in Section 16(2)(l) of Article XVIII of the State Constitution that is licensed pursuant to the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, C.R.S. § 44-12-101, et seq. 
    Self-service storage facility means a building consisting of individual, small, self-contained units that are leased or owned for the storage of business and household goods or contractor's supplies. 
    Service bay means an interior space designed for the repair of vehicles and which has unrestricted ingress and egress. 
    Service establishment means a commercial business that primarily renders personal or commercial services rather than the sale of goods as the principal use of the property, such as printing, copy, hairdressing, shoe repair, appliance repair, upholstery, roofing, plumbing and janitorial services, etc. Activities incidental to the primary service business are permitted as accessory uses. 
    Setback means the minimum dimension of a required yard. 
    Sign. 
A.  "Sign" shall include any writing, letter, word, numeral, pictorial representation, pictorial abstraction, graphic or pictorial form, emblem, symbol, trademark, object or design which conveys a recognizable meaning or identity or distinction; or any of the above which forms a structure or part of a structure or which is affixed in any fashion to any structure and which by reason of the form or color or wording or stereotyped design or other feature attracts or is designed to attract attention to the subject matter or is used as a means of identification or advertisement or announcement. 
B.  "Sign" shall not include: 
1.  Flags, not to exceed 24 square feet in size, of governments or fraternal, religious, civic, or educational organizations and institutions, except when used in connection with a commercial promotion or to advertise a commercial product, services, business, activity, condition, or person. 
2.  Placards, banners, pennants, pictures, bottles, or any other devices incorporated in a temporary window display. 
3.  Works of art which in no way identify a product or business and which are not displayed in conjunction with a commercial, for-profit, enterprise. 
4.  Temporary decorations or displays directly incidental to and customary and commonly associated with national, local or religious holiday celebrations. 
5.  Official traffic control devices and other official signs and devices of any public or governmental agency. 
    Sign area. Sign area shall be measured by determining the total area of the face of a sign within the outermost edge or border of the face. The computation of freestanding letters not attached to a surface or plane shall be made by determining the area enclosed within the smallest geometric figure needed to completely encompass all of the letters, words, insignias, or symbols. 
    Sign, flat wall, means a sign attached to or erected against a wall of a building, with the face parallel to the building wall. 
    Sign, freestanding, means a sign affixed directly to the ground or erected on a freestanding frame, mast or pole, which is affixed to the ground and not attached to any building. 
    Special review use means a use which may be allowed in a specified zone district only upon review and approval by the Planning Commission and Town Board and which may be allowed subject to certain conditions as established by the Planning Commission and Town Board. 
    Street, private, means a designated right-of-way, other than an alley, which provides primary vehicular access to adjacent property. 
    Street, public, means a dedicated public right-of-way, other than an alley, which provides primary vehicular access to adjacent property. 
    Subdivision means any parcel of land which is to be used for condominiums, apartments, or any other multiple-dwelling units, unless such land was previously subdivided and the filing accompanying such a subdivision complied with municipal regulations applicable to subdivisions of substantially the same density, or the division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or more lots, plats, sites, or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or of building development. It includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or territory subdivided. Unless one of the following is accomplished with the purpose of evading the existing provisions of this Title, "subdivision" or "subdivided land" shall not apply to any division of land: 
A.  Which is created by order of any court in this State or by operation of law, so long as the Town is notified of any such court action; 
B.  Which is created by a lien, mortgage, deed of trust, or other security instrument; 
C.  Which is created by a security or unit of interest in any investment trust regulated under the laws of this State or any other interest in an investment entity; 
D.  Which creates cemetery lots; 
E.  Which creates an interest in oil, gas, minerals or water which is severed from the surface of real property; 
F.  Which is created by the acquisition only of an interest in land in the name if a husband and wife or other persons in joint tenancy or as tenants in common; any such interest shall be deemed for the purposes of this section as only one interest; or 
G.  The dedication, conveyance or vacation of land to or from the Town for right-of-way or other public uses or purposes. 
    Town means the Town of Eagle. 
    Town Planner means the person designated by the Town Manager who is responsible for all current planning activities, including administration and enforcement of this Title 4, as well as certain long-range planning activities and community development projects. The Town Planner serves as staff person to the Eagle Planning and Zoning Commission and also performs such other duties and functions as the Board of Trustees or the Town Manager may assign from time to time. The Town Planner serves under the authority, direction and supervision of the Town Manager. The Board of Trustees may authorize the Town Manager to serve in the capacity of Town Planner, in which case such person serves under the authority, direction and supervision of the Board of Trustees. 
    Town's goals, policies and plans means those policies, goals, objectives and plans which have been formally adopted by the Planning Commission and/or Town Board, including, but not limited to, the following: the master plan approved January 22, 1985; the community beautification master plan; and the major street plan. 
    Townhouse means a unit, together with the lot appurtenant thereto, held in fee simple ownership sharing a common wall(s) with another townhouse(s) which comprises at least ten percent of the linear measurement around the perimeter of the unit. 
    Useable open space means open area of a lot designed and developed for uses, including, but not limited to, recreation, courts, gardens, parks, and landscaping, which open space may include a maximum of 20 percent of non-living materials such as walks, decks, terraces, water features and decorative rock. 
    Yard means an open space other than an interior court unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this Title. 
    Yard, front, means a yard extending the full distance of the building lot, the depth of which is measured in the least horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest wall of the principal building, such distance being known as the front yard setback. 
    Yard, rear, means a yard extending the full distance of the building lot, the depth of which is measured in the least horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the nearest wall of the principal building, such depth being known as the rear yard setback. 
    Yard, side, means a yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the distance of which is measured in the least horizontal distance between the side lot line and the nearest wall of the principal building. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.03.040, 3-5-1986; Amended 6-2-1991; Amended 11-21-1993; Amended 4-17-1997; Amended 2-13-2000; Amended 10-22-2013; Amended 1-14-2014; Amended 4-28-2015; Amended 10-27-2015; Ord. No. 26-2016, § 1, 8-23-2016; Ord. No. 08-2017, § 25, 4-11-2017; Ord. No. 36-2018 , § 1, 11-27-2018) 
Section 4.03.050. - Appeal of administrative decision. 
    Any person aggrieved by his inability to obtain a building permit or by the decision of any administrative officer or agency based upon or made in the course of the administration or enforcement of this Title may make an appeal to the Planning and Zoning Commission. Appeals to the Planning and Zoning Commission may also be made by any officer, department, Board or bureau of the Town. Such appeal shall be made within 15 days of the decision from which the appeal is made by filing with the Town Manager a written notice of appeal, specifying the grounds therefor. Such appeal shall be made in accordance with C.R.S. § 31-23-307. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.03.050, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.03.060. - Public notice. 
A.  For every public hearing required by this Title, the Town shall notify the public of the date, time and place of such hearing by: 
1.  Publication once in a newspaper published within the Town, prior to the hearing by a minimum of the number of days set forth below; and 
2.  Delivering notice by first class mail, except subdivision review which shall be by certified mail, to those landowners entitled to such notice, as set forth below; and 
3.  Posting notice at the Eagle Town Hall, 200 Broadway, Eagle, at least five days prior to the hearing. 
Review Mail Notice to Owners of Publication/Mailing Deadline Subdivision Subject land and minerals 
(and lessees), adjacent land* 15 days prior Zoning variance Adjacent land 15 days prior Special use Land within 250'* 15 days prior Rezoning, zoning amendment Land within 250'* 15 days prior PUD zoning plan Land within 250'* 15 days prior Development permit (minor) Adjacent land 15 days prior Development permit (major) Land within 250'* 15 days prior PUD amendments All property owners in PUD and property owners abutting the PUD when revisions would affect PUD boundary property 15 days prior Site-specific development plan (other than those specified above) Land with 250'* 15 days prior  
*In determining owners of adjacent land or owners of land within 250 feet, public and private rights-of-way shall not be considered. 
B.  The applicant shall be responsible for the accuracy of the list of names and addresses of owners as they appear in the records of the County Clerk and Recorder. 
C.  When a proposed amendment to the zone district regulations pertains to an entire zone district or all zone districts, notice shall be given pursuant to Subsections (A)(1) and (3) of this section. 
D.  Major activity notice. When a subdivision or commercial or industrial activity is proposed which will cover five or more acres of land, the Town shall send notice to the State Geologist and the Board of County Commissioners of the proposal prior to approval of any zoning change, development permit, subdivision or building permit application associated with such a proposed activity. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.03.060, 3-5-1986; Amended 6-2-1991; Amended 11-21-1993; Amended 4-16-1995; Ord. No. 13-2017, §§ 1, 2, 4-25-2017) 
Section 4.03.070. - Review procedures, general. 
A.  Unless otherwise provided in this Title, the Town Planner shall certify that any application or other submittal permitted by this Title is complete or incomplete within ten days following the receipt of said application or other submittal. In the event the Town Planner deems the application or other submittal to be incomplete, the Town Planner shall promptly notify the applicant in writing specifying the additional information required. 
B.  Unless otherwise provided in this Title, the Planning Commission shall review any application or other submittal, and hold a public hearing thereon, if required, no later than 45 days following certification by the Town Planner that the application or other submittal is complete. Any public hearing may be continued by the Planning Commission until its next regularly scheduled meeting, if deemed necessary. The Commission shall render its decision and/or recommendation on the application or submittal no later than 15 days following the conclusion of the public hearing or presentation by the applicant. Unless the Commission's decision or recommendation is issued in the presence of the applicant, such decision or recommendation shall be in writing and mailed to the applicant. 
C.  Unless otherwise provided in this Title, the Town Board shall review any application, submittal or appeal, and hold a public hearing thereon, if required, no later than 30 days following the issuance of a decision or recommendation of the Planning Commission. Any public hearing may be continued by the Town Board, if deemed necessary. The Town Board shall consider the recommendations of the Planning Commission, if any, and the comments, testimony and other evidence presented at the public hearing and either approve or affirm the application, other submittal, or appeal, approve or affirm the application, other submittal or appeal with conditions, or deny the application, other submittal or appeal. The Town Board shall render its decision on the application, submittal or appeal no later than 15 days following conclusion of the public hearing, or if no public hearing is required, 15 days following consideration of the submittal. Unless the Board's decision is issued in the presence of the applicant, said decision shall be in writing and mailed to the applicant. 
D.  The time limits set forth in this section may be extended by the applicant at any time. 
E.  A summary of the review procedures required by this Title is contained in appendix "M" at the end of this Title. However, an applicant should not rely solely on such summary and should consult the applicable sections of this Title and Chapter 2.20 for additional detailed information regarding review procedures, fees, public notice and hearings, and deadlines for submittal of applications and action by the reviewing authority. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.03.070, 3-5-1986; Amended 6-2-1991; Amended 4-20-1996; Amended 5-8-2007) 
Section 4.03.080. - Review fees. 
A.  [Filing fees.] Application filing fees shall be set by the Board of Trustees by resolution from time to time and shall include a portion of the cost of Town staff time and administrative costs associated with the processing of applications. The application fees shall be paid in full at the time of the filing of the application and unless paid, the application shall not be deemed to be complete. The fees paid shall not be refundable in whole or in part for applications withdrawn by an applicant without the permission of the Town Manager, or their designee. The Town Manager may refund all or a portion of the fees depending on the amount of review and processing time already incurred by the staff. 
B.  Deposits. For more complex applications, "pass through" costs may be necessary for the review and processing of applications. "Pass through" costs are required to be paid by the applicant and may include third party consultants engaged by the Town, the Town Attorney, the Town's water counsel and engineer, and staff time for planning, engineering, and public works. Deposit amounts shall be set by the Board of Trustees by resolution from time to time. 
1.  The applicant shall be billed by the Town for all "pass through" costs and any other fees incurred by the Town on a monthly basis. 
2.  In the event the Deposit amount does not fully cover the anticipated "pass through" costs, the applicant shall be responsible for the additional costs or a subsequent deposit may be required after a meeting between the applicant and staff to review anticipated costs. 
3.  The Town may withhold the recording of any subdivision final plat or development plan or the signing of any resolution or ordinance until such "pass through" fees are paid in full. In addition, any ordinance or resolution approving an application shall not become effective until such fees are paid. 
4.  Upon recording of any subdivision final plat or development plan or signing of any resolution or ordinance approving an application, any remaining deposit shall be returned to the applicant within 30 days. 
5.  For withdrawn applications, any remaining deposit shall be returned to the applicant within 60 days less any incurred "pass through" costs, as of the date of the formal withdrawal request. 
C.  Unpaid fees and penalties. All land use application fees and other costs authorized by Title 4 of this Code, and all actual review costs, including but not limited to, the costs of outside Town consultants, staff and the Town's legal fees shall constitute a lien upon any lot, land, building or premises which is the subject of a land use application until fully paid. If said fees and costs are not paid when due, the Town Treasurer may certify the amount of the same to the County Treasurer to be placed on the tax list for the current year and to be collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected, with 18 percent interest added thereto to defray the costs of collection in accordance with C.R.S. § 31-20-105. All laws of the state for the assessment and collection of general taxes, including the laws for the sale of property for taxes and redemption of the same, shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.03.080, 3-5-1986; Amended 6-2-1991; Amended 4-16-1995; Amended 8-7-2014; Amended 3-24-2015; Ord. No. 16-2018 , § 1, 8-14-2018) 
Section 4.03.090. - Applicability. 
A.  Except as otherwise specifically provided, the provisions and requirements of this Title shall become effective on the effective date of the ordinance from which this Title is derived, and shall be applicable to all developments, subdivision or uses of land commenced within the Town after said date. Any ordinance amending this Title shall become effective 30 days following publication unless otherwise specified in said ordinance and shall be applicable to all developments, subdivision or other uses of land commenced within the Town after said date. 
B.  Any development, subdivision or use of land for which an application has been filed and application fees have been paid prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this Title is derived may follow this Title as of the date such action was commenced or, at the option of the applicant, may follow this Title as amended. 
C.  Any land which has been subdivided prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this Title is derived and for which there has been no development review or other review substantially similar to the development review shall be subject to those provisions of this Title applicable to development. 
D.  Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions and requirements of this Title shall be deemed minimum requirements and stricter provisions may be imposed when the Planning Commission or Town Board find such provisions to be necessary to promote the purposes and provisions of this Title. 
E.  The number of copies of submittals required may be increased or decreased by the Town Planner as he deems necessary to promote the purposes and provisions of this Title. 
F.  Upon submittal of an application as provided in this Title, the applicant expressly accepts the time schedules for review as set forth herein and waives any right to any other time schedule for review. 
G.  If any provision of this Title conflicts with other provisions of this Code, the provisions of this Title shall control and take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.03.090, 3-5-1986; Amended 4-16-1995) 
Section 4.03.100. - Enforcement. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, reconstruct, use or alter any building or structure or to use any land in violation of this Title. Any person who violates any provision of this Title shall be deemed guilty of a Class A municipal offense. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the Town from pursuing any other remedies it may have for violation(s) of this Title. 
B.  In case any building or structure is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, or used or any land is or is proposed to be used in violation of this Title, the Town, in addition to other remedies provided by law, may institute an appropriate action to prevent, enjoin, abate, or remove the violation to prevent the occupancy of the building, structure, or land, or to prevent any illegal act or use. 
C.  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provision contained in this Title or any condition or requirement of a permit or other land use approval issued pursuant to this Title, or whenever there is reasonable cause to believe that a violation of this Title or any permit or other land use approval issued pursuant to this Title exists in any building or upon any real property within the jurisdiction of the Town, the Town Planner, or his designee, or the Town's Code Enforcement Officer may, upon presentation of proper credentials, enter such building or real property at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon him by this Code; provided that if such building or real property is unoccupied, the authorized official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or real property and request entry. If entry is refused, or the owner cannot be located, the Town Planner, his authorized designee, or the Code Enforcement Officer is expressly authorized to obtain a search warrant from the Eagle Municipal Court pursuant to Rule 241(b)(2) of the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure in order to conduct the inspection. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.03.100, 3-5-1986; Amended 6-2-1991; Amended 10-12-1993; Amended 3-16-1995; Amended 4-17-1997; Amended 11-13-2012) 
CHAPTER 4.04. - ZONING - GENERAL PROVISIONS, USES AND REQUIREMENTS 

Section 4.04.010. - Establishment of districts. 
    To carry out the purpose and provisions of this Title the incorporated area of the Town is hereby divided into the following zone districts, with the following intents: 
R Resource-To maintain and protect the natural resources and 
appropriate existing uses in the undeveloped areas of Town, including agricultural land, water, hillsides and other open spaces, which areas may be available for future development. RR Rural Residential-For rural-density single-family dwellings and 
compatible agricultural and other open space uses, including recreation. RL Residential Low Density-For low density residential uses. R1 Residential Single-Family-For single-family residential uses. RM Residential Medium Density-For medium density residential uses. RMF Residential Multi-Family-For higher density multifamily residential uses. RH Residential High Density-For higher density residential uses. MHP/PUD Mobile Home Park-For mobile home parks of two acres or larger. CBD Central Business District-For commercial uses which preserve the 
historic character of downtown Eagle and promote its economic and 
aesthetic viability. For the center of pedestrian activity and uses which contribute thereto. CL Commercial Limited-For commercial uses of limited size and impact which serve the daily or convenience needs of residents in the 
neighborhood. CG Commercial General-For commercial and tourist uses, including 
lodging, dining, and recreation facilities and compatible uses, and for heavier commercial uses, low-impact manufacturing uses, and compatible uses. I Industrial-For a wide range of industrial uses and compatible uses. PA Public Area-For any use owned and/or operated by a public entity. PUD Planned Unit Development-For large developments designed and 
reviewed as a unit so as to provide public and private design benefits, 
including larger areas of open space and a mixture of compatible uses.  
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.04.010, 3-5-1986; Amended 6-2-1991) 
Section 4.04.020. - Incorporation of map. 
    The location and boundaries of the zone districts established by this chapter are shown on the "Zone District Map" of the Town. Said zoning map, together with all data shown thereon and all amendments thereto, is by reference hereby incorporated into this chapter. The zone district map shall be identified by signature of the Mayor of the Town and shall bear the date of adoption. Changes in zone districts shall be made only upon amendment to this chapter; and any such change shall be promptly entered on the zone district map, with an entry on the map identifying the amending ordinance; or a revised or supplementary zone district map shall be drawn up, showing such changes. The official zone district map shall be located in the Town hall offices. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.04.020, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.04.030. - District boundaries. 
    Except where otherwise indicated, zone district boundaries shall follow municipal corporation limits, section lines, lot lines, centerlines of stream beds, and right-of-way centerlines or extensions thereof. In un-subdivided land or where a zone district boundary divides a lot or parcel, the location of such boundary, unless indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by scale of the zone district map. Where a zone district boundary coincides with a right-of-way line and said right-of-way is subsequently abandoned, the zone district boundary shall then follow the centerline of the former right-of-way. Land not part of public right-of-way and which is not indicated as being in any zone district shall be considered to be included in the most restrictive adjacent zone district even when such district is separated from the land in question by a public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.04.030, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.04.040. - Application of regulations. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, within the municipal boundaries of the Town: 
A.  No building or structure shall be erected and no existing building or structure shall be moved, removed, altered or extended, nor shall any land, building or structure be used for any purpose or in any manner other than as provided among the uses hereinafter listed in the district regulations for the district in which such land, building or structure is located. 
B.  No building or structure shall be erected, nor shall any existing building or structure be moved, removed, altered or extended, nor shall any open space surrounding any building or structure be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity with the lot area, lot coverage, floor area ratio, setback and height provisions hereinafter provided in the district regulations for the district in which such land, building or structure is located. 
C.  No lot area, frontage, yard or other open space or parking space provided about any building or structure for purposes of compliance with provisions of this Title shall be considered as providing lot area, frontage, yard or other open space for any other building or structure on the same lot or on any other lot. 
D.  Uses permitted by this chapter shall also be subject to provisions of other applicable town, county and state regulations except as specifically provided herein, and further, where the provisions of this chapter impose a greater restriction than required by such other regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. 
E.  In their application and interpretation, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements. Nothing herein shall impair the obligations of or interfere with private agreements in excess of the minimum requirements. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction than that imposed by existing provisions of law, contract or deed, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.04.040, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.04.050. - Zone district regulations. 
    The tables in Sections 4.04.060 through 4.04.090 indicate zone district regulations for uses allowed by right and as special uses; and requirements for minimum lot area, minimum setbacks, maximum building height, maximum lot coverage, and maximum floor area ratio. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.04.050, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.04.060. - Schedule of uses permitted in residential zone districts. 
ZONING DISTRICT RH RMF RM R1 RL RR R MHP/PUD USE Single-family dwelling P P P P P P P * Two-family dwelling P P P * S S S * Multiple-family dwelling P P P * * * * * High density, multiple-family dwelling 1 * S * * * * * * One single-family dwelling unit accessory to use-by-right * * * * * * S * Agricultural-farm/ranch * * * * * S P * Park, playground, greenbelt P P P P P P P P Bed and breakfast facility 2 * S S S S S S * Church S S S S S S * * Community building S S S S S S * S Child care facility S S S S S S * S Home occupation P P P P P P P P Public buildings S S S S S S S S School S S S S S S * S Mobile home * * * * * * * P Riding stable * * * * * S S * Utility substation S * S * * * * * Water impoundments S S S S S S S * Indoor recreation facility * S * * * * * * Golf course * * * S S S S * Outdoor recreation facility S S S S S S S S Business or professional office S S S * * * * * Recreational vehicle park * * * * * * S * Industrial extraction and processing * * * * * * S * Nursing home, group home S S S S S S S * Kennel * * * * * * S * Extraction and processing of minerals, rocks, sand, gravel, and other earth products * * * * * * S * Accessory apartment to owner-occupied single-family dwelling P P P * P P P * Retail, except mobile home and vehicle sales S S * * * * * * Service establishment, except vehicular service S S * * * * * * Restaurant S S * * * * * * Cultivation of medical marijuana by patients and caregivers 3 P P P P P P P P Cultivation of marijuana for personal use in residential units 4 P 4 P 4 P 4 P 4 P 4 P 4 P 4 P 4 KEY 1 Pursuant to Section 4.05.010(A)(3)(a). 
  
2 Pursuant to Section 4.05.010(A)(4). 
  
3 See Section 4.04.100(Q) concerning supplementary regulations and standards for the cultivation of medical marijuana by patients and primary caregivers in residential zone districts. 
  
4 See Section 4.04.100(S) concerning supplementary regulations and standards for the cultivation of marijuana for personal use in residential units in both residential and nonresidential zone districts 
  
RH = Residential High Density 

RMF = Residential Multi-Family 

RM = Residential Medium Density 

R1 = Residential Single-Family 

RL = Residential Low Density 

RR = Rural Residential 

R = Resource 

MHP/PUD = Mobile Home Park 

  
* = NOT PERMITTED USE 

P = USE BY RIGHT 

S = SPECIAL USE  
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.04.060, 3-5-1986; Amended 5-13-1986; Amended 12-27-1988; Amended 6-2-1991; Amended 8-15-1993; Amended 6-23-1994; Amended 12-6-2001; Amended 10-27-2010; Amended 10-22-2013; Amended 10-27-2015) 
Section 4.04.070. - Schedule of uses permitted in nonresidential zone districts. 
ZONING DISTRICT CBD CL CG PA I USE Retail establishment, except mobile home and vehicular services P P P * S Service establishment, except vehicular service P P P * S Restaurant P P P * * Tavern P P P * * Office P P P P * Lodging, extended stay * * S * * Lodging, temporary P P P * * Dwelling units - above street level P S * S * High density, multifamily dwelling 1 S * * * * Park, playground, greenbelt P P P P P Indoor recreation or theater S S S S * Public building, auditorium or other public assembly S S S S * Church, child care facility, school S S S P * Hospital, clinic, nursing home, group home S S S P * Commercial parking lot or garage S S S S S Vehicular and mobile home service, sales and rental S S S S S Contractor's yard * * S * S Shop for blacksmith, cabinetry, glazing, machining, off-set printing, publishing, and sheet metal S S P * P Utility substation * S S * S Water impoundment * * S S S Taxidermy shop * S S * S Dry cleaning plant S S S * S Gasoline sales S P P * S Automobile salvage yard * * * * P Manufacturing, assembly, processing, packaging or preparation of articles or merchandise * * S * P One single dwelling unit - accessory to a use permitted * * S * S Restaurant - accessory to use permitted * * * P P Office - accessory to use permitted * * * * P Veterinary clinic S S S * S Extraction and processing of minerals, rocks, sand, gravel, and other earth products * * * * S Storage of explosives * * * * S Sawmill or wood milling facility * * * * S Recreational vehicle park * * S * * Railroad transfer yard, 
Motor freight depot * * S * S Petroleum products bulk plant * * S * S Theater P P P P P Shooting range S S S S S Mobile home * * * * * Outside storage * S S S P Self service storage facility * * * * S Wholesale or distribution establishment, except mobile home and vehicular sales S S P * P Retail, except mobile home and vehicular 
Accessory to a principal permitted use P P P * P Service establishment, except vehicular service-accessory to a principal permitted use P P P * P Sexually oriented businesses * * * * S Medical marijuana business 2 * * S * S Retail marijuana cultivation facility 4 * * S * S Marijuana testing facility 5 * * S * S Cultivation of medical marijuana by patients and caregivers in non-residential units (commercial or industrial spaces) 3 * * * * P Cultivation of medical marijuana by patients and caregivers in residential dwelling units (permitted within non-residential zone districts) 3 P P P P P Retail marijuana business (excluding retail marijuana testing facilities) * * S 4 * S 4 Cultivation of marijuana for personal use in residential units P 5 P 5 P 5 P 5 P 5 Cultivation of marijuana for personal use in non-residential units or structures * * * * P 6 Medical marijuana infused products manufacturer 2 * * S * S Optional medical cultivation premises 2 * * S * S Retail marijuana store 4 * * S * S Retail marijuana products manufacturing facility 4 * * S * S KEY: 
  
1  Pursuant to Section 4.05.010.A.3.b 
  
2  Medical marijuana businesses allowed only on identified commercial general and industrial zoned properties. Please refer to attached map at the end of this section labeled Exhibit A. 
  
Refer to Section 4.04.100(P) concerning supplementary regulations and standards for medical marijuana businesses. 
  
3  See Section 4.04.100(R) concerning supplementary regulations and standards for the cultivation of medical marijuana by patients and primary caregivers in non-residential zone districts. 
  
4  Retail marijuana businesses allowed only on identified commercial general and industrial zoned properties. Refer to map at the end of this section labeled Exhibit A. 
  
Refer to Section 4.04.100(U) for supplementary regulations and standards for retail marijuana businesses. 
  
5  Marijuana testing facilities allowed only on identified commercial general and industrial zoned properties along Chambers Avenue. Refer to map at the end of this section labeled Exhibit A. 
  
Refer to Section 4.04.100(V) for supplementary regulations and standards for marijuana testing facilities. 
  
6  See Section 4.04.100(T) concerning supplementary regulations and standards for the cultivation of marijuana for personal use in non-residential units or structures in non-residential zone districts. 
  
CBD = Central Business District 
CL = Commercial Limited 
CG = Commercial General 
PA = Public Area 
I = Industrial 
  
  
* = Not Permitted Use 
P = Use By Right 
S = Special Use  
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.04.070, 3-5-1986; Ord. No. 26-2016, § 2, 8-23-2016; Amended 7-22-1986; Amended 6-2-1991; Amended 10-21-1993; Amended 4-16-1995; Amended 2-13-2000; Amended 3-8-2007; Amended 10-27-2010; Amended 11-13-2012; Amended 10-22-2013; Amended 10-27-2015; Ord. No. 28-2018 , § 4, 8-14-2018) 
Section 4.04.080. - Schedule of requirements in residential districts. 
RESIDENTIAL ZONE DISTRICTS TABLE ZD MLA MLA/DU MFY MSY MRY MBH MLC* MFA MUO/DU R 35 acres 35 acres L 25' Greater of 12.5' or1/2 building height 20' 35' C 25' A 50' RR 2 acres 2 acres L 25' Greater of 12.5' or 1/2 building height 20' 35' C 25' A 50' RL 10,000 sf 10,000 sf L 25' Greater of 12.5' or1/2 building height 20' 35' Building 30%; all other impervious 20% 60% C 25' A 50' R1 6,000 sf 6,000 sf L 25' Greater of 12.5' or1/2 building height 20' 35' Building 40%; all other impervious 20% 60% C 25' A 50' RM 6,000 sf 6,000 sf L 25' Greater of 12.5' or1/2 building height 20' 35' Building 40%; all other impervious 20% 80% C 25' A 50' RMF 6,000 sf SF 6,000 sf; MF 4,000 sf L 25' Greater of 12.5' or1/2 building height 20' 35' Building 50%; all other impervious 20% 150% C 25' A 50' RH 20,000 sf L 25' 15' 20' 35' 1,000 sf C 25' A 50' MHP* 2 acres L 25' 20' 20' 35' C 25' A 50'  
NOTES: 
    Minimum yard setback for the MHP/PUD zone district means those around the outside of the subdivision park (see Section 4.09.030(C)). 
    * MLC-maximum lot coverage. Lot or site coverage means the portion of a lot or site covered by materials forming any unbroken surface impervious to water, including buildings, decks, patios, structures; and streets, driveways, parking lots, and other impervious materials. 
KEY: 
ZD = Zone district. 
MRY = Minimum rear yard. 
MLA = Minimum lot area. 
MBH = Maximum building height. 
MLA/DU = Minimum lot area per dwelling unit. 
MLC = Maximum lot coverage. 
MFY = Minimum front yard. 
MFA = Maximum floor area. 
L = Local street. 
MUO/DU = Minimum usable open space per dwelling unit. 
C = Collector street. 
sf = Square feet. 
A = Arterial street. 
SF = Single-family. 
MSY = Minimum side yard. 
MF = Multifamily, including two-family dwelling. 
R = Resource. 
CBD = Central business district. 
RR = Rural residential. 
CL = Commercial limited. 
RL = Residential low density. 
CG = Commercial general. 
R1 = Residential single-family. 
I = Industrial. 
RM = Residential medium density. 
PA = Public area. 
RMF = Residential multi-family. 
RH = Residential high density. 
MHP = Mobile home park planned unit development. 
PUD = Planned unit development zone height/bulk/location requirements are specified in each PUD plan/control guide. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.04.080, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.04.090. - Schedule of requirements in nonresidential districts. 
NON-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS TABLE ZD MLA MLA/DU MFY MSY MRY* MBH MLC* MFA MUO/DU CBD 3,125 sf 0' 0' 25' 35' Building 80%; all other impervious 20% 240% CL 7,500 sf L 25' Greater of 12.5' or1/2 building height 25' 35' Building 50%; all other impervious 20% 100% C 25' A 50' CG 20,000 sf L 25' Greater of 12.5' or1/2 building height com-com 25' 35' Building 50%; all other impervious 30% 150% C 25' com-ind 25' A 50' com-res 75' I 20,000 sf L 25' Greater of 12.5' or1/2 building height ind-ind 25' 35' Building 50%; all other impervious 30% 150% C 25' ind-com 25' A 50' ind-res 75' PA 7,500 sf L 25' Greater of 12.5' or1/2 building height 25' 35' Building 50%; all other impervious 20% 150% C 25' A 50'  
NOTES: 
* com-com means the proposed use is commercial and the rear property line abuts a property with a commercial use, and so forth, with "com" meaning commercial, "ind" meaning industrial, and "res" meaning residential. 
* MLC-Maximum lot coverage. Lot or site coverage means the portion of a lot or site covered by materials forming any unbroken surface impervious to water, including buildings, decks, patios, structures; and streets, driveways, parking lots, and other impervious materials. 
* Rear yard setback in the Broadway District may be reduced to less than 25 feet. This situation will be reviewed on a case by case basis if enclosed garage parking is proposed and other requirements are met (refer to Section 4.07.060 for specific guidelines and standards). 
* Height limit in the Broadway District has a maximum building height limit of 42 feet (refer to Section 4.07.060 for specific guidelines and standards). 
* Building coverage may exceed the 80 percent maximum lot coverage in the Broadway District (refer to Section 4.07.060 for specific guidelines and standards). 
* In the Broadway District garage space and basement space does not count towards maximum floor area calculation (refer to Section 4.07.060 for specific guidelines and standards). 
KEY: 
ZD = Zone district. 
MRY = Minimum rear yard. 
MLA = Minimum lot area. 
MBH = Maximum building height. 
MLA/DU = Minimum lot area per dwelling unit. 
MLC = Maximum lot coverage. 
MFY = Minimum front yard. 
MFA = Maximum floor area. 
L = Local street. 
MUO/DU = Minimum usable open space per dwelling unit. 
C = Collector street. 
sf = Square feet. 
A = Arterial street. 
SF = Single-family. 
MSY = Minimum side yard. 
MF = Multifamily, including two-family dwelling. 
R = Resource. 
CBD = Central business district. 
RR = Rural residential. 
CL = Commercial limited. 
RL = Residential low density. 
CG = Commercial general. 
R1 = Residential single-family. 
I = Industrial. 
RM = Residential medium density. 
PA = Public Area. 
RMF = Residential multifamily. 
RH = Residential high density. 
MHP = Mobile home park planned unit development. 
PUD = Planned unit development zone height/bulk/location requirements are 
    specified in each PUD plan/control guide. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.04.090, 3-5-1986; Amended 6-2-1991; Amended 4-16-1995; Amended 2-13-2000; Amended 5-22-2007) 
Section 4.04.100. - Supplementary regulations and standards. 
    In addition to regulations contained elsewhere in this Title, the use of land and buildings shall be governed by the following: 
A.  Use not itemized. 
1.  When a use is proposed and no zone district specifically allows for such use, the applicant may request a determination of a zone district or districts in which the use may be allowed. The applicant shall submit a written request and a site plan drawn to scale which illustrates the particular use proposed. The site plan shall depict all improvements and structures necessary to accommodate the proposed use. Such request shall follow the procedures and public notice requirements as set forth for zoning amendments in Section 4.05.040. Following the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the Town Board may permit such request upon the finding of the following: 
a.  Such use is appropriate to the physiographic and general environmental character of the district to which it is added; 
b.  Such use does not create any more hazard to, or alteration of, the natural environment than the minimum amount normally resulting from the other uses permitted in the district to which it is added; 
c.  Such use does not create any more offensive noise, vibration, dust, heat, smoke, odor, glare, or other objectionable influences or more traffic hazards than the minimum amount normally resulting from the other uses permitted in the district to which it is added; 
d.  Such use is compatible with the uses existing and permitted in the district to which it is added; 
e.  Such use is in conformance with the goals and policies of the Town and the purposes of this Title. 
2.  When any use has been added as a use by right or special use in any district in accordance with this section, such use shall be deemed to be listed in the appropriate section of this chapter, and shall be added thereto in the published text of this chapter at the first convenient opportunity. 
B.  Temporary use. 
1.  Any use, including construction office or yard, construction housing and camper trailers, carnival, fair, tent meeting, or any use listed in this chapter, may by allowed on a temporary basis (less than 12 months), upon issuance of a temporary use permit. Such request shall follow the procedures and public notice requirements as set forth for special use review in Section 4.05.010. Such request may be allowed upon the finding by the Planning Commission and Town Board of the following: 
a.  Such use is compatible with the neighborhood proposed; 
b.  The site of the temporary use will be returned to its original condition or improved after completion of the temporary use, and adequate provision has been made therefor, subject to the approval of the Town Attorney. Such provision may include a bond or other security; 
c.  Such use is in conformance with the goals and policies of the Town. 
2.  Provided, however, if, in the determination of the Town Planner, the temporary use requested is a minor impact and meets the findings of Subsection (B)(1) of this section, the Town Planner may issue a temporary use permit. The Town Planner may issue conditions with the permit as are deemed necessary to achieve the objectives set forth above. In the event the Town Planner denies the temporary use permit requested, the applicant may file an appeal by following the procedures set forth in Chapter 2.20. The Town Board shall hear the appeal at a regular meeting within 30 days of the date of filing the appeal. The Board shall hold a public hearing at said meeting on the appeal. Public notice shall be as set forth for special use review in Section 4.05.010. 
C.  Utility transmission. Nothing in these regulations shall be construed to prohibit construction or installation of a public utility use or structure necessary for transmission of commodities or services of a utility company, through mains or distribution lines, in any zone district. Storage, maintenance facilities, substation or exchanges, and business offices shall be restricted to their appropriate zone district. Location of power transmission lines with a capacity of 69 KV or greater or pipelines for major transmission shall be subject to special use procedures as set forth in Chapter 4.05. 
D.  Water and sanitation service. All uses shall have water and sanitation service based on accepted engineering standards and approved by the Town and the State Department of Public Health and Environment. 
E.  Lot frontage. Each lot, unless otherwise approved under Chapter 4.11 shall have a minimum of 25 lineal feet of frontage on a public street, except that a maximum of 20 condominium units or 20 townhouse lots may front on a private access way at least 25 feet in width which need not meet the Town street construction regulations. All other private streets shall conform with said regulations. All private access ways and streets shall be reserved in perpetuity through private agreement and shall allow vehicular access to the unit or lot. 
F.  Buildings, mobile homes, manufactured homes. A building may be located in any zone district where buildings are permitted. A mobile home may be located only where expressly permitted by this Title. A manufactured home which is certified to meet the most current H.U.D. standards or which complies with the International Building Code for commercial buildings and the International Residential Code for residential buildings, as adopted by reference by the Town, shall be permitted in any zone district where single-family homes are allowed; provided, however, such manufactured home shall meet all other requirements pertaining to single-family homes. 
G.  Legal nonconforming uses, structures, and lots. Any use, structure, or lot in existence and lawful at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this Title is derived or any subsequent amendment hereto, which is not in conformance with the provisions of this Title or amendment, shall be considered a legal nonconforming use, structure or lot and may continue in existence, pursuant to the following: 
1.  A legal nonconforming use may be extended throughout the same building, provided no structural alteration of such building is made for the purpose of such extension. 
2.  A legal nonconforming use shall not be changed to any other use except a conforming use. 
3.  Whenever a legal nonconforming use of land or a building has been discontinued for a continuous period of one year, future use of the land or building shall be in conformance with the provisions of this Title. 
4.  A building which does not meet the setback, height or other site requirements of this chapter may be repaired, maintained, or extended, provided any such extension is in full compliance with all provisions of this chapter. 
5.  A legal nonconforming building which has been damaged or destroyed by fire or other causes may be restored to its original condition, provided such work is commenced within one year of such event and completed within 18 months of such event. Either time period may be extended upon approval in accordance with procedures for special use, as set forth in Chapter 4.05. 
6.  An individual lot which does not meet the minimum lot area requirement for the zone district in which it is located shall be considered a legal nonconforming lot, and any building situated on such lot shall be considered a legal nonconforming building, subject to the provisions of this section. Such legal nonconforming lot may be used for construction of a building allowed in the zone district, provided all other zone district regulations, including, but not limited to, setbacks, are met. 
7.  When a parcel containing a nonconforming use or structure is annexed to the Town, said use or structure shall be considered a legal nonconforming use or structure if said use or structure was permitted under county zoning regulations at the time of annexation and subject to any conditions imposed by the county prior to annexation. 
H.  Supplementary setback regulations. 
1.  Clear vision areas. 
a.  Use. Clear vision areas shall be maintained on the corners of all property at the intersection of two streets or a street and a railroad. A clear vision area shall contain no planting, fence, wall, structure, or temporary or permanent obstruction, including parking, exceeding 21/2 feet in height, measured from the top of the curb, or where no curb exists, from the established street centerline grade; except that trees exceeding this height may be located in this area, provided all branches and foliage are removed to a height of eight feet above the grade. 
b.  Measurement. A clear vision area shall consist of a triangular area, two sides of which are lot lines measured from the corner intersection of the street lot lines for a distance of 30 feet, or at an intersection including an alley, ten feet; where the lot lines have rounded corners, the lot lines shall be extended in a straight line to a point of intersection and so measured. The third side of the triangle shall be the straight line across the corner of the lot connecting the non-intersecting ends of the other two sides. 
2.  Live stream setback. 
a.  No improvement, building, structure, excavation, dumping, or backfill shall be placed, built, undertaken or approved within a 50-foot setback area measured horizontally from the high water mark of any river or live stream, except for bridges, paths for non-motorized use, irrigation structures, flood control and erosion protection devices, or fences. If necessary to protect the stream, additional width may be required. 
b.  Within such live stream setback area, underground utilities or public park structures may be allowed as a special use, following procedures set forth in Section 4.05.010, provided that the Planning Commission and Town Board find that: 
i.  There is no practical alternative location for such utilities or public park structures; and 
ii.  That adequate provision is made to ensure that all construction scars are revegetated. 
c.  In the Resource Zone District, permitted structures other than buildings shall be exempt from the live stream setback requirement. 
3.  Through and corner lots. On lots bordered on two sides by streets, whether on contiguous or opposite sides, front yard setbacks shall be required along both streets. 
4.  Duplexes, townhouses, condominiums. For purpose of setback calculations, any such building, regardless of multiple ownership, shall be considered one building occupying one lot. 
5.  Projections. Every part of a required yard shall be unobstructed from ground level to the sky except as follows: 
a.  Uncovered porches and decks not more than four feet above natural grade, slabs, patios, walks and steps may project into required yards. 
b.  Cornices, sills and ornamental architectural features may project 12 inches over a required yard. 
c.  Roof eaves may project 24 inches over a required yard. 
d.  Fire escapes and individual balconies not used as passageways project 18 inches into any required side yard or four feet into any required front or rear yard. 
6.  Fences and walls. 
a.  In any residential zone district, any fence in a required front yard, as well as any fence in a required side yard on a corner lot adjoining a public street, shall be a maximum of 42 inches in height, and any fence not in such front yard or side yard shall be a maximum of six feet in height. 
b.  In any nonresidential zone district, any fence in any front yard, whether required or not, shall be a maximum of three feet in height and shall be of such material and design as will not detract from adjacent properties, which determination shall be made by the Town Planner as part of the building permit review. Any fence in any rear yard, whether required or not, shall be a maximum of eight feet in height. 
c.  In any clear vision area, as set forth in Subsection (H)(1) of this section, any fence shall be a maximum of 21/2 feet in height. 
d.  No fence or wall shall be located so as to obstruct traffic sight distances. 
e.  Fence and wall height shall be measured vertically from undisturbed grade. 
7.  Accessory buildings. 
a.  An accessory building may be located in a required rear yard provided not more than 40 percent of the rear yard area is covered. Such building shall observe a 71/2-foot setback from the rear lot line and a 7 1/2; -foot setback from the side lot lines. 
b.  Provided, however, in the section of Town that lies within the boundaries of Grand Avenue, McIntire Street, 7th Avenue, and Church Street, accessory buildings shall observe a two-foot setback from the rear lot line and 21/2-foot setback from the side lot lines. 
I.  Supplementary height regulations; height limit exceptions. Parapet walls may exceed zone district height limitations by four feet. Stacks, vents, cooling towers, elevator structures and similar mechanical building appurtenances and spires, domes, cupolas, towers and similar non-inhabitable building appurtenances may exceed applicable zone district height limitations by up to 30 percent. 
J.  Minimum use standards. In all zone districts, except as otherwise specified herein, all uses shall be designed and operated in compliance with the following minimum standards: 
1.  All fabrication, service and repair operations shall be conducted within a building, except in the industrial zone, where such uses may be conducted outside a building if within a fence as set forth in Subsection (J)(2) of this section; 
2.  All storage of materials except merchandise displayed for retail sale shall be within a building or in the rear yard and obscured from view from surrounding properties by a fence in conformance with Subsection (H)(6) of this section; 
3.  Loading and unloading of vehicles shall be conducted on private property and not on any street or alley, except in the CBD, where it may be from a designated loading zone or alley; 
4.  No dust, noise, odor, fumes, glare or vibration shall be projected beyond the lot; 
5.  Any structure in the CBD without a side yard shall have a windowless wall on that side, with at least four hours' fire resistance, or as provided in the International Building and Fire Codes. 
K.  Home occupation standards. A home occupation shall be allowed in certain zone districts, as provided herein, provided all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  Such use is conducted entirely within a dwelling or accessory building and carried on by the inhabitants living there; 
2.  Such use is clearly incidental to and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not change the residential character thereof; 
3.  There is no exterior storage on the premises of material or equipment used as a part of the home occupation; 
4.  There is no advertising display or other indication of the home occupation on the premises other than provided for by Chapter 4.08; 
5.  There is no offensive noise, vibration, smoke, fume, dust, odor, heat or glare noticeable at or beyond the property line; 
6.  The home occupation will not adversely affect traffic flow and parking in the neighborhood; and 
7.  The home occupation provides additional off-street parking adequate to accommodate all needs created by the home occupation. 
L.  Industrial use standards. All industrial and commercial uses operating within the Town shall comply with the following standards so that such uses do not create any danger to safety in surrounding areas, do not cause water pollution and do not create offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare or other objectionable influences beyond the boundaries of the property in which such uses are located, and do not constitute a public nuisance or hazard: 
1.  Volume of sound. Every use shall be so operated that the volume of sound inherently and recurrently generated does not exceed 60 decibels with a maximum increase of five decibels permitted for a maximum of 15 minutes in any one hour at any point on any boundary line of the property on which the use is located. 
2.  Vibration. Every use shall be so operated that the ground vibration inherently and recurrently generated is not perceptible, without instruments, at any point on any boundary line of the property on which the use is located. 
3.  Smoke. Every use shall be so operated that it does not emit smoke exceeding a density of No.1 on the Ringlemann Chart. 
4.  Particulate matter. Every use shall be so operated that it does not emit particulate matter exceeding 0.2 grains per cubic foot of the flue gas at a stack temperature of 500 degree Fahrenheit. 
5.  Heat, glare, radiation and fumes. Every use shall be so operated that it does not emit an obnoxious or dangerous degree of heat, glare, radiation, or fumes beyond any boundary line of the property on which the use is located. 
6.  Storage. 
a.  The outdoor storage of flammable or combustible liquids shall conform to the requirements of Section 5704.4 of the International Fire Code, 2012 Edition. No outdoor storage of flammable or combustible liquids shall occupy any part of a front yard; 
b.  Underground storage of flammable or combustible liquids shall conform to all of the requirements of the International Fire Code, 2012 Edition; 
c.  No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a property in such form or manner that they may be transferred off the property by natural causes or forces; 
d.  All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible by or otherwise attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors in closed containers. 
7.  Water pollution. No water pollution shall be emitted by the manufacturing or other processing. In a case in which potential hazards exist, it shall be necessary to install safeguards acceptable to the County Health Officer and in compliance with the laws of the environmental protection agency, State Department of Public Health and Environment and Chapter 12.22 before operation of the facilities may begin. All percolation tests or groundwater resources tests which may be required by local or State Health Officers must be met before operation of the facilities may begin. 
M.  Outside storage standards. Items, including, but not limited to, vehicles, excavation equipment, machinery, utility service supplies, fabrication materials, and general supplies, which are stored outside on a regular, permanent, semi-permanent, or seasonal basis, and which occupy more than 1,000 square feet on any one lot, are subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Location of storage area. As a general rule, outside storage areas shall be situated in the rear yard. 
2.  Buffer. Outside storage areas in the front yard or on lots with no, or minimal, structures shall be required to provide a front street buffer as provided in Section 4.07.020(B). 
3.  Auto sales and nurseries. Auto sales and nurseries are exempt from the standards contained in this section. 
4.  Display area. Businesses that sell, rent, or lease outside storage items may create a display area in the front yard not to exceed a single area 25 feet by a length of 25 percent of the lot frontage for the purpose of displaying representative items. All other outside storage items are subject to the requirements in Subsections (M)(1) and (2) of this section. 
5.  Outside storage adjoining the I-70 right-of-way. Any outside storage areas located in the rear yards of lots adjoining the I-70 right-of-way shall create a buffer using the standards as found in Subsection (M)(2) of this section. 
N.  Accessory apartments in owner-occupied single-family dwellings. An owner or owners of a single-family dwelling in residential zone districts may construct and/or permit the occupancy of an accessory dwelling unit in such a single-family dwelling, attached to a single-family dwelling, or in an accessory building, providing that the following conditions are met: 
1.  The accessory apartment will be a complete, separate housekeeping unit that can be isolated from the original unit. 
2.  Separate outside access shall be created; provided, however, one airlock type entry may be used if separate access to the accessory apartment exists following the initial outside entry. 
3.  The owners of the residence in which the accessory unit is created shall occupy at least one of the dwelling units on the premises except for bona fide temporary absences. 
4.  The accessory apartment shall be designed so that, to the degree reasonably feasible, the appearance of the building remains that of a single-family residence. In general, new entrances shall be located on the side or the rear of the building. 
5.  Maximum lot coverage and maximum floor area ratios may not be exceeded. 
6.  Off-street parking spaces shall be provided pursuant to Section 4.07.140. 
7.  The design and size of the apartment shall conform to all other applicable standards and requirements. 
8.  The accessory unit shall not exceed 700 gross square feet, as defined by the currently adopted edition of the Uniform Building Code. 
O.  Extended stay temporary lodging facilities. All extended stay temporary lodging facilities permitted in the Commercial General (CG) Zone District shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  The operator of an extended stay temporary lodging facility shall lease the lodging units on a daily or week to week basis only. No person shall be permitted to reside in such a lodging facility for more than 150 days within a consecutive 12-month period, excepting only a resident manager that may reside on the premises. 
2.  Upon request by the Town, the owner or operator of such a lodging facility shall make available to the Town within ten business days all rental records or other business records necessary for the Town to verify that no person has in fact resided within the facility for no more than 150 days within a period of 12 consecutive months. 
3.  Prior to the issuance of a special use permit for an extended stay temporary lodging facility, the owner shall submit to the Town a schedule designating the maximum capacity of each of the units contained within the lodging facility. Each unit in the lodging facility containing a gross floor area of less than 250 square feet shall have a maximum capacity of not more than three persons, including no more than two persons over the age of 18. Units containing a gross floor area of more than 250 square feet shall have a maximum capacity of not more than four persons, including no more than two persons over the age of 18. 
4.  The owner of an extended stay temporary lodging facility shall provide at all times an adequate number of beds within each unit contained in the lodging facility for the stated capacity of each respective unit. The owner of the lodging facility shall not permit persons in excess of the stated capacity for each unit to reside in the respective units. 
5.  No pets or domestic animals of any kind, except service dogs for the disabled, shall be kept or harbored by guests within any unit of the lodging facility. 
P.  Medical marijuana businesses. 
1.  Limitation on the number of medical marijuana centers within the Town. 
a.  The number of medical marijuana centers permitted within the Town is based on population. A maximum of one medical marijuana center shall be permitted for every 5,000 people or fraction thereof. Population shall be determined by the most recent data available from the U.S. Census Bureau and the State demographer's office. 
b.  In the event more than one land use application for a medical marijuana center of the same classification are submitted to the Town in close proximity to one another, the applications comply with all the requirements of this chapter and the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, but the Town is not permitted to approve all of the applications because of the limitations set forth in this Subsection (P), the Board of Trustees shall first review for approval the application which was first submitted and determined to be complete by the Town Planner, or their designee. 
2.  Limitation on the number of optional medical marijuana cultivation premises within the Town. 
a.  The number of optional medical marijuana cultivation premises permitted within the Town is based on population. A maximum of one optional medical marijuana cultivation premises shall be permitted for every 5,000 people or fraction thereof. Population shall be determined by the most recent data available from the U.S. Census Bureau and the State demographer's office. 
b.  In the event more than one land use application for an optional medical marijuana cultivation premises of the same classification are submitted to the Town in close proximity to one another, the applications comply with all the requirements of this chapter and the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, but the Town is not permitted to approve all of the applications because of the limitations set forth in this Subsection (P), the Board of Trustees shall first review for approval the application which was first submitted and determined to be complete by the Town Planner, or their designee. 
3.  Limitation on the number of medical marijuana infused products manufacturers within the Town. 
a.  The number of medical marijuana infused products manufacturers permitted within the Town is based on population. A maximum of two medical marijuana infused products manufacturers shall be permitted for every 5,000 people or fraction thereof. Population shall be determined by the most recent data available from the U.S. Census Bureau and the State demographer's office. 
b.  In the event more than one land use application for a medical marijuana infused products manufacturer of the same classification are submitted to the Town in close proximity to one another, the applications comply with all the requirements of this chapter and the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, but the Town is not permitted to approve all of the applications because of the limitations set forth in this Subsection (P), the Board of Trustees shall first review for approval the application which was first submitted and determined to be complete by the Town Planner, or their designee. 
4.  Permitted locations. 
a.  Medical marijuana centers and optional medical marijuana cultivation premises shall only be located in the Commercial General (CG) and Industrial (I) Zone Districts and are located a minimum of 1,750 feet from the centerline of Eby Creek Road pursuant to a special use permit. Refer to map at the end of this section labeled Exhibit A. 
b.  Medical marijuana infused products manufacturer shall only be located on properties along Chambers Avenue that are within the Commercial General (CG) and Industrial (I) Zone Districts and are located a minimum of 1,750 feet from the centerline of Eby Creek Road pursuant to a special use permit. If any portion of such property is within the required minimum distance from Eby Creek Road, no medical marijuana infused products manufacturer shall be permitted on that property. Refer to map at the end of this section labeled Exhibit A. 
5.  Distance from schools, licensed child care facilities, alcohol or drug treatment facilities and college campus. All medical marijuana businesses shall be located a minimum of 1,000 feet from schools, as defined in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, licensed child care facilities, alcohol or drug treatment facilities, and the campus of a college or university. 
6.  Distance from residential zone district. All medical marijuana businesses shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from any residential zone district which shall be measured from the zone district boundary line to the subject property line. 
7.  Restrictions on mobile facilities and delivery of marijuana products. No medical marijuana business shall be located in a movable or mobile vehicle or structure and no medical marijuana products shall be delivered in the Town unless such delivery is specifically permitted by the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code. 
8.  Hours of operation. Medical marijuana businesses shall limit their hours of operation to 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight, Monday through Sunday, or as otherwise provided in the special use permit. 
9.  Operation of multiple businesses at a single location. A person may operate any medical marijuana business and any retail marijuana business permitted by this section at the same location if in full compliance with the requirements of the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code and the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code. 
10.  Specific requirements for a medical marijuana center. 
a.  Small samples of medical marijuana products offered for sale may be displayed on shelves, counters and display cases. All bulk marijuana products shall be locked within a separate vault or safe (no other items in this safe), securely fastened to a wall or floor, as approved by the Police Department. 
b.  A medical marijuana center may sell "marijuana paraphernalia," as that term is defined in Chapter 9.15, to patients only and shall be exempt from the prohibitions contained in said chapter. 
11.  Specific requirements for an optional medical marijuana cultivation premises. If co-located with an optional medical marijuana cultivation premises, the area of the proposed licensed marijuana premises utilized for cultivation shall be physically separated from the area of the premises open to the public or to patients. Walls, barriers, locks, signage and other means shall be employed to prevent the public or patients from entering the area of the licensed marijuana premises utilized for cultivation of marijuana. 
12.  No products to be visible from public places. Marijuana plants, products, accessories, and associated paraphernalia contained in any medical marijuana business shall not be visible from a public sidewalk, public street or right-of-way, or any other public place. 
13.  No beer or alcohol on premises. No fermented malt beverages and no alcohol beverages, as defined in the Colorado Beer Code and the Colorado Liquor Code, respectively, shall be kept, served or consumed on the premises of a medical marijuana business. 
14.  Storage of products. All products and accessories shall be stored completely indoors and on-site. 
15.  Consumption of marijuana prohibited. No consumption or smoking of any medical marijuana products shall be allowed or permitted on the premises or adjacent grounds of a medical marijuana business. 
16.  Storage of currency. All currency over $1,000.00 shall be stored within a separate vault or safe (no marijuana in safe), securely fastened to a wall or floor, as approved by the Police Department. 
17.  Prevention of emissions and disposal of materials. 
a.  Sufficient measures and means of preventing smoke, odors, debris, dust, fluids and other substances from exiting the business premises shall be provided at all times. In the event that any debris, dust, fluids or other substances shall exit the business premises, the property owner and operator shall be jointly and severally responsible for the full cleanup immediately. 
b.  Businesses shall properly dispose of all materials and other substances in a safe and sanitary manner in accordance with State regulations and county landfill regulations. 
c.  As applicable, medical marijuana businesses shall be equipped with ventilation systems with carbon filters sufficient in type and capacity to eliminate marijuana odors emanating from the interior to the exterior of the premises discernible by reasonable persons. The ventilation system must be inspected and approved by the Building Official. 
d.  If carbon dioxide will be used in any cultivation area, sufficient physical barriers or a negative air pressure system shall be in place to prevent carbon dioxide from moving into the ambient air, into other units in the same building or into an adjacent building in a concentration that would be harmful to any person, including persons with respiratory disease, and shall be inspected and approved by the Building Official and the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District. 
e.  All State regulations concerning ventilation systems shall be followed. 
18.  Compliance with other codes. Any medical marijuana business and the adjacent grounds of the medical marijuana business shall comply with all zoning, health, building, fire, and other codes and ordinances of the Town as shown by completed inspections and approvals by the Town Planner, Building Department, Greater Eagle Fire Protection District, and the County Health Department, if applicable. 
19.  No harm to public health, safety or welfare. The licensed marijuana premises and adjacent grounds of a medical marijuana business shall be operated in a manner that does not cause any substantial harm to the public health, safety and welfare. 
20.  Additional requirements. At the time a special use permit is granted, amended, or the Board of Trustees approves a major change to a medical marijuana business, the Board of Trustees may impose on the applicant any conditions related to the proposed use that is reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare, including, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  Additional security requirements; 
b.  Limits and requirements on parking and traffic flows; 
c.  Requirements for walls, doors, windows, locks and fences on the licensed marijuana premises and adjacent grounds; 
d.  Limits on medical marijuana products that may be sold; 
e.  Requirements and limits on ventilation and lighting; 
f.  Limits on noise inside the licensed premises or on the adjacent grounds; 
g.  Prohibitions on certain conduct in the medical marijuana business; 
h.  Limits on hours of operation that are more restrictive than prescribed by Subsection (P)(8) of this section; 
i.  A requirement that the applicant temporarily close the medical marijuana business to the public until certain changes, inspections or approvals are made; and 
j.  A limitation on the square footage of the medical marijuana business. 
21.  Penalty for violation. Any violation of the provisions of this Subsection (P) or the conditions of the special use permit granted by a medical marijuana business shall be punishable by a civil fine of up to $1,000.00. Each day that a violation is committed, exists or continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition, any violation of the provisions of this Subsection (P) or any conditions imposed by the special use permit may result in the revocation of the special use permit. 
Q.  Cultivation of medical marijuana by patients and primary caregivers in residential dwelling units. The cultivation, production, or possession of marijuana plants for medical use by a patient or primary caregiver, as such terms are defined by Article XVIII, Section 14 of the State Constitution, shall be allowed in residential dwelling units subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The cultivation, production or possession of marijuana plants shall be in full compliance with all applicable provisions of Article XVIII, Section 14 of the State Constitution, the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, C.R.S. § 1243.3-101 et seq., and the Medical Marijuana Program, C.R.S. § 251.5-106. 
2.  Marijuana plants that are cultivated, produced or possessed shall not exceed the presumptive limits of no more than two ounces of a useable form of marijuana unless otherwise permitted under Article XVIII, Section 14 of the State Constitution, and no more than six marijuana plants, with three or fewer being mature, flowering plants that are producing a useable form of marijuana shall be cultivated or permitted within a primary residence. 
3.  Such cultivation, production or possession of marijuana plants shall be limited to the following space limitations within a residential unit: 
a.  Within a single-family dwelling unit (Group R-3 as defined by the International Building Code, as adopted in Chapter 22, Section 131): a secure, defined, contiguous area not exceeding 150 square feet within the residence of the licensed patient or registered caregiver. 
b.  Within a multifamily dwelling unit (Group R-2 as defined by the International Building Code, as adopted in Chapter 22, Section 131): a secure, defined, contiguous area not exceeding 100 square feet within the residence of the licensed patient or registered caregiver. 
4.  Marijuana plants shall not be grown in the common area of a multifamily residential structure. 
5.  If a licensed patient or primary caregiver elects to cultivate quantities of marijuana in excess of the amounts permitted under Subsection (Q)(2) of this section, as permitted in Article XVIII, Section 14(4)(b) of the State Constitution, such patient must be in full compliance with the Colorado Medical Marijuana Program as provided in C.R.S. § 25-1.5-106(10) and may grow medical marijuana for personal use as a patient or as a primary caregiver for licensed patients as a use by right within the Industrial (I) Zone District only. 
6.  The cultivation of medical marijuana plants in a residential unit shall meet the requirements of all adopted Town building and safety codes. Any licensed patient or registered primary caregiver cultivating medical marijuana in a primary residential unit shall have an initial building and safety inspection conducted by the Town, shall comply with any conditions of said inspection, and shall submit to an annual building and safety code inspection thereafter. The names and locations of patients and caregivers shall not be made available to the general public in accordance with C.R.S. § 24-72-204(3)(a)(I), as contained in the Colorado Open Records Act. 
7.  The cultivation of medical marijuana plants shall not be permitted on the exterior portions of a residential lot. The cultivation, production or possession of marijuana plants in a residential unit must not be perceptible from the exterior of the residence and shall comply with the following: 
a.  Any form of signage shall be prohibited; unusual odors, smells, fragrances or other olfactory stimulants shall be prohibited; light pollution, glare, or brightness resulting from grow lamps that disturbs adjacent residents shall be prohibited; and excessive noise from ventilation fans shall be prohibited. 
b.  Marijuana plants shall be used exclusively by a licensed patient for the patient's personal use and solely to address a debilitating medical condition. 
8.  Any primary caregiver cultivating medical marijuana for licensed patients and providing said marijuana to patients for consideration such as a monetary sum shall obtain a business license from the Town pursuant to Chapter 5.02. Any primary caregiver transferring medical marijuana to a licensed patient for consideration shall also obtain a sales tax license and shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 3.04 concerning collection and payment of municipal sales tax. 
9.  Cultivation of medical marijuana in a residential unit that is not a primary residence is not permitted. 
10.  For the purposes of this Subsection (Q), the term "primary residence" means the place that a person, by custom and practice, makes his principal domicile and address to which the person intends to return, following any temporary absence, such as a vacation. Residence is evidenced by actual daily physical presence, use and occupancy of the primary residence and the use of the residential address for domestic purposes, such as, but not limited to, slumber, preparation of and partaking in meals, vehicle and voter registration, or credit, water and utility billing. A person may only have one primary residence. A primary residence shall not include accessory buildings. 
11.  For the purpose of this Subsection (Q), the term "secure area" means an area within the primary residence accessible only to the patient or primary caregiver. Secure premises shall be locked or partitioned off to prevent access by children, visitors, or anyone not licensed and authorized to possess medical marijuana. 
R.  Cultivation of medical marijuana by patients and primary caregivers in nonresidential zone districts. The cultivation, production, or possession of marijuana plants for medical use by a patient or primary caregiver, as such terms are defined by Article XVIII, Section 14 of the State Constitution, shall be allowed in nonresidential units or structures in the Industrial (I) Zone District as a permitted use as well as in permitted residential dwelling units located in the Central Business District (CBD), Commercial Limited (CL), Commercial General (CG), Public Area (PA), and Industrial (I) Zone Districts subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The cultivation, production or possession of marijuana plants shall be in full compliance with all applicable provisions of Article XVIII, Section 14 of the State Constitution, the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, C.R.S. § 12.43.3-101 et seq., and the Medical Marijuana Program, C.R.S. § 25-1.5-106. 
2.  Marijuana plants that are cultivated, produced or possessed shall not exceed the presumptive limits of no more than two ounces of a useable form of marijuana and no more than six marijuana plants, with three or fewer being mature, flowering plants that are producing a useable form of marijuana per patient, unless otherwise permitted under Article XVIII, Section 14 of the State Constitution, shall be cultivated. Within any nonresidential unit located in the Industrial (I) Zone District, a caregiver may cultivate medical marijuana for no more than five licensed patients. Two or more primary caregivers shall not join together for the purpose of cultivating medical marijuana within any nonresidential unit located in the Industrial (I) Zone District. In residential units within nonresidential zone districts, marijuana plants that are cultivated, produced or possessed shall not exceed the presumptive limits of no more than two ounces of a useable form of marijuana unless otherwise permitted under Article XVIII, Section 14 of the State Constitution, and no more than six marijuana plants, with three or fewer being mature, flowering plants that are producing a useable form of marijuana shall be cultivated or permitted. 
3.  The cultivation, production or possession of marijuana plants within a permitted residential dwelling unit shall be limited to the following space limitations within the residential unit: 
a.  Within a single-family dwelling unit (Group R-3 as defined by the International Building Code, as adopted in Chapter 22, Section 131): a secure, defined, contiguous area not exceeding 150 square feet within the residence of the licensed patient or registered caregiver. 
b.  Within a multifamily dwelling unit (Group R-2 as defined by the International Building Code, as adopted in Chapter 22, Section 131): a secure, defined, contiguous area not exceeding 100 square feet within the residence of the licensed patient or registered caregiver. 
4.  Marijuana plants shall not be grown in the common area of any commercial or industrial building. 
5.  The cultivation of medical marijuana plants in any building or unit within the Central Business District (CBD), Commercial Limited (CL), Commercial General (CG), Public Area (PA), and the Industrial (I) Zone Districts shall meet the requirements of all adopted Town building and safety codes. Any licensed patient or registered primary caregiver cultivating medical marijuana shall have an initial building and safety inspection conducted by the Town, shall comply with any conditions of said inspection, and shall submit to an annual building and safety code inspection thereafter. The names and locations of patients and caregivers shall not be made available to the general public in accordance with C.R.S. § 24-72-204(3)(a)(I), as contained in the Colorado Open Records Act. 
6.  Cultivation of medical marijuana in a residential unit that is not a primary residence is not permitted. 
7.  For the purposes of this Subsection (R), the term "primary residence" means the place that a person, by custom and practice, makes his principal domicile and address to which the person intends to return, following any temporary absence, such as a vacation. Residence is evidenced by actual daily physical presence, use and occupancy of the primary residence and the use of the residential address for domestic purposes, such as, but not limited to, slumber, preparation of and partaking in meals, vehicle and voter registration, or credit, water and utility billing. A person may only have one primary residence. A primary residence shall not include accessory buildings. 
8.  The cultivation of medical marijuana plants shall not be permitted on exterior portions of a lot. The cultivation, production or possession of marijuana plants within a building or unit located in the Central Business District (CBD), Commercial Limited (CL), Commercial General (CG), Public Area (PA), and Industrial (I) Zone Districts must not be perceptible from the exterior of the building or unit. 
9.  Any form of signage shall be prohibited; unusual odors, smells, fragrances or other olfactory stimulants shall be prohibited; light pollution, glare or brightness resulting from grow lamps that disturbs adjacent property shall be prohibited; and excessive noise from ventilation fans shall be prohibited. 
10.  Any primary caregiver cultivating medical marijuana for licensed patients and providing said marijuana to patients for consideration such as a monetary sum shall obtain a business license from the Town pursuant to Chapter 5.02. Any primary caregiver transferring medical marijuana to a licensed patient for consideration shall also obtain a sales tax license and shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 3.04 concerning the collection and payment of municipal sales taxes. 
S.  Cultivation of marijuana for personal use in residential dwelling units in both residential and nonresidential zone districts. 
1.  Purpose. This Subsection (S) is intended to apply to the growing of marijuana in residential dwelling units for personal use to the extent authorized by Article XVIII, Section 16 (3)(b) of the State Constitution. 
2.  Any person, for purposes of this Subsection (S) and consistent with Article XVIII, Section 16(3)(b) of the State Constitution, who is 21 years of age or older that is cultivating marijuana plants for his own use, may possess, grow, process or transport no more than six marijuana plants with three or fewer being mature, flowering plants, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Such possessing, growing, processing, or transporting of marijuana plants for personal use must be in full compliance with all applicable provisions of Article XVIII, Section 16 of the State Constitution. 
b.  Except as provided below, such marijuana plants shall be possessed, grown, or processed within the primary residence of the person possessing, growing or processing the marijuana plants for personal use, as defined by Subsection (S)(4) of this section. No more than six marijuana plants may be cultivated in a primary residence. If persons living in a primary residence desire to cultivate more than six marijuana plants, such persons may cultivate no more than a total of six marijuana plants per person for personal use as a permitted use in nonresidential units or structures in the Industrial (I) Zone District only. No sales, or barter of cultivated marijuana is permitted. See Subsection (T) of this section. 
c.  The possession, growing and processing of such marijuana plants must not be observable from the exterior of the primary residence, including, but not limited to: 
i.  Common visual observation, including any form of signage; 
ii.  Unusual odors, smells, fragrances, or other olfactory stimulus; 
iii.  Light pollution, glare, or brightness that disturbs others. 
d.  Marijuana plants shall not be grown or processed in the common areas of a planned community or of a multifamily or attached residential development or commercial or industrial buildings. 
e.  Such cultivation, production, growing and processing of marijuana plants shall be limited to the following space limitations within a primary residence: 
i.  Within a single-family dwelling (Group R-3 as defined by the International Building Code): a secure, defined, contiguous area not exceeding 150 square feet within the primary residence of the person possessing, growing or processing the marijuana plants for personal use. 
ii  Within a multifamily dwelling unit (Group R-2 as defined by the International Building Code) or a residential dwelling unit in a commercial or industrial building: a secure, defined, contiguous area not exceeding 100 square feet within the primary residence of the person possessing, growing, or processing the marijuana plants for personal use. 
iii.  Such possession, growing and processing of marijuana plants shall not occur in any accessory structure. 
f.  Such possession, growing and processing of marijuana plants shall meet the requirements of all adopted Town building and life/safety codes, including requirements concerning electrical systems and ventilation systems, as the same may be amended from time to time. In addition to these above-referenced codes and requirements, all marijuana plants shall be grown in mold resistive rooms with hard surfaces. Any person cultivating marijuana for personal use shall have an initial building and safety inspection conducted by the Town Building Official, shall comply with any conditions of said inspection, and shall submit to periodic building and safety code inspections thereafter. No odor shall be permitted to emanate from the premises. 
g.  Pursuant to C.R.S. § 9-7-113, the use of a compressed flammable gas as a solvent in the extraction of THC or other cannabinoids is prohibited. 
h.  The possession, growing and processing of marijuana plants shall meet the requirements of all adopted water and wastewater regulations promulgated by the Town. 
3.  Cultivation of marijuana in a residential unit that is not a primary residence is not permitted. 
4.  For the purposes of this Subsection (S), the term "primary residence" means the place that a person, by custom and practice, makes his principle domicile and address to which the person intends to return, following any temporary absence, such as a vacation. Residence is evidenced by actual daily physical presence, use and occupancy of the primary residence, and the use of the residential address for domestic purposes, such as, but not limited to, slumber, preparation of meals, package delivery, vehicle and voter registration, or credit and utility billings. A person shall have only one primary residence. A primary residence shall not include accessory buildings. 
5.  For purposes of this Subsection (S), the term "secure area" means an area within the primary residence accessible only to the person possessing, growing or processing the marijuana plants for personal use. Secure premises shall be locked or partitioned off to prevent access by children, visitors, or anyone not authorized to possess marijuana. 
T.  Cultivation of marijuana for personal use in nonresidential units or buildings in nonresidential zone districts. The cultivation, production, or possession of marijuana plants for personal use by a person 21 years of age or older, as permitted by Article XVIII, Section 16 of the State Constitution, shall be allowed in nonresidential units or buildings in the Industrial (I) Zone District as a permitted use subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The cultivation, production or possession of marijuana plants shall be in full compliance with all applicable provisions of Article XVIII, Section 16 of the State Constitution. 
2.  No more than six marijuana plants, with three or fewer being mature, flowering plants per person may be cultivated. 
3.  Marijuana plants shall not be grown in the common area of any commercial or industrial building. 
4.  The cultivation of marijuana plants in any building or unit within Industrial (I) Zone District shall meet the requirements of all adopted Town building and safety codes. In addition to these codes, these personal grow operations shall meet State standards for retail or medical marijuana grow operations. Any person cultivating marijuana for personal use shall have an initial building and safety inspection conducted by the Town, shall comply with any conditions of said inspection, and shall submit to a periodic building and safety code inspection thereafter. 
5.  All cultivation shall be located within a secure building. Grow operations in permanent or temporary greenhouses are not permitted. 
6.  No more than 36 plants may be grown in any industrial unit. 
7.  The cultivation of marijuana plants shall not be permitted on exterior portions of a lot or a building. The cultivation, production or possession of marijuana plants within a building or unit must not be perceptible from the exterior of the building or unit. 
8.  Any form of signage shall be prohibited; unusual odors, smells, fragrances or other olfactory stimulants shall be prohibited; light pollution, glare or brightness resulting from grow lamps that disturbs adjacent property shall be prohibited; and excessive noise from ventilation fans shall be prohibited. 
9.  Pursuant to C.R.S. § 9-7-113, the use of a compressed flammable gas as a solvent in the extrication of THC or other cannabinoids is prohibited. 
U.  Retail marijuana businesses. 
1.  Limitation on the number of retail marijuana stores within the Town. 
a.  The number of retail marijuana stores permitted within the Town is based on population. A maximum of one retail marijuana store shall be permitted for every 5,000 people or fraction thereof. Population shall be determined by the most recent data available from the U.S. Census Bureau and the State demographer's office. 
b.  In the event more than one land use application for a retail marijuana store of the same classification are submitted to the Town in close proximity to one another, the applications comply with all the requirements of this chapter and the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, but the Town is not permitted to approve all of the applications because of the limitations set forth in this Subsection (U), the Board of Trustees shall first review for approval the application which was first submitted and determined to be complete by the Town Planner, or their designee. 
2.  Retail marijuana cultivation facilities within the Town. 
a.  The number of retail marijuana cultivation facilities permitted within the Town is based on population. A maximum of one retail marijuana cultivation facility shall be permitted for every 5,000 people or fraction thereof. Population shall be determined by the most recent data available from the U.S. Census Bureau and the State demographer's office. 
b.  In the event more than one land use application for a retail marijuana cultivation facility of the same classification are submitted to the Town in close proximity to one another, the applications comply with all the requirements of this chapter and the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, but the Town is not permitted to approve all of the applications because of the limitations set forth in this Subsection (U), the Board of Trustees shall first review for approval the application which was first submitted and determined to be complete by the Town Planner, or their designee. 
3.  Limitation on the number of retail marijuana products manufacturing facilities within the Town. 
a.  The number of retail marijuana products manufacturing facilities permitted within the Town is based on population. A maximum of two retail marijuana products manufacturing shall be permitted for every 5,000 people or fraction thereof. Population shall be determined by the most recent data available from the U.S. Census Bureau and the State demographer's office. 
b.  In the event more than one land use application for a retail marijuana products manufacturing facility of the same classification are submitted to the Town in close proximity to one another, the applications comply with all the requirements of this chapter and the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, but the Town is not permitted to approve all of the applications because of the limitations set forth in this Subsection (U), the Board of Trustees shall first review for approval the application which was first submitted and determined to be complete by the Town Planner, or their designee. 
4.  Permitted locations. 
a.  Retail marijuana stores and retail marijuana cultivation facilities shall only be located in the Commercial General (CG) and Industrial (I) Zone Districts and are located a minimum of 1,750 feet from the centerline of Eby Creek Road pursuant to a special use permit. Refer to map at the end of this section labeled Exhibit A. 
b.  Retail marijuana products manufacturing facilities shall only be located on properties along Chambers Avenue that are within the Commercial General (CG) and Industrial (I) Zone Districts and are located a minimum of 1,750 feet from the centerline of Eby Creek Road pursuant to a special use permit. If any portion of such property is within the required minimum distance from Eby Creek Road, no retail marijuana products manufacturing facility shall be permitted on that property. refer to map at the end of this section labeled Exhibit A. 
5.  Distance from schools, licensed child care facilities, alcohol or drug treatment facilities and college campus. All retail marijuana businesses shall be located a minimum of 1,000 feet from schools, as defined in the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, licensed child care facilities, alcohol or drug treatment facilities, and the campus of a college or university. 
6.  Distance from residential zone district. All retail marijuana businesses shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from any residential zone district which shall be measured from the zone district boundary line to the subject property line. 
7.  Restrictions on mobile facilities and delivery of marijuana products. No retail marijuana business shall be located in a movable or mobile vehicle or structure and no retail marijuana products shall be delivered in the Town unless such delivery is specifically permitted by the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code. 
8.  Hours of operation. Retail marijuana stores shall limit their hours of operation to 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight, Monday through Sunday, or as otherwise provided in the special use permit. 
9.  Operation of multiple businesses at single location. A person may operate any medical marijuana business and any retail marijuana business permitted by this section at the same location if in full compliance with the requirements of the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code and the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code. 
10.  Specific requirements for a retail marijuana store. A retail marijuana store may only sell retail marijuana, retail marijuana products, marijuana accessories and non-consumable products such as apparel, and marijuana related products such as childproof packaging containers. Retail marijuana stores shall be prohibited from selling or giving away any consumable product, including, but not limited to, tobacco products or alcohol, or edible products that do not contain marijuana, including, but not limited to, sodas, candies or baked goods. 
11.  No products to be visible from public places. Marijuana plants, products, accessories, and associated paraphernalia contained in a retail marijuana business shall not be visible from a public sidewalk, public street or right-of-way, or any other public place. 
12.  No beer or alcohol on premises. No fermented malt beverages and no alcohol beverages, as defined in the Colorado Beer Code and Colorado Liquor Code, respectively, shall be kept, served or consumed on the premises of a retail marijuana business. 
13.  Consumption of marijuana prohibited. No consumption or smoking of any retail marijuana products shall be allowed or permitted on the premises or adjacent grounds of a retail marijuana business. 
14.  Storage of products. All products and accessories shall be stored completely indoors and on-site. 
15.  Prevention of emissions and disposal of materials. 
a.  Sufficient measures and means of preventing smoke, odors, debris, dust, fluids and other substances from exiting the business premises shall be provided at all times. In the event that any debris, dust, fluids or other substances shall exit the business premises, the property owner and operator shall be jointly and severally responsible for the full cleanup immediately. 
b.  Businesses shall properly dispose of all materials and other substances in a safe and sanitary manner in accordance with State regulations and county landfill regulations. 
c.  As applicable, retail marijuana businesses shall be equipped with ventilation systems with carbon filters sufficient in type and capacity to eliminate marijuana odors emanating from the interior to the exterior of the premises discernible by reasonable persons. The ventilation system must be inspected and approved by the Building Official. 
d.  If carbon dioxide will be used in any cultivation area, sufficient physical barriers or a negative air pressure system shall be in place to prevent carbon dioxide from moving into the ambient air, into other units in the same building or into an adjacent building in a concentration that would be harmful to any person, including persons with respiratory disease, and shall be inspected and approved by the Building Official and the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District. 
e.  All State regulations concerning ventilation systems shall be followed. 
16.  Compliance with other codes. Any retail marijuana business and the adjacent grounds of the retail marijuana business shall comply with all zoning, health, building, fire and other codes and ordinances of the Town as shown by completed inspections and approvals by the Town Planner, Building Department, Greater Eagle Fire Protection District, and the County Health Department, if applicable. 
17.  No harm to public health, safety or welfare. The licensed marijuana premises and adjacent grounds of a retail marijuana business shall be operated in a manner that does not cause any substantial harm to the public health, safety and welfare. 
18.  Additional requirements. At the time a special use permit is granted, amended or any time the Board of Trustees approves a major change to a retail marijuana business, the Board of Trustees may impose on the applicant any conditions related to the proposed use that is reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare, including, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  Additional security requirements; 
b.  Limits and requirements on parking and traffic flows; 
c.  Requirements for walls, doors, windows, locks and fences on the licensed marijuana premises and adjacent grounds; 
d.  Limits on retail marijuana products that may be sold; 
e.  Requirements and limits on ventilation and lighting; 
f.  Limits on noise inside the licensed premises or on the adjacent grounds; 
g.  Prohibitions on certain conduct in the retail marijuana business; 
h.  Limits on hours of operation that are more restrictive than prescribed by Subsection (U)(8) of this section; 
i.  A requirement that the applicant temporarily close the retail marijuana business to the public until certain changes, inspections or approvals are made; and 
j.  A limitation on the square footage of the retail marijuana business. 
19.  Penalty for violation. Any violation of the provisions of this Subsection (U) or the conditions of the special use permit granted by a retail marijuana business shall be punishable by a civil fine of up to $1,000.00. Each day that a violation is committed, exists or continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition, any violation of the provisions of this Subsection (U) or any conditions imposed by the special use permit may result in the revocation of the special use permit. 
V.  Marijuana testing facilities. 
1.  Limitation on the number of marijuana testing facilities within the Town. 
a.  The number of marijuana testing facilities permitted within the Town is based on population. A maximum of one marijuana testing facility shall be permitted for every 5,000 people or fraction thereof. Population shall be determined by the most recent data available from the U.S. Census Bureau and the State demographer's office. 
b.  In the event more than one land use application for a marijuana testing facility of the same classification are submitted to the Town in close proximity to one another, the applications comply with all the requirements of this chapter, the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code and the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, but the Town is not permitted to approve all of the applications because of the limitations set forth in this Subsection (V), the Board of Trustees shall first review for approval the application which was first submitted and determined to be complete by the Town Planner, or their designee. 
2.  Permitted Locations. Marijuana testing facilities shall only be located on properties along Chambers Avenue that are within the Commercial General (CG) and Industrial (I) Zone Districts and are located a minimum of 1,750 feet from the centerline of Eby Creek Road pursuant to a special use permit. If any portion of such property is within the required minimum distance from Eby Creek Road, no marijuana testing facility shall be permitted on that property. Refer to map at the end of this section labeled Exhibit A. 
3.  Distance from schools, licensed child care facilities, alcohol or drug treatment facilities and college campus. All marijuana testing facilities shall be located a minimum of 1,000 feet from schools, as defined in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code and the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, licensed child care facilities, alcohol or drug treatment facilities, and the campus of a college or university. 
4.  Distance from residential zone district. All marijuana testing facilities shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from any residential zone district which shall be measured from the zone district boundary line to the subject property line. 
5.  Restrictions on mobile facilities and delivery of marijuana products. No marijuana testing facility shall be located in a movable or mobile vehicle or structure and no marijuana products shall be delivered in the Town unless such delivery is specifically permitted by the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code or the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code. 
6.  Hours of operation. Marijuana testing facilities shall limit their hours of operation to 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight, Monday through Sunday, or as otherwise provided in the special use permit. 
7.  Operation of multiple businesses at single location. A person may operate any medical marijuana business and any retail marijuana business permitted by this section at the same location if in full compliance with the requirements of the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code and the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code. 
8.  No products to be visible from public places. Marijuana plants, products, accessories, and associated paraphernalia contained in a marijuana testing facility shall not be visible from a public sidewalk, public street or right-of-way, or any other public place. 
9.  No beer or alcohol on premises. No fermented malt beverages and no alcohol beverages, as defined in the Colorado Beer Code and Colorado Liquor Code, respectively, shall be kept, served or consumed on the premises of a marijuana testing facility. 
10.  Consumption of marijuana prohibited. No consumption or smoking of any marijuana products shall be allowed or permitted on the premises or adjacent grounds of a marijuana testing facility. 
11.  Storage of products. All products and accessories shall be stored completely indoors and on-site. 
12.  Prevention of emissions and disposal of materials. 
a.  Sufficient measures and means of preventing smoke, odors, debris, dust, fluids and other substances from exiting the business premises shall be provided at all times. In the event that any debris, dust, fluids or other substances shall exit the business premises, the property owner and operator shall be jointly and severally responsible for the full cleanup immediately. 
b.  Testing facilities shall properly dispose of all materials and other substances in a safe and sanitary manner in accordance with State regulations and county landfill regulations. 
c.  As applicable, marijuana testing facilities shall be equipped with ventilation systems with carbon filters sufficient in type and capacity to eliminate marijuana odors emanating from the interior to the exterior of the premises discernible by reasonable persons. The ventilation system must be inspected and approved by the Building Official. 
d.  All State regulations concerning ventilation systems shall be followed. 
13.  Compliance with other codes. Any marijuana testing facility and the adjacent grounds of the marijuana testing facility shall comply with all zoning, health, building, fire and other codes and ordinances of the Town as shown by completed inspections and approvals by the Town Planner, Building Department, Greater Eagle Fire Protection District, and the County Health Department, if applicable. 
14.  No harm to public health, safety or welfare. The licensed marijuana premises and adjacent grounds of a marijuana testing facility shall be operated in a manner that does not cause any substantial harm to the public health, safety and welfare. 
15.  Additional requirements. At the time a special use permit is granted, amended or any time the Board of Trustees approves a major change to a marijuana testing facility, the Board of Trustees may impose on the applicant any conditions related to the proposed use that is reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare, including, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  Additional security requirements; 
b.  Limits and requirements on parking and traffic flows; 
c.  Requirements for walls, doors, windows, locks and fences on the licensed marijuana premises and adjacent grounds; 
d.  Requirements and limits on ventilation and lighting; 
e.  Limits on noise inside the licensed premises or on the adjacent grounds; 
f.  Prohibitions on certain conduct in the marijuana testing facility; 
g.  Limits on hours of operation that are more restrictive than prescribed by Subsection (V)(6) of this section; 
h.  A requirement that the applicant temporarily close the marijuana testing facility to the public until certain changes, inspections or approvals are made; and 
i.  A limitation on the square footage of the marijuana testing facility. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.04.100, 3-5-1986; Ord. No. 26-2016, §§ 3-6, 8-23-2016; Amended 10-22-2013; Ord. No. 28-2018 , §§ 1-3, 8-14-2018) 
Exhibit A 
Area Where Medical Marijuana Businesses, 
Retail Marijuana Businesses, and 
Marijuana Testing Facilities are Permitted 

(Ord. No. 28-2018 , § 3, 8-14-2018) 

Section 4.04.110. - Inclusionary residential requirements for local employee residency. 
A.  Purpose. 
1.  The purpose of this section is to mitigate the impact of market rate housing construction on the limited supply of available land suitable for housing, and to increase the supply of housing that is affordable to a broad range of persons who live and/or work in the Town. In recent years, the cost of housing has increased at a rate much faster than the increases in the earnings of low to moderate income households. This section will prevent the Town's land use regulations applicable to residential development from having the effect of excluding housing that meets the needs of all economic groups within Eagle. 
2.  This section requires new residential development to provide at least ten percent of the housing that it produces to be affordable to lower and moderate income households as further defined in the local employee residency requirements and guidelines. Local employee residences shall be obtainable by persons having lower and median incomes, paying not more than 33 percent of their household income for mortgage principal and interest payments, insurance, and property taxes, but excluding homeowners' association assessments. Local employee residences should be disbursed throughout the community and, when possible, integrated into the existing community fabric. 
3.  The Town recognizes that affordable housing is a valuable community resource that needs to remain available not only for current residents and employees, but also for those who may come to the area in the future. For this reason, deed restrictions or other methods that assure that prices remain affordable over time are necessary. 
B.  Definitions. The words, terms, phrases and clauses used in this section shall have the meaning assigned in this subsection. Any words, terms, phrases and clauses not defined herein shall have the meaning as defined in other parts of this Code. Any words, terms or phrases not defined in this Code shall have the meaning assigned in Webster's Third New International Dictionary, 1993, unabridged. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Area median income means median family income estimates and program income limits compiled and released annually by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. Such figures shall be utilized by the Town in the establishment of initial maximum sales proceeds for local employee residences. 
    Development means the division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any structure; any excavation or other land disturbance; or any use or extension of use that alters the character of the property. 
    Dwelling means a building or portion thereof or a mobile home used for residential occupancy, not including motels, hotels, or other overnight lodging accommodations. 
    Dwelling, two-family, means one building on one lot designed to be occupied by two families living independently of each other. 
    Local employee residence means a residential lot or separate dwelling unit that is deed restricted in accordance with the Town's local employee residency requirements and guidelines, and in accordance with a deed restriction approved by the Board of Trustees or its designee. 
    Local employee residency requirements and guidelines means the requirements and guidelines adopted by resolution of the Board of Trustees, from time to time, which may include, but shall not be limited to, standards concerning the procedure for qualifying to own or rent local employee residences; the requirements (e.g., residency) for qualifying to own or rent local employee residences; forms of approved deed restrictions; limitations on appreciation of sale prices of local resident housing; procedures for sale of local employee residences; priorities for persons bidding to purchase local employee residences; occupancy requirements; size, rental, and sales price limitations; maximum sales and rental rate increases; standards for the number of residents per dwelling unit; quality of construction requirements for new local employee residences; and possible incentives for the construction of local employee residences. The local employee residency requirements and guidelines, and any subsequent amendments thereto, shall be adopted following a duly noticed public hearing at which such guidelines are considered. 
C.  Applicability. Local employee residences shall be required as a condition of approval for all residential development including residential annexations, residential planned unit developments (PUDs) (Chapter 4.11), residential subdivisions (Chapter 4.12), and multifamily residential development permits (Chapter 4.06), as well as special use permits for high density multifamily dwellings in the Residential Multi-Family (RMF) and Central Business District (CBD) Zone Districts (Section 4.05.010). 
D.  Exemptions. The following development is exempt from the requirements of this section: 
1.  Development of local employee residences. 
2.  Proposed residential development of less than ten units or lots to be located on one or more contiguous parcels of land held under the same or substantially the same ownership. 
3.  Development which is exempt by virtue of a vested property right pursuant to a site-specific development plan as defined and established in accordance with C.R.S. § 24-68-103 and Chapter 4.17 prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, or which is otherwise specifically exempt pursuant to an ordinance of the Town. 
E.  Residential development requirements. 
1.  Number of local employee residences required. All residential annexations, new residential subdivisions, new planned unit developments containing residential units, development permits for new multifamily residential developments and special use permits for high density multifamily dwellings, approved after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, containing ten or more residential units, shall set aside at least ten percent of those units as local employee residences as defined in this section and the Town's local employee residency requirements and guidelines. In addition, the developer of such project shall construct local employee residences in accordance with the Local employee residency requirements and guidelines. For those development of less than 30 units whose calculation results in a fraction of a unit, the local employee residence requirement shall be rounded down to the nearest integer. For those developments of 30 or more residential units whose calculation results in a fraction of a unit, the local employee residence requirement shall be rounded to the nearest integer (up or down). 
2.  Determination of mix units. The mix of local employee residences available for purchase shall average a price affordable to households earning 90 percent of the maximum income limits as set forth in the Town's local employee residency requirements and guidelines. The affordable price shall be calculated based on mortgage principal, interest, taxes, and insurance, not to exceed 33 percent of gross household income. The calculation shall assume a 95 percent loan to value ratio, and a 30-year mortgage at prevailing interest rates. The average price may be achieved by providing units affordable to households not greater than 100 percent of the maximum income limits as set forth in the Town's local employee residency requirements and guidelines. 
3.  Location and character of local employee residences. Local employee residences shall be distributed throughout the proposed development, to the extent possible. Off-site housing will not be approved. A cash payment in lieu of local employee residences shall not be permitted. The proposed character and density of local resident housing units shall be compatible with the surrounding land uses and neighborhood character, and suitable for the proposed site. Development and construction of local resident housing units shall comply with all other requirements of this Title. 
4.  Schedule for construction of local employee residences. A developer shall construct the required local employee residences prior to, or concurrently and proportionally with, the production of market rate housing or the sale of market rate lots. Prior to receiving development approval, the developer shall provide the Town with a proposed construction schedule for approval by the Town that clearly delineates the start and completion dates of the production of market rate units and/or the sale of market rate lots and the construction of local employee residences in accordance with the Town's local employee residency requirements and guidelines. 
5.  Deed restrictions. All local employee residences required by this section shall be deed restricted, in accordance with the requirements of the local employee residency requirements and guidelines, and as approved by the Town Attorney, as to rental or ownership and occupancy by persons and as to the resale price of the unit. The deed restriction shall be provided to the developer for review at the time of approval of the developer's local employee residency plan. Prior to the issuance of any building permit within the development, the Town shall have an approved, executed and recorded deed restriction for all local employee residence lots or units in the project or phase of the project, if applicable. Such deed restrictions shall not be subject to any recorded liens or encumbrances. 
F.  Local employee residency plan. 
1.  All applications for approval of a subdivision preliminary plan, planned unit development plan, development permit or special use permit for high density multifamily dwellings, containing ten or more residential units, shall be accompanied by a local employee residency plan, unless otherwise determined by the Town Planner. Such plan shall contain sufficient information to allow the Town to determine the plan's compliance with this section and the Town's local employee residency requirements and guidelines. The local employee residency plan shall include, but shall not be limited to, the information specifically required by the Town's local employee residency requirements and guidelines. 
2.  Upon receipt of a complete proposed local employee residency plan, the Town Planner shall evaluate the plan for compliance with this section and the Town's local employee residency requirements and guidelines. The Town Planner may make a recommendation of approval, recommendation of approval with appropriate conditions, or a recommendation of denial. Following receipt of the Town Planner's recommendation, and as a part of the Town's procedures for review and final approval of any application for an annexation, planned unit development, subdivision, development permit, or special use permit for high density multifamily dwellings, containing ten or more residential units, the Town Board, Planning Commission or administrative staff member vested with authority to approve any such development may approve the plan, approve the plan with appropriate conditions consistent with the Town's local employee residency requirements and guidelines, or deny approval of such plan. No application for annexation, subdivision final approval, planned unit development plan approval, development permit approval, or special use permit approval for high density multifamily dwellings, containing ten or more residential units, shall be granted unless the local employee residency plan is approved or approved subject to conditions by the Town. 
(Amended 9-8-2002) 
CHAPTER 4.05. - ZONING REVIEW PROCEDURES 

Section 4.05.010. - Special use. 
A.  Conditions for special use. 
1.  All special uses. 
a.  A special use permit may be granted for a use in a particular zone district, as provided in Subsection (B) of this section, provided the Planning Commission and Council find the following: 
1.  The proposed use is consistent with the provisions of this chapter and with the Town's goals, policies and plans; 
2.  The proposed use is compatible with existing and allowed uses surrounding or affected by the proposed use; 
3.  Street improvements adequate to accommodate traffic volumes generated by the proposed use and provision of safe, convenient access to the use and adequate parking are either in place or will be constructed in conjunction with the proposed use, as approved by the Town; and 
4.  The special conditions for specific uses, as provided in this section, are met. 
b.  In granting a special use permit, the Planning Commission and Board shall impose such restrictions on the proposed use as they find necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, including, but not limited to, restrictions equal to or more restrictive than requirements of the zone district regulations regarding area, setback, coverage, and height of proposed structures; off-street parking; safety of ingress and egress; physical separation in distance from other uses or buildings; landscaped buffer areas; screening fences; and any other provisions they find necessary. A special use permit may be limited as to duration of not less than three years, location, the party entitled to the benefit thereof, and/or other specifics. 
c.  All special uses that attract or produce additional vehicular trips shall pay a street improvement fee in accordance with Section 4.13.220. 
d.  All special uses requiring additional fire protection services shall pay a fire protection services impact fee in accordance with Section 4.13.230. 
2.  Industrial operations. Every industrial use requiring a special use permit shall be designed to conform with Section 4.04.100(L) and operated so as to have no adverse effect on: 
a.  Existing lawful use of water through depletion or pollution of surface run-off, stream flow or groundwater. 
b.  Wildlife and domestic animals through creation of hazardous attractions, blockade of migration routes or patterns or other means. 
3.  High density multiple-family dwellings. 
a.  In the Residential Multi-Family (RMF) Zone District, high density multiple-family dwellings shall be allowed as a special use at the maximum density of one dwelling unit per 2,500 square feet of lot area provided that, in addition to all other applicable standards and requirements, the lot area shall include a minimum of 600 square feet of usable open space, as defined in this Title, per dwelling unit. 
b.  In the Central Business District (CBD) Zone District, high density multiple-family dwellings shall be allowed as a special use provided that, in addition to all other applicable standards and requirements, the lot area shall include a minimum of 300 square feet of usable open space, as defined in this Title, per dwelling unit. 
c.  As a condition of any special use permit for high density multifamily dwellings in the Residential Multi-Family (RMF) Zone District and the Central Business District (CBD) Zone District, containing ten or more residential units, the applicant shall provide local employee residences in accordance with Section 4.04.110 and the Town's local employee residency requirements and guidelines. 
4.  Bed and breakfast facility. A bed and breakfast facility may be allowed as special use in certain zone districts, as set forth herein, provided all of the following conditions and standards, in addition to those imposed by the Planning Commission and/or Board of Trustees, are met: 
a.  A bed and breakfast facility is an owner-occupied, single-family residential dwelling unit that contains no more than three guest bedrooms where overnight lodging, with or without meals, is provided for compensation. Kitchen and dining facilities serve only residents and guests and are not operated or used for any commercial activity other than that necessary for bed and breakfast purposes; 
b.  The bed and breakfast use shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and shall not change the residential character thereof; 
c.  There shall be no advertising display or other indication of the bed and breakfast use on the premises other than a single six square foot unlighted sign that is otherwise in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 4.08; 
d.  A minimum of one parking space per guest and resident bedroom shall be required and shown on a site plan. Additional landscape screening may be required; 
e.  Basement bedrooms shall have adequate egress; 
f.  The bed and breakfast facility shall comply with all building codes adopted by the Town, and any requirements in fire codes adopted by the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District; 
g.  The bed and breakfast facilities shall be subject to the street improvement fee set forth in Section 4.13.220, the fire protection impact fee set forth in Section 4.13.230, and the lodging occupation tax set forth in Chapter 5.05; 
h.  It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to demonstrate that the relevant subdivision's, covenants, condition or restrictions allow for a bed and breakfast use and/or associated signing; and 
i.  Existing uses in addition to that of a dwelling unit (e.g., home occupation, accessory dwelling unit, etc.), if any, will be considered as part of the special use review. 
B.  Procedures for special use review. 
1.  Application. 
a.  Each application for a special use permit shall be made on a form provided by the Town, and signed by the applicant, which clearly states the nature of the proposed use and reasons in support thereof. The application shall be accompanied by: 
1.  Proof of ownership of the land for which the application is made. If the applicant is other than the owner, notarized consent of the owner is required; 
2.  A site plan drawn to scale depicting the locations and boundaries of existing and proposed lots and structures; 
3.  The proper special use permit fee as set by the Town; 
4.  A list of names and addresses of owners of record of all property within 250 feet; 
5.  Any other information which the Town Planner determines is necessary to determine whether the special use will comply with the Town's regulations, goals and policies; and 
6.  Applications for special use permits for high density multifamily dwellings, containing ten or more residential units, shall include a local employee residency plan pursuant to Section 4.04.110 and the Town's local employee residency requirements and guidelines. 
b.  A minimum of 20 copies of the completed application, site plan and supporting materials, except proof of ownership, shall be submitted to the Town Planner at least 30 calendar days prior to the Planning Commission meeting at which it is to be reviewed. 
2.  Staff/agency review. The Town Planner shall review the application with appropriate staff or other agencies and shall provide copies of the application and staff or agency comments to the Planning Commission members. 
3.  Planning Commission review. The Planning Commission shall review the application at a regular meeting, at which it shall hold a public hearing on the application, following procedures and public notice requirements of Sections 4.03.060 and 4.03.070. The applicant or his representative shall be present at the meeting to represent the proposal. The Commission shall take one of the following actions: 
a.  Approve the special use and recommend to the Town Board that a special use permit be granted, subject to any conditions they find necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare or to ensure compliance with the Town's regulations, goals, and policies; 
b.  Recommend denial of the special use permit, stating the specific reasons for denial; or 
c.  Continue the hearing pursuant to Chapter 2.20, with the requirement that the applicant submit changes or additional information which they find necessary to determine whether the proposal complies with the Town's regulations, goals, policies. 
4.  Further review by Planning Commission 
a.  In the event the hearing is continued pursuant to Subsection (B)(3)(c) of this section, the applicant shall submit 15 copies of the required changes or information to the Town Planner at least ten days prior to the Planning Commission meeting at which the application is to be reconsidered. The Town Planner shall review the additional submittal with appropriate staff or agencies and shall distribute copies of the submittal to the Planning Commission members, along with comments from the staff or agencies. 
b.  At the continued hearing, the applicant or his representative shall be present to represent the application. At this meeting, the Planning Commission shall take on one of the following actions: 
1.  Approve the special use and recommend to the Town Board that a special use permit be granted, subject to any conditions they find necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare or to ensure compliance with the Town's regulations, goals and policies; 
2.  Recommend denial of the special use permit, stating the specific reasons for denial; or 
3.  Continue the hearing pursuant to Chapter 2.20. 
5.  Town Board review. 
a.  After the Planning Commission has made its recommendation for issuance or denial of the special use permit, the Town Planner shall distribute copies of the application to the Board members, along with relevant excerpts from Planning Commission meeting minutes and copies of staff or agency comments. 
b.  The Board shall review the application at a regular meeting within 30 days of the Planning Commission recommendation, or such longer period as may be agreed to by the applicant and the Town, at which it shall hold a public hearing on the application. At such hearing, the Board shall consider the recommendations of the Planning Commission and the comments, testimony and other evidence presented. The applicant or his representative shall be present to represent the proposal. The Board shall take one of the following actions: 
1.  Approve the proposed special use, subject to any conditions it finds necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare or to ensure compliance with the Town's regulations, goals and policies; 
2.  Deny the special use applied for, stating the specific reasons for denial; or 
3.  Continue the hearing pursuant to Chapter 2.20. 
c.  If the special use permit is approved, the Board shall authorize issuance of a written special use permit, subject to such conditions as it finds necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to ensure compliance with the Town's regulations, goals and policies. In the event no building permit has been applied for or the special use has not been established within three years of the approval date, the special use permit shall be null and void. 
C.  Performance guarantee. 
1.  In order to secure the construction and installation of street improvements, access improvements, parking improvements, landscape improvements, and any other improvements required by the Town as a condition of the issuance of a special use permit, the applicant shall, prior to the issuance of the special use permit, furnish the Town with: 
a.  A certificate or other evidence in good and sufficient form approved by the Town Attorney of a performance bond or an irrevocable letter of credit to secure the performance and completion of such improvements in an amount equal to 110 percent of the estimated costs of said facilities; or 
b.  Such other collateral as may be satisfactory to the Town Attorney. The estimated cost of such improvements shall be a figure mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the Town Planner. The purpose of such cost estimate is solely to determine the amount of security and may be revised from time to time to reflect the actual cost. No representation shall be made as to the accuracy of these estimates, and the applicant shall in any event pay the actual cost of such required improvements. 
2.  All improvements required to be constructed shall be warranted to be free of any defects in materials or workmanship for a period of 12 months following completion and approval by the Town. If any such improvements are public improvements, they shall also be dedicated or conveyed to the Town. 
3.  Upon the applicant's failure to perform its obligations as required by the conditions for the issuance of the special use permit, and in accordance with all plans, drawings, specifications and other documents submitted to the Town as approved, within the required time periods, the Town may give written notice to the applicant and the surety on a performance bond or the issuer of an irrevocable letter of credit, that the Town, as agent for the applicant, is proceeding with the task of installing the required improvements in whole or in part. Upon the assumption by the Town, the surety or issuer of the irrevocable letter of credit shall be authorized to disburse funds, upon written request from the Town, showing the proposed payee and the amount to be paid. Copies of any such request shall be sent to the applicant's last known address. The applicant shall be given an opportunity to appear before the Town Board of Trustees concerning any such assumption by the Town, within 30 days after the giving of such notice by the Town. 
4.  The applicant shall in writing designate and irrevocably appoint the Mayor of the Town as its Attorney-in-fact and agent for the purpose of completing all of the improvements required by the special use permit in event of a default by the applicant. 
5.  If any legal proceedings are commenced by the applicant concerning the Town's assumption of the task of installing the required improvements, and if the applicant does not prevail in said legal proceedings, the surety or issuer of the letter of credit as well as the Town shall be entitled to recover the reasonable Attorney's fees and costs incurred therein from the applicant. 
D.  Revocation of special use permit. Any special use permit granted under this chapter may be revoked, following a public hearing, upon a determination that the owner of the property subject to the special use permit, or holder of the permit if different from the owner, has violated one or more of the conditions or requirements contained in the special use permit, including the conditions set forth in Section 4.17.050. In the event the Town Planner has reasonable cause to believe that one or more conditions or requirements of the special use permit has been violated, the Town Planner shall serve the record owner of the property subject to the special use permit and the holder of such permit if other than the owner, in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to show cause why the special use permit should not be revoked and any vested property rights related thereto forfeited. Such notice shall state the date, time and place for a public hearing at which the Board of Trustees or designated Hearing Officer will consider whether the special use permit should be revoked. The notice shall also set forth a concise statement of the grounds for revocation. The notice shall be served at least 15 days prior to the date of the hearing. The public hearing shall be conducted by the Board of Trustees, or a Hearing Officer appointed by the Board of Trustees, pursuant to Chapter 2.20. Following such hearing, the Board of Trustees shall issue a written decision either revoking the special use permit or finding insufficient evidence exists to revoke the permit. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.05.010, 3-5-1986; Amended 6-2-1991; Amended 7-15-1996; Amended 4-17-1997; Amended 9-8-2002; Amended 5-8-2007) 
Section 4.05.020. - Zoning variance. 
A.  Conditions for zoning variance. 
1.  A variance from the strict application of any zone district requirement or supplementary regulation of this chapter may be granted by the Planning Commission following the procedures and conditions herein, except that no use shall be allowed in any zone district in which it is not listed as a permitted or special use. The Planning Commission may grant a variance provided it finds both Subsections (A)(1)(a) and (b) of this section and either Subsection (A)(1)(c) or (d) of this section are applicable. 
a.  That the variance granted is without substantial detriment to the public good and does not impair the intent and purposes of the Town's regulations, goals, policies and plan, including the specific regulation in question; and 
b.  That the variance granted is the minimum necessary to alleviate the hardship; and 
c.  That there exists on the property in question exceptional topography, shape, size or other extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition peculiar to the site, existing buildings, or lot configuration such that strict application of the zone district requirements from which the variance is requested would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional and undue hardship upon the owner of the property in question; or 
d.  That such exceptional situation or condition was not induced by any action of the applicant and is not a general condition throughout the zone district. 
2.  In granting a zoning variance, the Planning Commission shall modify the application of the regulation so that the spirit of the title is observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. 
3.  Pursuant to C.R.S. § 31-23-307, as amended, the Planning Commission may vary or modify the application of zoning regulations for the purpose of considering access to sunlight for solar energy devices. 
B.  Procedures for variance review. 
1.  Application. 
a.  Each application for a zoning variance shall be made on a form provided by the Town, and signed by the applicant which clearly states the reasons for the request and how it complies with the conditions for variance. The application shall be accompanied by: 
1.  Proof of ownership of the land for which the application is made. If the applicant is other than the owner, notarized consent of the owner is required; 
2.  A site plan drawn to scale depicting the locations and boundaries of existing and proposed lots and structures; 
3.  The proper zoning variance fee as set by the Town; and 
4.  A list of names and addresses of owners of record of adjacent property. 
b.  A minimum of 20 copies of the application, site plan and supporting materials shall be submitted to the Town Planner at least 15 calendar days prior to the Planning Commission meeting at which the variance request is to be reviewed. 
2.  Staff/agency review. The Town Planner shall review the application with appropriate staff or other agencies and shall provide copies of the application and staff or agency comments to the Planning Commission. 
3.  Planning Commission review. 
a.  The Planning Commission shall review the zoning variance request at a regular meeting at which it shall hold a public hearing on the application. Public notice shall be given pursuant to Section 4.03.060. The applicant or his representative shall be present to represent the proposal. The Planning Commission shall take one of the following actions: 
i.  Grant the zoning variance, subject to Subsection (A) of this section; 
ii.  Deny the zoning variance, stating the specific reasons for denial; or 
iii.  Continue the hearing pursuant to Chapter 2.20. 
b.  Any decision of the Planning Commission shall be final, from which an appeal may be taken to a court of competent jurisdiction as provided in accordance with C.R.S. § 31-23-307. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.05.020, 3-5-1986; Amended 6-2-1991) 
Section 4.05.030. - Rezoning. 
A.  Conditions for rezoning. The Town Board may amend the number, shape, or boundaries of any zone district, removing any property from one zone district and adding it to another zone district, only after recommendation of the Planning Commission. A rezoning may be granted where the findings are made: 
1.  That the rezoning is compatible with surrounding land uses, and is consistent with the Town's goals, policies and plans; 
2.  That the land to be rezoned was previously zoned in error or the existing zoning is inconsistent with the Town's goals, policies and plans; 
3.  That the area for which rezoning is requested has changed substantially such that the proposed rezoning better meets the needs of the community; or 
4.  That the rezoning is incidental to a comprehensive revision of the Town's zoning map which recognizes a change in conditions and is consistent with the Town's goals, policies and plans. 
B.  Procedures for rezoning. 
1.  Application. 
a.  Rezoning action may be initiated by the Planning Commission, the Board of Trustees or by a minimum of 50 percent of the owners of the property to be rezoned. When a rezoning request is initiated by other than the Town, the request for rezoning shall be made on an application form provided by the Town. The application shall be accompanied by: 
1.  Proof of ownership of the land for which the application is made; 
2.  A petition requesting the zoning change signed by owners of at least 50 percent of the land area proposed for rezoning; 
3.  A site plan depicting the location and boundaries of existing and proposed lot(s) and structures; and 
4.  The proper zoning action request fee as set by the Town. 
b.  A minimum of 20 copies of the application, site plan and supporting materials shall be submitted to the Town Planner at least 30 calendar days prior to the Planning Commission meeting at which the rezoning request is to be reviewed. 
c.  Review of a rezoning request may occur concurrently with review for a development permit, pursuant to Section 4.06.020; a special use permit, pursuant to Section 4.05.010; or a subdivision, pursuant to Section 4.12.020; at the option of the applicant. 
2.  Staff/agency review. The Town Planner shall review the application with appropriate staff and other agencies and shall provide copies of the application and comments to the Planning Commission members. 
3.  Planning Commission review. Whether initiated by the Town or property owner(s), the Planning Commission shall review the zoning application at a regular meeting within 30 days of the application submittal, at which it shall hold a public hearing on the application. Public notice shall be given pursuant to Section 4.03.060, except that when an entire zone district is to be rezoned, notice to the owners of land within such district shall be made by published notice rather than mailed notice. The applicant, if any, or his representative, shall be present at the meeting to represent the proposal. The Planning Commission shall take one of the following actions: 
a.  Approve the rezoning and recommend to the Town Board that an ordinance be enacted to rezone the subject property; 
b.  Recommend denial of the rezoning stating the specific reasons for denial; or 
c.  Continue the hearing pursuant to Chapter 2.20. 
4.  Town Board review. 
a.  After the Planning Commission has made its recommendation for approval or denial, the Town Planner shall distribute copies of the rezoning application, staff comments, and Planning Commission minutes to the Board members. 
b.  The Board shall review the application at a regular meeting within 30 days of the Planning Commission recommendation, or such longer period as may be agreed to by the Town and the applicant, at which it shall hold a public hearing on the application. Public notice shall be given as for the Planning Commission hearing. At such hearing, the Board shall consider the recommendations of the Planning Commission and the comments, testimony and other evidence presented. The applicant, if any, or its representative, shall be present at the meeting to represent the proposal. 
c.  The Board shall take one of the following actions: 
1.  Approve the proposed rezoning, after a finding that the criteria for rezoning have been met pursuant to Subsection (A) of this section. If the rezoning is approved by the Board of Trustees, it shall enact an ordinance to such effect and the rezoning shall become effective 30 days after publication of said ordinance; 
2.  Deny the rezoning application, stating the specific reasons for such denial; or 
3.  Continue the hearing pursuant to Chapter 2.20. 
d.  In case of a protest against a rezoning which is submitted to the Town Clerk at least 24 hours before the Town Board's vote on the rezoning, and which is signed by the owners of 20 percent or more of either the area included in the proposed rezoning or of the land extending a radius of 250 feet from the land included in the proposed rezoning, then such rezoning shall not become effective except upon favorable vote by three-fourths of the entire membership of the Board, whether present or not. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.05.030, 3-5-1986; Amended 8-9-1988; Amended 5-8-2007) 
Section 4.05.040. - Amendment to zone district regulations. 
A.  Conditions for amendment. The Town Board may, after the recommendation of the Planning Commission, amend any regulation of any zone district, which amendment may be initiated by the Town or by the owner of real property within a zone district for which a change is proposed. Amendment to zone district regulations may be made upon a finding that the amendment is consistent with the Town's goals, policies and plans. 
B.  Procedures for amendment. 
1.  Application. 
a.  When a zoning regulation amendment is proposed by other than the Town, such proposal shall be accompanied by a request signed by the owners of at least 50 percent of the land area within the districts to be affected by the amendment. 
b.  The amendment to zone district regulations fee shall be paid at time of application submittal when proposed by an applicant other than the Town. 
2.  Review. A request for a zoning regulation amendment proposed by an applicant other than the Town shall follow the procedures and public notice requirements as set forth for rezoning in Section 4.05.030. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.05.040, 3-5-1986) 
CHAPTER 4.06. - DEVELOPMENT REVIEW 

Section 4.06.010. - General. 
    In order to afford the Town the opportunity to review the potential impacts of proposed development on the Town, its environment, economy and people, and in order to direct such impacts so that they are in conformance with the goals and policies of the Town, all nonresidential development and multifamily dwellings for eight or more families, unless otherwise provided herein, shall be subject to the standards, procedures and requirements of this chapter, and Chapter 4.07. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, ch. 4.06, intro. ¶, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.06.020. - Development permit. 
A.  The following shall require a development permit before issuance of a building permit: 
1.  Construction of any building for nonresidential use; 
2.  Renovation of or addition to any building for nonresidential use, which would require additional parking spaces, under Section 4.07.060, whether or not such spaces are actually required; 
3.  Renovation of or addition to any building for nonresidential use which would make a substantial change, as determined by the Town Manager, in the visual appearance of the building or in the visual impact of the building on its neighborhood; 
4.  Construction of any residential project containing eight or more dwelling units; 
5.  Establishment of a mobile home park pursuant to Chapter 4.09; or 
6.  Any planned unit development, as set forth in Chapter 4.11. 
B.  A development permit shall be issued only after the proposed development has been approved in accordance with the procedures for development review, as set forth in Sections 4.06.050 through 4.06.070 and after the appropriate reviewing body has determined that such proposed development is in conformance with the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 4.07, as well as the Town's goals and policies. The development permit shall specify the terms and conditions thereof and shall become effective on the date of final approval. The development permit shall be incorporated into the building permit and all conditions shall apply to the building permit. If more than three years elapse without the application for a building permit, a new development permit shall be required, following the procedures set forth in this chapter. 
C.  Every development requiring a development permit, as provided in this chapter, shall follow review procedures for either minor development or major development, as set forth in Sections 4.06.050 through 4.06.070. Development review may occur concurrently with review for special use, zoning variance, rezoning, or subdivision, at the option of the applicant. For any review which, pursuant to the provisions of this Title, requires Town Board review, no development permit shall be issued until such required Town Board approval is received. 
D.  Every development permit shall expire upon the first occurrence of the following events: 
1.  Three years from its effective date, unless application for a building permit is made or unless application for renewal of the development permit is approved, pursuant to this chapter; 
2.  Upon expiration of the building permit for such development if such expiration occurs at least three years following the effective date of the development permit; or 
3.  Upon abandonment of the development, if such abandonment occurs at least three years following the effective date of the development permit. Abandonment shall be defined as the date one year after the last significant progress toward the construction of the development occurred. Abandonment shall be determined at the sole discretion of the Building Official, and such determination may be appealed pursuant to Section 4.03.050. 
E.  A development permit may be renewed for a period not to exceed one year from its expiration date or abandonment date, whichever is later, by the Planning Commission. Application for renewal shall be made on a form furnished by the Town, which shall be submitted to the Town Planner at least 30 days before the Planning Commission meeting at which it is to be reviewed, and which shall be accompanied by the applicable renewal fee. For a minor development permit, the renewal request shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4.06.060. For a major development permit, the renewal request shall follow procedures set forth in Section 4.06.070. In granting a renewal of the development permit, the Planning Commission or Town Board may add, delete or modify any terms and conditions of the permit, in accordance with this Code and the Town's goals and policies then in effect. 
F.  Performance guarantee-Public improvements. 
1.  Acceptable types of security. In order to secure the construction and installation of all on-site and off-site public improvements required by the Town pursuant to an approved development plan for which the developer is responsible, a developer shall furnish the Town with: 
a.  Cash to be deposited in an escrow account that is acceptable to the Town Attorney; 
b.  An irrevocable standby letter of credit that is acceptable to the Town Attorney; 
c.  A performance bond issued by a surety approved by the Town Attorney; or 
d.  Other security acceptable to the Town Attorney. 
2.  Amount and delivery of security. 
a.  The amount of the security required by this section shall be in an amount equal to 110 percent of the estimated cost of all on-site and off-site public improvements. 
b.  A developer shall provide the security to the Town prior to the issuance of a building permit. Unless expressly authorized by the Town Manager, a developer shall not commence any work within a development until such approved security is furnished to the Town. 
c.  The estimated cost of the required public improvements shall be a figure provided by a developer and approved by the Town Engineer. The purpose of the cost estimate is solely to determine the amount of security required and may be revised from time to time to reflect the actual costs. No representations are made as to the accuracy of these estimates, and a developer shall be required to pay the actual cost of the required public improvements. Neither the estimated costs nor the amount of the security establishes the maximum amount of a developer's liability. 
3.  Letter of credit standards. In the event that a developer elects to deliver to the Town an irrevocable letter of credit as a performance guarantee, the following standards shall apply: 
a.  The letter of credit shall be payable at sight to the Town, or its designee, and will bear an expiration date of not earlier than two years from the date of issuance; and 
b.  A developer shall renew such letter of credit as necessary in order to secure the performance and completion of the required public improvements, for which a developer is responsible for, in accordance with this Subsection (F)(3), without further notice from the Town. If a developer fails to provide the Town with a satisfactory substitute letter of credit at least 30 days prior to the expiration date of the letter of credit previously delivered, the Town may, at its sole option, draw the full amount of the letter of credit and hold the proceeds thereof as a performance guarantee deposit. The proceeds of such draw shall be deposited in a federally insured interest bearing account, and all interest earned thereon shall be added to and become part of the performance guarantee deposit. 
4.  Additional security standards. The initial performance bond or letter of credit, if applicable, issued to the Town by a developer shall bear an expiration date of not earlier than two years from the date of issuance. A developer shall be required to renew such security, as necessary, in order to secure the performance and completion of all, required public improvements, in accordance with this subsection, without further notice from the Town. 
5.  Payment upon default. The performance bond, letter of credit, or escrow funds shall be payable at any time upon presentation of an affidavit by the Town stating the developer is in default under this subsection, has received notice of such default as required by this subsection and has failed to cure such default within the time set forth in this subsection or in the case of a letter of credit, the developer has failed to renew the letter of credit as required herein. The performance bond, or letter of credit, or escrow and disbursement agreement or other acceptable security shall be in good and sufficient form as approved by the Town Attorney. In the event of a default by a developer and compliance with the terms of this subsection, the surety or financial institution shall disperse funds, upon written request by the Town, or the escrow fund may be drawn upon, showing the proposed payee and the amount to be paid. Copies of any such request shall be sent to the developer at its last known address. 
6.  Release of security. 
a.  Upon completion of all of the required public improvements by a developer, and upon final inspection and approval by the Town Engineer of all such improvements, the Board of Trustees, or its designee, shall further authorize the reduction of the amount of the security guaranteeing the required public improvements to ten percent of the total actual cost of such improvements. 
b.  Any performance guarantee issued to the Town by a developer shall be fully released and discharged by action of the Town Board of Trustees upon expiration of the 24-month warranty period, and the correction of any defects discovered during such warranty period. In the event that the correction of defects are not satisfactorily completed upon the expiration of the 24 months, the Town may require a new performance guarantee and withhold the issuance of any further building permits until a new public improvements guarantee is supplied. 
7.  Notice of default. Upon a developer's failure to perform its obligations under an approved development plan or development permit for which the developer is responsible for and in accordance with all other applicable plans, drawings, specifications and other documents as approved, within the applicable time periods the Town may give written notice to the developer of the nature of the default and an opportunity to be heard before the Board of Trustees concerning such default. If such default has not been remedied within 30 days of receipt of the notice or of the date of any hearing before the Board of Trustees, whichever is later (or such reasonable time period as is necessary to cure the default provided that the developer has commenced in good faith to cure the default), the Town may then give written notice to such developer and any surety on the performance bond, issuer of a letter of credit, or escrow agent that the Town, as agent for the developer, is proceeding with the task of installing the required public improvements in whole or in part. 
8.  Power of Attorney required. A developer shall, in writing, designate and irrevocably appoint the Mayor of the Town, as its Attorney-in-fact and agent for the purpose of completing all on-site and off-site public improvements required by the approved development plan or a development permit for which said developer is responsible, in the event of a default by the developer. 
9.  Increase in amount of security. If a substantial amount of time elapses between the time of posting of the security and actual construction of the required on-site and off-site public improvements, the Town reserves the right to require a reasonable increase in the amount of the applicable security, if necessary because of estimated increased costs of construction. 
10.  Attorney's fees. If any legal proceedings are commenced concerning the Town's election to complete the required on-site and off-site public improvements, as agent for developer, against a developer, its surety, or issuer of the letter of credit, the substantially prevailing party shall be entitled to its costs and reasonable Attorney's fees (including legal assistant's fees) or the reasonable value of a salaried Attorney's time (including legal assistant's time). 
G.  Performance guarantee-Private improvements. 
1.  Conditions for issuance of certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy. Generally a performance guarantee securing the construction or installation of required private improvements, such as parking lots and landscaping, by way of example, is not required. However, no certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Town until such required private improvements have been completed. In the event a developer desires to obtain a certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy prior to the completion of certain private improvements because of weather, season of the year or other factors, the developer may provide the Town with a performance guarantee as described in Subsection (F) of this section to secure the completion of the unfinished private improvements. Upon delivery of such performance guarantee, a certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued to a developer. 
2.  Development plan for multi-building project. 
a.  In the event an applicant submits a development plan for multiple buildings, the applicant shall identify and the Town approve, on the development plan, the private improvements that are required for each building. 
b.  No certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy shall be issued for an individual building until construction or installation of the private improvements, identified on the approved development plan for that specific building, have been completed. 
c.  In the event a developer desires to obtain a certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy prior to the completion of certain private improvements identified for an individual building, it may do so subject to the requirements described in Subsection (G)(1) of this section. 
H.  Warranty by developer. A developer shall warrant all on-site and off-site public improvements, required by an approved development plan or as a condition for the issuance of a development permit for which a developer is responsible, constructed by such developer and conveyed or dedicated to the Town. A developer shall warrant such improvements for a period of 24 months from the date that the Town's Engineer certifies that the same conform with the plans and specifications approved by the Town Engineer. Specifically, but not by way of limitation, a developer shall warrant the following: 
1.  That the title conveyed shall be good and its transfer rightful; 
2.  Any and all facilities conveyed shall be free from any security interest or other lien or encumbrance; and 
3.  Any and all facilities so conveyed shall be free of any and all defects in materials or workmanship. 
I.  Revocation of development permit. Any development permit granted under this chapter may be revoked, following a public hearing, upon a determination that the owner of the property subject to the development permit, or holder of the permit if different from the owner, has violated one or more of the conditions or requirements contained in the development permit, including the conditions set forth in Section 4.17.050. In the event the Town Planner has reasonable cause to believe that one or more conditions or requirements of the development permit has been violated, the Town Planner shall serve the record owner of the property subject to the development permit and the holder of such permit if other than the owner, in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to show cause why the development permit should not be revoked and any vested property rights related thereto forfeited. Such notice shall state the date, time and place for a public hearing at which the Board of Trustees or designated Hearing Officer will consider whether the development permit should be revoked. The notice shall also set forth a concise statement of the grounds for revocation. The notice shall be served at least 15 days prior to the date of the hearing. The public hearing shall be conducted by the Board of Trustees, or a Hearing Officer appointed by the Board of Trustees, pursuant to Chapter 2.20. Following such hearing, the Board of Trustees shall issue a written decision either revoking the development permit or finding insufficient evidence exists to revoke the permit. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.06.010, 3-5-1986; Amended 6-2-1991; Amended 7-15-1996; Amended 4-17-1997; Amended 2-13-2000; Amended 3-10-2015) 
Section 4.06.030. - Classification criteria. 
    For purposes of development review, all developments as set forth in Section 4.06.020(A) shall be classified as minor development except the following, which shall be classified as major development: 
A.  Establishment of a mobile home park, pursuant to Chapter 4.09; 
B.  Any planned unit development, as set forth in Chapter 4.11; or 
C.  Any development which otherwise meets the criteria for minor development, which includes any one of the following: 
1.  Extension of municipal facilities beyond locations or other limits set forth in the Town's regulations, policies or plans, or an extension which requires Town Board approval pursuant to other provisions of this Title. Such extensions shall include, but are not limited to, water mains of six inches or greater, sewer mains, and local, collector, or arterial streets. 
2.  A dedication of land which the Town will be required to maintain or payment of fee in lieu of, including a street, alley, park, trail, or other public land or right-of-way. 
3.  A development impact report. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.06.020, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.06.040. - Development plan. 
    Every development permit application shall include a development plan, which shall include the following: 
A.  A copy of the recorded subdivision plat(s) covering the subject lot(s), where the proposal is for development on previously subdivided lot(s); 
B.  A brief written description of the proposed development signed by the applicant; 
C.  A development plan map, at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet or larger, with title, date, north arrow and scale, on a minimum sheet size of 81/2 inches by 14 inches, which depicts the area within the boundaries of the subject lots and including: 
1.  The location of existing and proposed land uses, and the square footage of building space devoted to each use; 
2.  The location and dimensions, including building heights, of all existing and proposed: 
a.  Buildings or structures and setbacks from lot lines, or building envelopes where exact dimensions are not available; 
b.  Parking spaces and vehicular use area; 
c.  Utility distribution systems and utility easements; 
d.  Drainage improvements and drainage easements; 
e.  Roads, alleys, curbs, curb cuts, and other access improvements; 
f.  Any other improvements; 
g.  Any proposed reservations or dedications of public right-of-way, easements, or other public lands; 
3.  Existing topography and any proposed changes in topography, using five-foot contour intervals, or smaller intervals as deemed appropriate by the Town Planner; 
4.  Circulation and transportation conditions, such as volumes and traffic flow patterns, transit service needs, and potential changes or impacts, both on- and-off-site; 
5.  Evidence of adequate water supply and other services and facilities needed to serve the development; 
6.  Evidence of adequate water rights needed to serve the development; 
7.  A statement of compatibility with the Town's goals and policies, with specific reference to those affected; 
8.  Any plans or reports required pursuant to Chapter 4.07, including, but not limited to, landscape plan, parking plan, architectural design plan, and development impact report; 
9.  A proposal for municipal or park land dedication or fee, pursuant to Section 4.13.190 or documentation that such dedication or fee has been previously been made; 
10.  Any request for design variance or zoning action, including special use permit, zoning variance, or rezoning, with supporting evidence that the variance will be in conformance with the Town's goals and policies; 
11.  For any PUD, a list of any zone district regulations and/or design requirements, as set forth in Chapters 4.04, 4.07 and 4.13, which the applicant proposes to vary, with the proposed variations and supporting evidence that the variations will produce a public benefit and are in conformance with Section 4.11.030; 
12.  A schedule for phasing of development; 
13.  All of the applicable certifications set forth in the appendices to this Title; 
14.  Any other information which the Town Planner determines is necessary to determine whether the proposed development will comply with the Town's regulations, goals and policies, including, but not limited to, any information set forth in Section 4.12.020 for preliminary subdivision plan; 
D.  A lighting plan that demonstrates compliance with Section 4.07.010; 
E.  For all proposed developments containing ten or more residential units, a local employee residency plan that demonstrates compliance with Section 4.04.110 and the Town's local employee residency requirements and guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.06.030, 3-5-1986; Amended 6-2-1991; Amended 2-13-2000; Amended 9-8-2002) 
Section 4.06.050. - Pre-application conference. 
A.  When proposing any development requiring a development permit, the applicant shall first request a pre-application conference with the Town Planner to discuss procedures, requirements, and the Town's goals and policies. The applicant shall provide for the conference: 
1.  An application for development permit on a form provided by the Town; 
2.  A copy of the approved subdivision plat, where the development is on previously subdivided land; 
3.  A sketch plan of the proposed development, which may be a free-hand drawing of the proposed development, depicting topography of the land to be developed, existing and proposed land uses and street system including approximate right-of-way widths, lot and block pattern with approximate lot areas noted, and the location of utilities and easements; and 
4.  Proof of ownership of the land proposed for development. 
B.  At the pre-application conference, the Town Planner shall classify the proposal as minor or major development, based on the classification criteria set forth in Section 4.06.030. If the Town Planner cannot determine on the basis of the criteria specified whether the proposal is to be classified as minor or major development, then the determination shall be made by the Planning Commission at its next regular meeting. If the proposal includes a subdivision of land, the Town Planner shall refer the applicant to Section 4.12.030. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.06.040, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.06.060. - Minor development review. 
A.  Development plan submittal. 
1.  Within one week after the pre-application conference, the Town Planner shall prepare and deliver or mail to the applicant, a written list of information, which shall constitute the applicant's development plan, pursuant to Section 4.06.040. 
2.  A minimum of 17 copies of the minor development plan map and description shall be submitted to the Town Planner which shall be reviewed by the Town Planner in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 4.03.070(A). The submittal shall be accompanied by the development review fee as set forth in Section 4.03.070. 
B.  Staff review. The Town Planner shall distribute copies of the development plan to Town staff and other agencies as he deems appropriate. They shall review the development plan with site visits as needed to determine whether it conforms with the Town's regulations, goals and policies in their areas of responsibility. They shall submit their comments to the Town Planner at least seven days before the appropriate Planning Commission meeting. The Town Planner shall compile these comments and shall prepare for the Planning Commission a summary of the issues which the Planning Commission should consider in reviewing the proposal. 
C.  Planning Commission review. The Town Planner shall distribute copies of the development plan to the Planning Commission members along with the summary of issues and comments. A copy of the summary and comments shall be furnished to the applicant. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the development plan at a regular meeting within 30 days following certification by the Town Planner that the submittal is complete. Public notice shall be given pursuant to Section 4.03.060. Any public hearing may be continued by the Planning Commission until the next regularly scheduled meeting, if deemed necessary. The applicant or his representative shall be present at said public hearing to represent the proposal. Within 15 days following the conclusion of the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall take one of the following actions: 
1.  Approve the development proposal and authorize issuance of a development permit subject to such conditions as it finds necessary to ensure that the proposed development complies with the Town's regulations, goals and policies; 
2.  Continue the hearing to the next regular Planning Commission meeting, with the requirement that the applicant submit changes or additional information which they find necessary to determine whether the proposal complies with the Town's regulations, goals and policies; or 
3.  Deny the development permit, stating the specific reasons for denial. 
D.  Further review by Planning Commission. 
1.  In the event the hearing is continued pursuant to Subsection (C)(2) of this section, the applicant shall submit 15 copies of the required changes or information to the Town Planner at least seven days prior to the Planning Commission meeting at which the proposal is to be reconsidered. The Town Planner shall review the additional submittal with appropriate Town staff or other agencies and shall distribute copies of the submittal to the Planning Commission members along with comments from the staff and agencies. 
2.  At the continued hearing the applicant or his representative shall be present to represent the proposal. The Planning Commission shall take one of the following actions: 
a.  Approve the development proposal and authorize issuance of a development permit subject to such conditions as they deem necessary to ensure that the proposed development complies with the Town's regulations, goals and policies; 
b.  Deny the development permit, stating the specific reasons for denial; or 
c.  Continue the hearing pursuant to Chapter 2.20. 
3.  Appeal of minor development review. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Planning Commission where the Planning Commission is the final authority may appeal such decision to the Town Board as follows: 
a.  Filing appeal. The person(s) aggrieved shall file ten copies of a letter of appeal with the Town Manager within one week of the Planning Commission decision from which the appeal is taken. The letter of appeal shall state the specific grounds upon which the appeal is based and shall have attached to it any supporting documentary evidence. The Town Planner shall distribute copies of the appeal submittal to the Town Board members, along with copies of the minutes from the Planning Commission meeting(s) at which the proposal was reviewed, copies of the staff or agency comments and the Town Planner's summary of issues. 
b.  Town Board meeting. The Board shall hear the appeal at a regular meeting pursuant to Chapter 2.20 within 30 days of the date of the filing of the appeal. The Board shall hold a public hearing at said meeting on the appeal. Public notice shall be given as for the Planning Commission hearing. The applicant or his representative shall be present at the public hearing. At the meeting the Board shall: 
1.  Affirm the decision of the Planning Commission; or 
2.  Reverse or modify the decision of the Planning Commission upon a vote of two-thirds of the entire membership of the Board. 
E.  Filing of development plan. If a development permit is authorized, it shall be signed by the Town Planner within ten days of the approval. A copy shall be filed at Town hall, along with a copy of the approved development plan, both of which shall become part of the permanent records of the Town. 
F.  As-builts. Before the issuance of any certificate of occupancy for the development, the applicant shall submit to the Town Planner a set of as-built plans and profiles on 24-inch by 36-inch reproducible Mylar sheets, showing the locations of all water mains, sanitary sewers and storm sewers as well as a surveyed map of utility easements. Such plans and profiles shall be of a scale and accuracy sufficient to enable location of the improvements and easements and shall be in accordance with the Town's construction standards, and shall be subject to the approval of the Town Engineer. 
G.  Changes in development plan. Any change in the development plan made after original submittal of the plan, either before or after issuance of the development permit, shall require the proposal to be re-entered in the review procedure at the appropriate planning step unless: 
1.  The change is directed by the Planning Commission; or 
2.  In the opinion of the Town Planner, the change does not materially change the development plan and it complies with the Town's regulations, goals and policies. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.06.050, 3-5-1986; Amended 6-2-1991; Amended 3-16-1995; Amended 4-20-1996; Amended 2-13-2000; Amended 5-8-2007) 
Section 4.06.070. - Major development review. 
A.  Development plan submittal. 
1.  Within one week after the pre-application conference, the Town Planner shall prepare and deliver or mail to the applicant, a written list of information which shall constitute the applicant's development plan, pursuant to Section 4.06.040. 
2.  A minimum of 22 copies of the major development plan map and description shall be submitted to the Town Planner and reviewed in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 4.03.070. The submittal shall be accompanied by the development review fee as set forth in Section 4.03.070. 
B.  Staff review. The Town Planner shall distribute copies of the development plan to Town staff and other agencies as he deems appropriate. They shall review the development plan with site visits as needed to determine whether it conforms with the Town's regulations, goals, policies and plans in their areas of responsibility. They shall submit their comments to the Town Planner at least 12 days before the appropriate Planning Commission meeting. The Town Planner shall compile these comments and shall prepare for the Planning Commission a summary of the issues which they should consider in reviewing the proposal. 
C.  Site review. Before the Planning Commission hearing for a major development proposal, the proposal shall be reviewed on-site by at least three members of the Planning Commission. They may make written recommendations to the full Planning Commission at its regular meeting regarding compliance of the proposal with the Town's regulations, goals, policies and plans. 
D.  Planning Commission review. The Town Planner shall distribute copies of the development plan to the Planning Commission members along with the summary of issues and comments. A copy of the summary and comments shall also be furnished to the applicant. The Planning Commission shall review the proposal at a regular meeting at which it shall hold a public hearing on the proposal. Public notice shall be given pursuant to Section 4.03.060. The applicant or his representative shall be present to represent the proposal. The Planning Commission shall take one of the following actions: 
1.  Approve the development proposal and recommend to the Board that a development permit be issued, subject to such conditions as they find necessary to ensure that the proposed development complies with the Town's ordinances, regulations, goals, policies and plans, and that any adverse impacts resulting from the proposed development will be reasonably and adequately mitigated by the applicant to minimize such impacts; and recommend municipal or park land dedication or fee pursuant to Section 4.07.110; 
2.  Continue the hearing to the next regular Planning Commission meeting with the requirement that the applicant submit changes or additional information which they find necessary to determine whether the proposal complies with the Town's regulations, goals, policies and plans; or 
3.  Recommend denial of the development permit, stating the specific reasons for denial. 
E.  Further review by Planning Commission. 
1.  In the event the hearing is continued pursuant to Subsection (D)(2) of this section, the applicant shall submit a minimum of 22 copies of the required changes or information to the Town Planner at least ten days prior to the Planning Commission meeting at which the proposal is to be reconsidered. The Town Planner shall review the additional submittal with appropriate staff and other agencies and shall distribute copies of the submittal to the Planning Commission members along with comments from staff and agencies. 
2.  At the continued hearing the applicant or his representative shall be present to represent the proposal. The Planning Commission shall take one of the following actions: 
a.  Approve the development proposal and recommend to the Board that a development permit be granted subject to such conditions as the Commission finds necessary to ensure that the proposed development complies with the Town's regulations, goals, policies and plans, and that any adverse impacts resulting from the proposed development will be reasonably and adequately mitigated by the applicant to minimize such impacts; 
b.  Recommend denial of the development permit, stating the specific reasons for denial; or 
c.  Continue the hearing pursuant to Chapter 2.20. 
F.  Town Board review. 
1.  Subsequent to the Planning Commission's recommendation for issuance or denial of the development permit, the Town Planner shall distribute copies of the development plan to the Town Board, along with relevant excerpts from Planning Commission meeting minutes and copies of staff or agency comments. 
2.  The Board shall review the proposed development application at a regular meeting at which it shall hold a public hearing on the proposal. Public notice shall be given pursuant to Section 4.03.060. At the public hearing, the Board shall consider the recommendations of the Planning Commission, and the comments, testimony and other evidence presented. The applicant or his representative shall be present to represent the proposal. The Board shall take one of the following actions: 
a.  Approve the proposed development, subject to any conditions it finds necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare or to ensure compliance with the Town's regulations, goals and policies, after finding that the proposed development will comply with the Town's ordinances, regulations, goals, policies and plans and any adverse impacts resulting from the proposed development will be reasonably and adequately mitigated by the applicant to minimize such impacts; 
b.  Deny the development application, stating the specific reasons for denial; or 
c.  Continue the hearing pursuant to Chapter 2.20. 
3.  If the proposed development is approved by the Board, the Town Planner shall issue a development plan within ten days of the approval subject to such conditions found necessary by the Town Board to ensure that the development complies with the Town's regulations, goals, policies and plans. If the proposal is denied, the Board shall state the specific reasons for denial. 
4.  The decision of the Board shall be final, from which an appeal may be taken to Court in accordance with the laws of the State. 
G.  Filing of development plan. If a development permit is authorized, a copy shall be filed at the Town hall, along with a copy of the approved development plan, both of which shall become part of the permanent records of the Town. 
H.  As-builts. When deemed necessary by the Town Engineer, and before the issuance of any certificate of occupancy for the development, the applicant shall submit to the Town Planner a set of as-built plans and profiles on 24-inch by 36-inch reproducible Mylar sheets and, if available, an AutoCad (Release 10 or greater) drawing file(s) on a 31/2-inch floppy disk(s), showing the locations of all water mains, sanitary sewers and storm sewers, as well as a surveyed map of utility easements. Such plans and profiles shall be of a scale and accuracy sufficient to enable location of the improvements and easements and shall be in accordance with the Town's construction and mapping standards, and shall be subject to the approval of the Town's Engineer. 
I.  Changes in development plan. Any change in the development plan made after original submittal of the plan, either before or after issuance of the development permit, shall require the proposal to be re-entered in the review procedure at the appropriate planning step unless: 
1.  The change is directed by the Planning Commission; or 
2.  In the opinion of the Town Planner, the change does not materially change the development plan and it complies with the Town's regulations, goals and policies. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.06.060, 3-5-1986; Amended 4-16-1995; Amended 4-20-1996; Amended 2-13-2000; Amended 5-8-2007) 
CHAPTER 4.07. - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

Section 4.07.010. - Lighting standards. 
A.  Objectives. The objectives of this section are as follows: 
1.  Provide quality, context-sensitive lighting for the Town mountain environment; and 
2.  Sustain a pristine nighttime sky by controlling glare, light trespass and light pollution; and 
3.  Provide for zero tolerance of light pollution and light trespass beyond property lines within and into residential areas; and 
4.  Minimize light pollution and light trespass beyond property lines within and into commercial and industrial areas; and 
5.  Require proper shielding to eliminate glare at normal viewing angles from all high brightness sources; and 
6.  In facade, sign and retail applications, use lighting to create visual hierarchy, which facilitates circulation and way finding. 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  Except as provided herein, the provisions of this section shall apply to all subdivisions, planned unit developments, development permits, sign permits, and building permits finally approved on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
2.  All lighting fixtures, devices, equipment, lamp sources and wattage, fixture locations, and shielding installed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall comply with the requirements and standards of this section. 
3.  All lighting fixtures, devices, equipment, lamp sources and wattage, fixture locations, and shielding presently in use and existing as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, and not in conformance with the requirements and standards of this section, shall be considered a legal nonconforming use. 
C.  Submittal requirements. A lighting plan shall accompany all applications for development and preliminary subdivision plans and shall be submitted separately from other drawing information. The lighting plans and/or specifications shall show the type of lighting equipment, the lamp source and wattage, fixture locations, mounting heights, shielding and all mounting details. Manufacturer catalog and/or specification materials with scaled drawings or photographs are also required for all lighting equipment. In addition, calculations shall be provided which show point-by-point horizontal illuminance at ground level for all commercial or industrial projects. Calculations for other project types shall be provided at the Town's request. 
D.  Prohibitions. 
1.  All mercury vapor sources are prohibited. Existing fixtures should be modified to accommodate more current technologies. 
2.  Any search light or laser light used for the purpose of advertising, or as a beacon, is prohibited. Blinking, tracing, or flashing lights are also prohibited. 
3.  High intensity discharge (HID) floodlighting is prohibited. 
4.  Fixtures with high brightness lamps and poor visual cutoff are prohibited. 
5.  Bollards or low-mounted luminaries (less than 12 feet above ground) are not to exceed 35 watts. 
6.  Exterior neon sources such that the source can be directly viewed are prohibited. Backlighted applications may be acceptable, and must conform to the same restrictions as cabinet signs. 
E.  Exemptions. 
1.  All lighting used for the purpose of aviation is exempted. 
2.  All temporary lighting used to identify hazards or roadway construction (operating less than four months) is exempted. 
3.  All traffic signal lighting is exempted. 
4.  Low voltage, ornamental landscape lighting which meets yard lighting and lamp shielding requirements is allowed. 
5.  Low-brightness, seasonal holiday lighting is allowed. Note that the National Electrical Code (Section 590.3(B)) allows for temporary lighting installations for up to 90 days. 
6.  High intensity discharge floodlighting may be used for sports lighting applications (see Lamp Shielding Chart for restrictions). 
7.  Lighting for the purpose of security must meet the criteria of each application category but may be exempted from specific control requirements. 
F.  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cutoff angle (of fixture) means the angle measured upward from the vertical at which the bare source is completely blocked from view. 
    Discomfort glare means glare producing discomfort. It does not necessarily interfere with visual performance or visibility. 
    Footcandle means the basic unit of illuminance (the amount of light falling on a surface). 
    Full-cutoff fixture means a fixture that allows no emission of light above horizontal. 
    Full shielding refers to internal and/or external shields and louvers provided to prevent brightness from lamps, reflectors, refractors and lenses from causing glare at normal viewing angles. 
    Glare means the sensation of annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility due to bright or uncontrolled light sources. 
    IESNA means the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, an organization that establishes standards for the lighting industry. 
    Illuminance means a measure of the amount of light incident on a surface, expressed in footcandles. 
    Light trespass means any form of artificial illumination emanating from a light fixture or illuminated sign that penetrates another property. 
    Luminance means the apparent brightness of a light fixture or lamp as viewed from a specific direction. The luminance of a fixture can vary as the viewing angle varies. 
    Motion sensor device means a device that will sense motion electronically and switch on security lighting for a brief duration. 
    Non-cutoff fixture means a fixture that includes no optics to prevent light emission above horizontal. 
    Nuisance glare means glare that causes complaints. 
    Semi-cutoff fixture means a fixture that emits some light above horizontal, but less than a non-cutoff fixture. 
    Timing device means a switching device, a part of which is a clock, set to the prevailing time, that will control the period of operation for outdoor lighting fixtures and signs. 
LAMP SHIELDING AND SPECIAL APPLICATION CHARTS 
Lamp Shielding Chart Refer to this chart for shielding instructions for all exterior lighting applications Lamp Wattage Incandescent Fluorescent H.I.D. Less than 35 None None N/A 36-75 None None Low 76-100 Low Low Medium 101-150 Medium Medium Medium 151-250 Medium 251-500 Full 501-1,000 Full 1,001+ Full Legend: None No shielding (IESNA non-cutoff) Low Low shielding (IESNA semi-cutoff) Medium Medium shielding (IESNA full-cutoff) Full Full shielding (lamp shielded from view outside of property) Full Prohibited (see "exemptions")  
Commercial Light Level Criteria Maximum initial illuminance values in these areas must not exceed the range specified by the table. Values are taken from the IESNA's recommended illuminance values. Lower wattages and mounting heights should be implemented whenever possible Area/Criteria Fast Food/ 
Convenience Gas Station/ 
Hotel Canopy Automotive 
Outdoor Retail General 
Commercial Walkways and Parkways Maximum initial 
horizontal 
illuminance (fc) value 
at ground level 1.5-3.0 20-30 20-30 1.5-3.0 0.2-1.0  
Note- Lighting for residential and industrial areas is covered under specific application categories in the title. 
PARKING AREA LIGHTING 
Acceptable Lamp Types and Maximum Allowable Wattages Controls Maximum Mounting Height Residential Lighting parking lots is prohibited in rural or standard residential areas Residential Multi-Family Compact fluorescent 
H.I.D. 
Incandescent 42 W max. 
70 W max. 
100 W max. Lights on dusk to dawn 15 feet Residential Medium Density Compact fluorescent 
H.I.D. 
Incandescent 42 W max. 
70 W max. 
100 W max. Public Area Compact fluorescent 
H.I.D. (2)42 W max. 
175 W max. Commercial Limited Compact fluorescent 
H.I.D. (2)42 W max. 
175 W max. Lights on until one hour 
after closing or servicing 25 feet Commercial General Compact fluorescent 
H.I.D. (2)42 W max. 
75 W max. Central Business District Compact fluorescent 
H.I.D. (2)42 W max. 
100 W max. 30 feet Industrial Compact fluorescent 
H.I.D. (2)42 W max. 
175 W max. Lights on until one hour 
after closing 30 feet  
Notes: 
 Dusk-to-dawn operation is allowed for 24-hour business operations. 
 Mounting height may be increased for medium and fully shielded fixtures upon the Town's approval. 
The following table lists recommended minimum maintained average illuminance values and maximum acceptable uniformity ratios: 
Parking Lot Activity Level General Parking and Pedestrian Areas Non-Pedestrian Driveways 
(Vehicle Entries and Exits) Footcandles Uniformity Ratio 
(Avg.:Min.) Footcandles Uniformity Ratio 
(Avg.:Min.) High: 
   Large shopping malls 
   High-volume fast food 0.9 4:1 2 3:1 Medium: 
   Smaller shopping centers 
   Office complexes 
   Hotels and motels 
   Hospitals 
   Community events 
   Condominiums 
   Fast food 0.6 4:1 1 3:1 Low: (for security lighting) 
   Neighborhood markets 
   Industrial facilities 
   School or churches 0.2 4:1 0.5 4:1  
YARD LIGHTING 
Acceptable Lamp Types and Maximum Allowable Wattages Controls Maximum Mounting Height Residential Compact fluorescent 
Incandescent 32 W max. 
75 W max. Lights on dusk to 11:00 p.m. 20 feet Residential Multi-Family Compact fluorescent 
Incandescent 32 W max. 
75 W max. 15 feet Residential Medium Density Compact fluorescent 
Incandescent 32 W max. 
75 W max. Public Area Compact fluorescent 
Metal halide (2)42 W max. 
70 W max. Lights on dusk to dawn 25 feet Commercial Limited Compact fluorescent 
Metal halide (2)42 W max. 
70 W max. Lights on until one hour after closing or servicing 25 feet Commercial General Compact fluorescent 
Metal halide 2)42 W max. 
70 W max. 20 feet Central Business District Compact fluorescent 
Metal halide (2)42 W max. 
100 W max. 25 feet Industrial Compact fluorescent 
H.I.D. (2)42 W max. 
175 W max. Lights on dusk to 11:00 p.m. 30 feet  
Notes: 
 The use of motion detectors and timers is encouraged to control specific fixtures for security and egress applications. 
 The use of porch lights and egress lighting is encouraged. Dusk-to-dawn operation is allowed for these applications. Note that these fixtures must still meet the intent of the Lamp Shielding Chart. 
FACADE LIGHTING 
Acceptable Lamp Types and 
Maximum Allowable Wattages Controls Maximum Mounting Height Residential Facade lighting is prohibited in rural or standard residential areas Residential Multi-Family Facade lighting is prohibited in residential multifamily areas Residential Medium Density Facade lighting is prohibited in residential medium density areas Public Area Compact fluorescent 
Linear fluorescent 
H.I.D. 
Incandescent 42 W max. 
32 W max. 
70 W max. 
100 W max. Lights on dusk to dawn See below Commercial Limited Compact fluorescent 
Linear fluorescent 
H.I.D. 
Incandescent 42 W max. 
32 W max. 
70 W max. 
100 W max. Lights on until one hour after closing or servicing Commercial General Compact fluorescent 
Linear fluorescent 
H.I.D. 42 W max. 
32 W max. 
70 W max. Central Business District Compact fluorescent 
Linear fluorescent 
H.I.D. 42 W max. 
32 W max. 
70 W max. Industrial Facade Lighting is prohibited in Industrial areas  
Notes (mounting of facade lighting): 
 In all facade lighting, the source will be fully shielded from pedestrians and motorists. 
 Sources should not be visible from inside the lighted building or from surrounding buildings. 
 Uplighting must be shielded and/or fall completely on the facade. 
 Downlighting of facade elements is preferred. 
SIGN LIGHTING 
Sign Lighting Acceptable Lamp Types and 
Maximum Allowable Wattages Controls Maximum Mounting Height Residential Sign lighting is prohibited in rural or standard residential areas Residential Multifamily Sign lighting is prohibited in residential multifamily areas Residential Medium Density Sign lighting is prohibited in residential medium density areas Public Area Compact fluorescent 
Linear fluorescent 
Incandescent (2)42 W max. 
(2)32 W max. 
100 W max. Sign lights on dusk to dawn See notes below Commercial Limited Compact fluorescent 
Linear fluorescent 
H.I.D. 
Incandescent (2)42 W max. 
(2)32 W max. 
70 W max. 
150 W max. Sign lights on until one hour after 
closing Commercial General Compact fluorescent 
Linear fluorescent 
H.I.D. 
Incandescent (2)42 W max. 
(2)32 W max. 
70 W max. 
150 W max. Central Business District* Compact fluorescent 
Linear fluorescent 
Incandescent (2)42 W max. 
(2)32 W max. 
100 W max. Industrial Compact fluorescent 
Linear fluorescent 
H.I.D. 
Incandescent (2)42 W max. 
(2)32 W max. 
70 W max. 
150 W max. *Cabinet signs are prohibited in Central Business Districts  
General notes: 
  The word "sign" refers to any object attached to or apart from a structure intended to convey advertising, image, or identification. Note that the National Electrical Code (Section 509.3(B)) allows for temporary lighting installations for up to 90 days. 
  Each proprietor is limited to one illuminated sign per establishment. 
  In all sign lighting, the source will be fully shielded from pedestrians and motorists. 
  Sources should not be visible from inside the associated building or from surrounding buildings. 
Externally lighted signs: 
  Downlighting of signs is preferred. 
  Uplighting must be shielded and/or fall completely on the sign. 
Internally lighted signs: 
  Cabinet signs, or signs with interior lighting, are to have fluorescent lamps and will not exceed 130 watts. 
  The use of sources other than fluorescent for cabinet signs is subject to the approval of the Town. 
ROADWAY LIGHTING 
Allowable Lamp Types and 
Maximum Allowable Wattages Controls Maximum Mounting Height Residential* Compact fluorescent 
H.I.D. (2)42 W max. 
100 W max. Lights on dusk to dawn 20 feet Residential Multifamily* Compact fluorescent 
H.I.D. 42 W max. 
100 W max. Residential Medium Density* Compact fluorescent 
H.I.D. (2)42 W max. 
100 W max. Public Area Compact fluorescent 
H.I.D. (2)42 W max. 
175 W max. 25 feet Commercial limited** Compact fluorescent 
H.I.D. (2)42 W max. 
175 W max. 30 feet Commercial General** Compact fluorescent 
H.I.D. (2)42 W max. 
175 W max. Central Business District** Compact fluorescent 
H.I.D. (3)42 W max. 
175 W max. Industrial Compact fluorescent 
H.I.D. (3)42 W max. 
175 W max. *House-side shields should be used in all residential areas (to prevent roadway lighting from trespassing 
  onto residential property). 
  
**Mounting height may be extended to 40 feet for special cases such as large commercial developments only 
  upon the Town's approval.  
(Amended 1-13-2000; Ord. No. 08-2017, §§ 1-5, 4-11-2017) 
Section 4.07.020. - Landscape standards. 
    In order to enhance the visual impact of development on the community, to clarify traffic and pedestrian circulation patterns, and to prevent land erosion and improper drainage, every development permit application, except some commercial projects in the CBD Zone Area, shall include a landscape plan. 
A.  Landscape plan. Each landscape plan shall be a drawing at the same scale as the development plan or larger, which shall depict the following: 
1.  Existing and proposed improvements. 
a.  Property boundaries. 
b.  Easements. 
c.  Building outlines. 
d.  Parking lots and parking spaces. 
e.  Driveways and sidewalks. 
f.  Walls and fences. 
g.  Storage areas. 
h.  Light standards. 
i.  Snow storage area. 
2.  Planting plan. 
a.  Proposed treatment of all ground surfaces (paving, turf, gravel, roadbase, concrete, pavers, etc.). 
b.  Location of existing and proposed landscape materials. 
c.  Plant materials schedule listing the number, height and types of materials by species and common name. 
3.  Plan for maintenance. A plan which specifies the parties responsible for maintenance of landscaping and irrigation system. 
4.  Information block. 
a.  Name of owner. 
b.  Title of development or address. 
c.  List of square footage of coverage by buildings, parking area, landscaping areas, etc., equaling the total square footage of the property. 
B.  Landscape requirements. 
1.  Impervious coverage. No more than 80 percent of the area of any development shall be covered with impervious materials; a minimum of 20 percent of each development shall be covered with landscape materials, as provided below. 
2.  Landscape materials. Landscape materials shall include live plant materials, including grass, ground covers, trees, shrubs, and flower beds. The following landscape materials may cover a maximum of 30 percent of the required landscape area: walks, decks, terraces, water features and decorative rock. No artificial trees, shrubs, turf, or plants may be used as landscape material. 

3.  Front street buffer. 
a.  All yards adjacent to primary and secondary streets shall be landscaped. Landscape materials shall include deciduous, coniferous, and ornamental trees, shrubs, perennials, bulbs, and seed or sodded lawn. Plant quantities are flexible; however, the planting plan shall provide combinations of plant material with differing heights and densities, contributing to the overall uniform appearance of the neighborhood. Plantings shall not compete with and overpower existing streetscape planting, but supplement trees, shrubs, and lawn areas in the public right-of-way. On lots larger than one-half acre and in mobile home parks and subdivisions, a landscaped buffer shall abut the entire length of the front property line except for approved driveway accesses. The width of the landscaped buffer shall be five percent of the average of the two side property lines, but not less than 15 feet. Plant material for landscape areas shall be suitable for use in the local climate. All landscape areas shall be irrigated using an underground automatic system. All landscaped areas shall be maintained and all sod and seeded lawn areas to be mowed regularly. Deciduous shade trees shall be spaced a minimum of 30 feet on center and shall be three-inch caliper minimum. Coniferous evergreen trees shall be spaced 20 feet on center and be a minimum six feet in height. Ornamental trees shall be no closer than 15 feet on center and two-inch caliper. Aspen trees may be grouped at less than 15 feet. Trees may be grouped at species appropriate spacing, or spaced evenly along roadways. Shrubs and perennials shall be spaced to achieve massing, depending on anticipated mature size. 
b.  Groundcovers, including sod and seed, shall be planted at a rate to achieve full coverage and mowed to a maximum height of six inches. All plant beds shall be mulched to an appropriate depth to retain moisture and reduce dust. Mulch shall be organic; rock and gravel mulch is not allowed. No more than two driveway cuts per lot, each a maximum of 35 feet wide, shall be allowed unless specifically approved by the Planning Commission during the development review. 
4.  Boundary buffer. The boundaries of every development shall be landscaped to adequately buffer potential incompatibility between adjacent land uses. Screening of parking lots from adjacent properties shall be required. Screening must be provided to eliminate headlight glare from lot onto adjacent property and to screen views into parking lots. Planting buffers along the edge(s) of parking lots must be a minimum of five feet wide or a combination of fencing and a two-foot wide buffer may be used. 
5.  Drainage easements. All drainage easements shall be seeded or sodded with grass or other ground cover and shall be maintained in a manner that promotes proper drainage in conformance with the drainage plan for the subdivision in which the subject lot lies. 
6.  Clear vision area. In any clear vision area, as set forth in Section 4.04.100(H)(1), berm and plant height shall be such that landscaping is a maximum of 21/2 feet in height above the road elevation, measured from the point of the nearest road pavement. 
7.  Parking area landscaping. In parking areas with ten or more parking spaces, landscaped islands or peninsulas shall be used to reduce the visual impact and assist in defining on-site traffic movement. Such landscaped areas shall be curbed to prevent vehicles from intruding on them. They shall be included in the total landscape requirements of this section and shall constitute at least ten percent of the total un-enclosed parking area, in conformance with Section 4.07.140. 
8.  Sprinkler system. All required landscaped areas in nonresidential zone districts must be served by an underground sprinkler system that provides full coverage for landscaped areas. The landscape plan need not specify the exact irrigation plan, but must clearly state that an underground sprinkler system providing full coverage will be provided. 
9.  All new construction adjacent to the right-of-way shall provide new curb and gutter if curb and gutter does not exist or is in disrepair unless the Town intends to make similar improvements within an established capitol plan. 
10.  Street furnishings such as benches and pedestrian lighting should express local character in design and materials such as wood or wrought iron. Furnishings should have similar materials and colors. Product lines should be selected based upon durability and resistance to climactic elements. Street furnishings should be located adjacent to pedestrian zones and not impede pedestrian movement along sidewalks. 
C.  Landscape installation required. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all required landscape improvements are installed. 
D.  Recommended plant list. 
Botanical name Common name Notes Deciduous Shade Trees Acer negundo Box Elder N Fraxinus pennsylvanica Green Ash L Populus acuminata Lanceleaf Cottonwood N Populus angustifolia Narrowleaf Cottonwood N Populus balsamifera Balsam Poplar N Sorbus scopulina Mountain Ash N Ornamental Trees Acer glabrum Rocky Mountain Maple N Alnus incana tenuifolia Thinleaf Alder N Amelanchier canadensis Shadblow Serviceberry N L Betula occidentalis Rocky Mountain Birch N Crataegus succulenta Western Hawthorn N L Crataegus erythropoda Cerro Hawthorn N Malus "Dolgo" Dolgo Crabapple Malus "Radiant" Radiant Crabapple Malus "Spring Snow" Spring Snow Crabapple Populus tremuloides Quaking Aspen N Prunus pensylvanica Pin Cherry N L Prunus virginiana Chokecherry N L Quercus gambelii Gambel Oak N L Evergreen: Pine, Spruce, Fir Picea pungens Colorado Blue Spruce N Picea engelmannii Engelmann's Spruce N Pinus aristata Bristlecone Pine N L Pinus edulis Pinyon Pine N L Pinus flexilis Limber Pine N L Pinus ponderosa Ponderosa Pine N Pseudotsuga menziesii glauca Colorado Douglas Fir N Upright Junipers Juniperus communis Common Juniper N L Juniperus scopulorum Rocky Mountain Juniper N L Juniperus monosperma Oneseed Juniper N L Spreading Junipers Juniperus horizontalis "Blue Ring" Blue Ring Creeping Juniper L Juniperus horizontalis "Prince of Wales" Prince of Wales Creeping Juniper L Juniperus sabina "Arcadia" Arcadia Savin Juniper L Juniperus sabina "Broadmoor" Broadmoor Savin Juniper L Juniperus sabina "Buffalo" Buffalo Savin Juniper L Juniperus sabina "Scandia" Scandia Savin Juniper L Juniperus sabina tamariscifolia Tamarix (Tam) Juniper L Juniperus scopulorum "Table Top" Table Top Rocky Mountain Juniper L Broadleaf Evergreens Arctostaphylos uva-ursii Kinnikinnick N L Cercocarpus ledifolius Curl-Leaf Mountain Mahogany N L Cercocarpus montanus Alderleaf Mountain Mahogany N L Mahonia repens Creeping Oregon Grape N L Yucca glauca Soapweed Yucca N L Shrubs Acer ginnala Amur Maple L Acer glabrum Rocky Mountain Maple N L Amelanchier alnifolia Saskatoon Serviceberry N L Artemisia filifolia Sand Sagebrush N L Atriplex canescens Chamiso N L Chrysothamnus nauseosus Yellow Twig Rabbit Brush N L Cornus sericea Red Osier Dogwood N L Cotoneaster acutifolia Peking Cotoneaster L Eunoymus alatus Burning Bush Holodiscus dumosus Mountain Spray N L Potentilla sp. Cinquefoil N Prunus besseyi Western Sand Cherry N L Prunus cistena Purpleleaf Sand Cherry L Prunus virginiana Chokecherry N L Physocarpus opulifolius Common Ninebark N L Quercus gambelii Gambel Oak N L Rhamnus smithii Smith Buckthorn N L Rhus glabra Smooth Sumac N L Rhus trilobata Three Leaf Sumac N L Ribes americanum American Black Currant N Ribes aurem Golden Currant N Ribes cereum Wax Currant N Ribes inerme Whitestem Gooseberry N Ribes leptanthum Trumpet Gooseberry N Rosa glauca Red-Leaved Rose Rosa woodsii Western Wild Rose N L Rubus deliciosus Rocky Mountain Raspberry N Rubus ideaus Wild Red Raspberry N Salix caprea Pussy Willow Salix irrorata Bluestem Willow N Shepherdia argentea Silver Buffaloberry N Symphoricarpos albus Common Snowberry N Symphoricarpos oreophilus Mountain Snowberry N Syringa vulgaris Common Lilac L N-Species native to Colorado the State 
L-Low water use plants (after establishment) 
Refer to local nurseries for information regarding perennials and annuals that will tolerate the short mountain growing season  
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.07.010, 3-5-1986; Amended 6-2-1991; Amended 10-16-1996; Amended 8-24-1999; Amended 2-13-2000; Ord. No. 08-2017, §§ 6-8, 4-11-2017) 
Section 4.07.030. - Erosion and sediment control, stabilization, and revegetation standards. 
    In order to ensure that natural drainage patterns are preserved and protected from increased water flows, to keep any disturbance in natural vegetation and soil cover to a minimum, to prevent increased degradation of rivers and streams, to ensure that fugitive dust from development is minimal, and to ensure that erosion is controlled and slopes are properly stabilized and revegetated, every development permit application shall include an erosion and sediment control plan, and if necessary, a slope stabilization and revegetation plan in accordance with the requirements contained in Section 4.13.060. The Town Planner shall determine for each application which elements of Section 4.13.060(B) and (C) shall be included in such plans. 
(Amended 2-13-2000) 
Section 4.07.040. - General architectural standards. 
    In order to enhance the visual impact of development on the community and the compatibility of building design with neighboring buildings, road design and drainage patterns, every development permit application, including those for mobile home parks, shall include an architectural design plan and the provisions of this section shall apply. 
A.  Architectural design plan. The architectural design plan shall include the following: 
1.  A drawing or model of the proposed development, as follows: 
a.  For all residential projects with total build out of eight or more units or nonresidential projects with gross floor area of more than 10,000 square feet, a three dimensional drawing or model. 
b.  For nonresidential projects with gross area of 10,000 square feet or less, the requirements of Subsection (A)(1)(a) of this section or a two dimensional drawing of all elevations. 
2.  A statement of architectural design, on a form provided by the Town, which indicates consideration of each of the requirements of this section. 
B.  Requirements for architectural design. 
1.  General. The architectural design plan shall demonstrate how the following items have been addressed in the location of buildings and design of the development: orientation, sun, views, natural light, shadows and ventilation for inhabitants, prevailing winds, slopes, existing and future drainage patterns, snow shedding, existing landscaping, pedestrian circulation, and compatibility with scale. 

2.  Building height. 
a.  The maximum height allowed is 35 feet to any point on the building, except in the Broadway District (see Section 4.07.060) and as further defined below. 
b.  On a flat or shed roof, any selected reference point on the roof surface that sits directly above the interior of the building must be measured from existing grade to the highest point of the roof structure. On a gable, hip, or gambrel roof, any selected reference point on the roof surface that sits directly above the interior of the building must be measured from existing grade to the average distance between the eaves and the apex of the roof. If the selected reference point is outside of the building footprint (such as eaves and overhangs), then the height measurement is from the existing or proposed finished grade, whichever is more restrictive. Existing grade is defined as the natural topography that exists prior to any improvements being made. Finished grade is the final elevation of the surface material that adjoins the building. Parapet walls may exceed applicable zone district height limitations by four feet. Stacks, vents, cooling towers, elevator structures and similar mechanical equipment and spires, domes, cupolas, towers and similar non-inhabitable appurtenances may exceed applicable zone district height limitations by up to 30 percent. 
3.  Building mass/form/orientation. 
a.  Building mass, form, length, and height shall be designed to provide variety and visual interest, maintaining a scale appropriate to surroundings. 
b.  Building styles that are traditionally used within the Town and in rural settings (such as two-story, false fronts and ranch buildings) shall be used as examples for new construction and renovations. Appropriate styles and form vary within the Town; refer to specific area design standards for appropriate building types. Buildings that are evocative of other regions, such as adobe buildings, are inappropriate. 
c.  The front facade of buildings shall orient towards the street; the front building facade containing the primary entry way shall parallel the street. 
4.  Architectural detail. 
a.  Building entrances shall be visible and accessible from the pedestrian right-of-way along the building's primary street. 
b.  All mechanical equipment (either on roofs or at ground level), service areas, storage areas, loading docks, and trash receptacles shall be screened from public view. 
5.  Building materials. 
a.  Building materials should be sympathetic and harmonious with the natural setting of Eagle. Traditional materials used in construction of buildings in rural mountain communities are wood, stone, stucco, and brick masonry. A variety of materials should be employed within the building facade. Stone or masonry delineating the building foundation is encouraged. Screw down metal roofs are permitted. 
b.  Facade and roof colors shall have subtle, neutral, or earth tone colors. Muted colors are encouraged. The use of high intensity colors, metallic colors, black, or fluorescent colors is prohibited. Exemplary colors are available for review at the Town hall. 
c.  Building trim and accent areas may feature brighter, complementing colors, including primary colors, but plastic materials and neon tubing is unacceptable for building trim or accent areas. Plastic light raceways are prohibited. 
d.  Canopies, such as over gasoline pumps, shall be equipped with skirts and/or under-canopy lighting shall be recessed sufficiently to direct lighting downward to prevent light being broadcast beyond the site. 
6.  Plastics. Major components, including roofs, walls, fascia and exterior trim of a principal structure shall not be of plastic. Plastic may be allowed for smaller components such as skylights, outdoor seating and similar items. The use of plastics shall be discouraged unless it is demonstrated that the proposed material is the best alternative for the particular component. 
7.  Utility connection. Underground utility connection is encouraged. Where the connection meets the building, risers, utility meters, panel boxes, etc., are encouraged to be covered with the same or compatible material as the siding material unless expressly prohibited by utility company regulations. 
8.  Trash receptacles. Areas for trash receptacles shall be designed so that the receptacle, as much as possible, cannot be viewed from the street or yard. Access to the receptacles must be provided to allow easy ingress and egress by trash hauling vehicles. Dumpsters must be placed on concrete pads. 
9.  Fencing. See Section 4.04.100(H)(6). 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.07.020, 3-5-1986; Amended 6-2-1991; Amended 2-13-2000; Amended 5-22-2007; Ord. No. 08-2017, §§ 9, 10, 4-11-2017) 
Section 4.07.050. - Central Business Area. 
A.  General provisions. 
1.  The Central Business District is located within downtown Eagle, south of U.S. Highway 6. This district is the focus of the Town's commercial activity and encompasses "Old Town" Eagle and a retail area along Highway 6. (Figure 1) Land uses in this district include convenience retail services, offices, shops, cafes, public offices, civic organizations, churches, and residential. New construction should be designed to blend with the existing fabric of historic buildings here. The design standards of the Central Business District do not apply to the Broadway District which can be found in Section 4.07.060. 
2.  Specific attention should be given to maintaining the existing scale, materials, and design style of the Central Business District. This will help maintain the village character of downtown Eagle and promote its economic and aesthetic vitality. 
B.  Goals and objectives. The goals and objectives of this section are: 
1.  Preserve the character and integrity of the Central Business District by promoting appropriate architecture and site planning. 
2.  Strengthen visual continuity of the streetscape by enforcing setbacks and controlling building orientation. 
3.  Reinforce the traditional, rural mountain character of the Town by incorporating traditional building materials and native plant material in new development. 
4.  The district and each individual building should enhance the overall goals and objectives and be appropriate to today's lifestyles. 
5.  Residential units, lofts, and offices should be located above retail, restaurant, and commercial uses. Residential use is not allowed at the street level or basement level for new construction or renovated buildings. 
6.  There should be a sense of simplicity and repose in the building mass without creating buildings that are too busy or overly ornate. 

Figure 1: Central Business District 
C.  Building setbacks. 
1.  New buildings shall reinforce the traditional building alignment found on the same block. Alignments vary within the area. 
2.  Sites adjacent to or utilizing existing residential structures shall respect established setbacks of existing residential buildings where front yards and deeper setbacks are typical. 
3.  At the intersection of Highway 6 and the Central Business District, setbacks may be varied to encourage a landscaped gateway treatment. 
4.  Buildings should present their front facades to the street that they face. Corner lots should address both streets that they face. 
D.  Building height. New construction shall place the first floor at ground level. Three-story buildings are allowed. The building height limit is 35 feet. 
E.  Building mass/form/orientation. 
1.  New construction shall maintain and reinforce the pattern of traditional building forms and shapes along the streetscape. New buildings shall be simple and rectangular in form; corners shall be at right angles. Corner entrances are, however, allowed in the Central Business District. Traditional commercial buildings in the Central Business District are simple in design and construction. Buildings should present their front facades to the street that they face. Corner lots should address both streets that they face. 
2.  Buildings shall be of widths similar to those found historically on same or adjacent blocks. 
3.  Roof form shall match those of existing and traditional buildings on the same or adjacent blocks, as appropriate. 
F.  Architectural detail. 
1.  Doors should be similar in character, proportion, scale, and material to those of traditional buildings on the same or adjacent blocks. Oversized doors that would create a "grand entry" are inappropriate. 
2.  Traditionally, windows have a ratio of width to height of one to two. Second story/upper story windows are usually smaller than ground level storefront windows and should be evenly spaced across all facades adjacent to the street. 
3.  A solid-to-void ratio that is similar to those found historically in the neighborhood shall be used. Large expanses of glass on exterior facades, whether vertical or horizontal, are inappropriate on renovated residential buildings used for commercial purposes. Glass panels shall have low reflectivity and high transparency, allowing for visual access into the building at ground level. 
4.  New construction should provide architectural differentiation between upper and lower floors that is reflected in the primary and secondary street elevations. 
5.  Porches on residential structures used for commercial purposes should be of a size and proportion similar to that seen historically in the Central Business District. Porches should project from the central form and have a separate roof. 
6.  Ornamental elements, such as brackets, railings, and awnings, should be in scale with similar, traditional buildings. Modest ornamental details should be considered, but highly ornate decorative features that would compete with traditional architectural details are inappropriate. 
G.  Building materials. 
1.  Building materials used for all major surfaces shall be similar to those employed historically. Segmented, horizontal siding as traditionally seen on wood and wood-clad ranch buildings is appropriate; maximum overlap dimension shall be eight inches. Sandstone and river-rock is appropriate when used as a foundation material; however, stone cladding over large portions of a surface is not a documented historical use and is inappropriate. Moss rock is unacceptable as a facade material. Manufactured products that are made to simulate natural materials (such as Hardiplank(c) or pre-cast concrete panels made to simulate limestone) shall be reviewed on a case by case basis. All facade materials shall have low reflectivity. Concrete block is prohibited. 
2.  Pitched roof materials are to be wood or asphalt shingles; galvanized sheet metal is a documented historical roof material and is acceptable. Metal roof colors shall be muted. 
H.  Landscape/sidewalks/furnishings/fencing. 
1.  Sidewalks shall be constructed in all commercial zones. In areas where traditionally there has been a zero foot setback, sidewalks shall have an integral curb and gutter. In areas where it is customary to have a tree lawn or planting strip, the sidewalk shall be detached from the curb and gutter. Sidewalk should be set back from the back of curb five feet minimum, aligning and connecting to existing sidewalks. Sidewalk material is to be concrete or concrete unit pavers. 
2.  In areas where the sidewalk is adjacent to the building, planters and/or window boxes should be installed and maintained at the expense of the property owner. Planters shall not impede pedestrian flow along the sidewalk. 
3.  Opaque fencing shall be limited to back yards and service areas. Materials shall be wood, masonry, or split face concrete block. Chainlink fencing may be used in backyards and service areas for demonstrated security purposes only and must be vinyl-coated black or green and used in conjunction with plant material that is tightly spaced to create a visual screen. 
4.  Fencing in front yards shall be no taller than three feet. Fences shall be of wooden pickets, wood and wire, wrought iron, or masonry. Chainlink, rough-sawn wood, vinyl material, or concrete block fencing is prohibited. 
I.  Parking. 
1.  In the Central Business District, both parallel and diagonal parking currently exists. This is the traditional, established parking layout in this area. Both parallel and diagonal parking shall remain the standard for this area. Parking configuration will be determined at development review on a case by case basis and will be dependent upon street right-of-way width. The existing rights-of-way in area vary between 60 feet and 80 feet. 
2.  Parallel parking shall be encouraged along all blocks within the Central Business District where diagonal parking is not feasible. Parking layout and design shall include curb and gutter. 
3.  For parking lots with ten or more parking spaces, one deciduous shade tree shall be required to be planted in the interior of the lot for every ten spaces. All required shade trees shall be located within curbed, planted medians and/or islands to provide spatial definition and shade within paved areas. 
4.  In areas where residential setbacks occur, visibility of parking from the street shall be minimized by placing parking behind the building. Access to rear parking lots shall be from the alley. Existing buildings undergoing renovations shall be required to eliminate and landscape existing driveways; new curb and gutter will be required to meet existing conditions. 
5.  All parking lots adjacent to primary and secondary streets shall be screened using plant material and/or fencing. 
J.  Signage. 
1.  Signage separate from the building shall be integrated with the overall site plan and planting plan. Signage must comply with the Town Sign Code (Chapter 4.08). 
2.  Projecting signs must be mounted eight feet above finished grade, measuring from pavement to bottom of sign. 
3.  Neon lighting on exterior building facades is not permitted in the Central Business District. 
4.  All sign faces are to be no more than 20 square feet. 
5.  Sign material shall be compatible with building facade materials and must be durable to withstand climactic effects of the area. Painted wood or metal is preferred. Highly reflective materials are prohibited. 
6.  All signs shall receive a separate sign permit prior to erection as required in Chapter 4.08. 
7.  Buildings which contain more than one sign shall have a coordinated plan for all signs on the building and property. 
(Amended 2-13-2000; Ord. No. 08-2017, § 11, 4-11-2017) 
Section 4.07.060. - Broadway District. 

Figure 2: Broadway District 
A.  General provisions. 
1.  The overriding vision for Broadway is to enhance the Town and to create a vibrant business district based on traditional architecture, urban planning, and design principles. Broadway deserves special attention and more specific guidelines than the Central Business Area as a whole. Broadway is defined as the face-block of the street extending through the 100, 200, 300, and 400 blocks. The alleys between Capitol Street and Wall Street provide the eastern and western boundaries for the specific guidelines found on Broadway. (Figure 2) 
2.  The buildings of the Broadway District should be permanent in character. Retail and commercial uses shall be located on the first floor with office, service establishments (except vehicular service), and residential uses found above on the second and third floors. There are specific details and guidelines which are called out in this section that serve to guide the construction and redevelopment of properties on Broadway. The purpose of these guidelines are to encourage mixed-use buildings in the Broadway District. (Mixed-use buildings are multi-story buildings that contain more than one land use. For example, a three-story building could have a restaurant on the first floor, a service business or office on the second floor, and apartments on the third floor.) 
3.  The character of Eagle's Broadway District shall be referential to the business districts of traditional western slope communities and the State vernacular architectural style (see appendix N at the end of this Title). Downtown districts found in Telluride, Salida, Leadville, Breckenridge, Montrose, Glenwood Springs, Carbondale, and districts located on the front range of the State are all examples of the styles of architecture, building massing, and scale that should be considered when designing buildings for the Broadway District in Eagle. These communities vary from traditional mining towns to rural agricultural villages. The buildings in the Broadway District will be designed with these precedents in mind. 
B.  Goals and objectives. The goals and objectives of this section are: 
1.  Preserve the character and integrity of the Broadway District by promoting appropriate architecture and site planning. 
2.  Strengthen visual continuity of the streetscape by enforcing setbacks and controlling building orientation. 
3.  Reinforce the traditional character of the Town by incorporating traditional building materials and native plant material in new development. 
4.  The buildings and site plans should be referential to traditional western slope communities and the State vernacular architectural style, but a strict period replication is not the intent of this section. 
5.  The district and each individual building should enhance the overall goals and objectives and be appropriate to today's lifestyles. 
6.  There should be a sense of simplicity and repose in the building mass without creating buildings that are too busy or eclectic. 
7.  Residential units, lofts, and offices should be located above retail, restaurant, and commercial uses. Residential use is not allowed at the street level or basement level for new construction or renovated buildings. 
8.  The character of storefronts should be carefully considered to include higher ceilings in the first floor spaces, signage, canopies, awnings, and appropriate window fenestration. 
9.  Building character in this area is extremely important. The look and feel of this district taken as a whole is intended to be comprised of distinctive qualities that will establish its identity and create a desirable place to spend time. 
10.  Roof and parapet forms can provide interest, scale, richness, and height variation to the buildings. These forms should also be utilized to screen unsightly mechanical systems and appropriately direct snow and water removal from the buildings. Steps should be taken so that these, and any other, building forms do not pose a falling ice or snow hazard to users, passersby, or adjacent property. 
C.  Building setbacks. 
1.  Buildings have a zero lot line allowance to the front property line. Buildings shall not be built greater than 15 feet from the front property line. (Figure 3) 

Figure 3: Zero setback and maximum 15-foot setback 
2.  In the Broadway District, properties are encouraged to be built to the front lot line. Exceptions to the zero lot line recommendation would potentially be for the creation of active pedestrian spaces, semi-public patio spaces, outdoor dining opportunities, temporary displays of merchandise, sidewalk sales, and landscaping details where appropriate. Special consideration may be given to vary the front setback to allow for keeping mature and large-caliper trees that exist on some properties along Broadway. In addition, this setback may allow for the creation of useable spaces at the ground level, but the second and third floors may overhang these spaces and extend to the front lot line. New buildings are encouraged to be built to the front and side property lines, but this shall be decided on a case by case basis. (Figure 4, 5) See Subsection (H) of this section for specific guidelines on allowed uses in the front yard areas. 

Figure 4: Usable space at the ground level - used for outdoor dining in this example 

Figure 5: Usable space at the ground level entrance with cantilevered element extending to the front property line - used for temporary or daily merchandising in this example 
D.  Building height. 
1.  New construction shall place the first floor at ground level. 
2.  In the Broadway District, buildings may be three stories in height. 
3.  In order to maintain proper proportions and enhance the existing vertical to horizontal ratios of the Broadway District, there are two maximum building height limits depending on the scenario: 
a.  Scenario one; 35-foot height limit: New three-story buildings have a height limit of 35 feet. In this scenario, parapet walls may exceed the height limit by no more than four feet. (A parapet is a low wall projecting from the edge of a platform, terrace, or roof.) Thus, the maximum building height for scenario one is 39 feet including the maximum four-foot parapet wall. (Figure 6) 
b.  Scenario two; 42-foot height limit: The maximum building height for scenario two is 42 feet including the parapet wall. In this scenario, the first two stories may be located on the property line but the third story must be stepped-back from the lot line at a 35-degree bulk plane angle. The total height limit for the ground level and second story must not be greater than 30 feet in this case. Facade material on the step-back must match the majority of the facade material of the first two floors directly below the section that is stepped-back. (Figure 7, 8) Except as provided herein, refer to Chapter 4.04 for specific zoning standards relating to height limits. 

Figure 6: Scenario one - 35 foot building height including parapet walls and mechanical access 

Figure 7: Image of second and third story setbacks - note the matching facade materials on the second and third story 

Figure 8: Scenario two - third story setback when a total height of building is greater than 35 feet 
4.  The bulk plane setback for three story buildings greater than 35 feet shall apply to corner lots which front Broadway and a secondary street (2nd, 3rd, 4th, or 5th Streets). (Figure 9) 

Figure 9: Scenario two - third floor setbacks on Broadway and a cross street within the Broadway District 
5.  Corner treatments at street intersections may exceed the height limit and shall be decided on a case by case basis. The height limit to the extent of which a corner detail may exceed the height limit shall be no greater than 30 percent of the total building height. Careful consideration will be given to circumstances where the intent of the corner treatment shall be to define the corner as a landmark opportunity that shall be in scale with the building and district as a whole. Corner treatments may exceed the height limit if the non-inhabitable architectural feature serves to add punctuation and significance to the building and to the district. Out of proportion or superfluous detailing will not be allowed. (Figures 10, 11) 
a.  Scenario one: If the corner building is built to the 35-foot height limit, corner treatments are allowed according to the standards described above. 
b.  Scenario two: No excess of the height limit is allowed if the corner building is built to the 42-foot height limit. 

Figure 10: Corner treatment in excess of 35-foot height limit - reviewed on a case by case basis and not allowed under scenario two 

Figure 11: Corner treatment that would be allowed in excess of building height limits - note that the elements are in scale with the buildings and with the district and add appropriate architectural interest and detailing to the corner - reviewed on a case by case basis 
E.  Building mass/form/orientation. 
1.  New construction shall maintain and reinforce the pattern of traditional building forms and shapes along the streetscape. 
2.  Buildings should present their front facades to the street that they face. Corner lots should address both streets that they face. 
3.  Front building facades should create a rhythm of architecture and interest. Blank walls are inappropriate. The same rhythm that is established on the front facades should be established on any side street facades. 
4.  Buildings and additions should continue the existing pattern of architecture both vertically and horizontally to reflect traditional patterns found in traditional western slope communities. 
5.  Relation to human scale should be a consideration in the design of the facades and the spaces created adjacent to the pedestrian realm. 
6.  New construction should exemplify the proportions found in traditional western slope communities and the State vernacular architectural style. 
F.  Architectural detail. 
1.  Doors should be similar in character, proportion, scale, and material to those of traditional buildings. 
2.  Large expanses of uninterrupted glass on exterior facades, whether vertical or horizontal, are inappropriate on renovated residential buildings used for commercial purposes. Glass panels shall have low reflectivity and high transparency, allowing for visual access into the building at ground level. 
3.  An effective way to subtly invoke traditional building character is to express the basic structural organization of the buildings in their facades. The vertical structure can be expressed as opaque vertical areas substantial enough to be perceived as columns and pilasters. (Figure 12) 

Figure 12: Brick facade which is designed to look like 'vertical columns' - these are not true supporting columns but add to the traditional character for this building 
4.  The location of the floor levels should be expressed as areas of horizontal opacity. Glass curtain walls are not allowed. 
5.  Storefront designs shall compliment the traditional western slope community ambiance while reflecting today's lifestyles. Storefronts do not have to be period reproductions and should appear open, inviting, and be a minimum of 60 percent transparent. The storefront design standard applies to the first floor only. 
6.  Storefront windows should extend from the sidewalk to a height of at least 12 feet. Transom windows may be included in the minimum window height calculation. The sill plate of a retail display window may begin at the sidewalk level and shall be no higher than three feet above the sidewalk elevation. The window base need not match the building material, but may include metal, wood, stone, or masonry. (Figures 13, 14) 

Figure 13: Window height diagram and explanation of required storefront design elements 

Figure 14: Storefront windows (plate glass and transom), low sill plate at street level, and articulated entry 
7.  Storefront windows may be set parallel to the curb or storefront windows and entries may be articulated by creating areas of indentation. (Figure 14) 
8.  Circumstances will arise where it is necessary to add muntin systems to windows. These may be true divided light windows or muntin systems adhered to both sides of the glazing system. One-sided, snap-in muntin systems are not permitted. 
9.  Windows on the second and third floors will be shorter in height than those occurring at ground level due to the smaller floor-to-ceiling heights. These window units should be vertical in proportion and may be double-hung or divided light. Windows on the second and third floors should be arranged singly or in groupings that result in a composition that agrees with the composition at the first floor. 
10.  Passages and entries to the second level shall be distinguished architecturally. Passages that lead to a rear parking area should be clearly signed. The architectural elements which express these entrances should appear to be supported by adequate pilaster expressions where it interfaces with the building. Retail tenants on both sides of passages are encouraged to add display windows into and along the passages. Articulated second-level entries and passage ways may create display conditions where a merchandising corner is appropriate, and an indentation may create suitable space for door swings. Door swings into the right-of-way are prohibited. 
11.  Corner entrances are encouraged where they are possible. They have the advantage of addressing two streets and an intersection, resulting in a unique degree of visibility for those businesses that create them. They also contribute more animation to the district as a whole. (Figure 15) 

Figure 15: Corner entrance 
12.  The use of cornices to visually terminate the top of building facades is encouraged. (The cornice is the uppermost section of moldings along the top of a wall or just below a roof.) In most cases, the cornice will be established below a parapet wall that continues vertically past the cornice line. Cornices may project from the building line and into a public right-of-way a maximum of 18 inches. Refer to Chapter 4.04 for specific zoning standards relating to projections. Balconies, porches, or decks are not allowed to project into the public right-of-way. 
13.  Fixed overhangs. Architectural overhangs used to provide protection from sun and weather at the first level are considered canopies. They may be constructed of opaque materials, glass or their combination. If glass is used, a frosted or heavily fritted finish shall be required to obscure dirt. Metal canopies will also be considered on a case by case basis. Canopies shall be cantilevered or bracketed from the main building facade and may project a maximum of six feet. The lowest point of the canopy element shall not be less than 12 feet above the sidewalk. See Subsection (F)(14) of this section for an explanation of design standards for ornamental elements, such as brackets, railings, and awnings. 
14.  Awnings. Ornamental elements, such as brackets, railings, and awnings, should be in scale with similar, traditional buildings. Modest ornamental details should be considered, but highly ornate decorative features that would compete with traditional architectural details are inappropriate. Fabric for awnings shall be matte finish. Plastic material, plastic coverings, and internally illuminated awning assemblies are prohibited. Awnings shall not interfere with pedestrian traffic or any maintenance equipment that the Town may employ in the public right-of-way. 
15.  Porches on residential structures used for commercial purposes should be of a size and proportion similar to that seen historically in the Broadway District. Porches should project from the central form and have a separate roof. 
16.  Stacks, vents, cooling towers, elevator structures and similar mechanical building appurtenances and spires, domes, cupolas, towers and similar non-inhabitable building appurtenances may exceed applicable height limitations by up to 30 percent of the total building height. The need for this height limit excess for mechanical appurtenances must be documented and proven that no other engineering solution would eliminate the need to exceed the height limit. For example, a building may require heating or cooling equipment to be located on the roof. Any mechanical equipment or similar non-inhabitable building appurtenances will be required to be shielded with appropriate building materials that would match the rest of the building or painted to match the color scheme of the building. Care is required to be taken to eliminate the visual impact of any excess to the height limit from surrounding streets and alleyways. This situation will be decided on a case by case basis. (Figure 16). 

Figure 16: Parapet walls and mechanical access 
G.  Building materials. 
1.  Materials shall be predominantly brick, stone, hand-chiseled stone, metal, or wood siding. A combination of these materials on a single building may be acceptable. For example, buildings that are predominantly masonry or brick may have the entrance details or a window sash that is trimmed in wood. All materials should be in character with those traditionally employed in western slope communities. In general, buildings in this zone district are meant to convey a sense of permanence and the use of appropriate materials should reflect the goal. Manufactured products that are made to simulate natural materials (such as Hardiplank(c) or pre-cast concrete panels made to simulate limestone) shall be reviewed on a case by case basis. When brick is used as a primary facade material, variation in the detailing of the brick to cast shadow lines is encouraged. 
2.  Segmented, horizontal siding as traditionally seen on wood and wood-clad ranch buildings is appropriate; maximum overlap dimension shall be eight inches. Sandstone is appropriate when used as a foundation material; however, stone cladding over large portions of a surface is not a documented traditional use and is inappropriate. Moss rock is unacceptable as a facade material. Modular panel materials are not allowed. All facade materials shall have low reflectivity. Concrete block is prohibited on front facades. 
3.  Pitched roof materials shall be wood or asphalt shingles and sheet metal is a documented traditional roof material and is acceptable. Metal roof colors shall be muted. 

Figure 17: The side facade material must match the front facade material for a length of at least 15 feet 
4.  Exterior facade material along the side of the building must match the exterior facade material found on the front of the building for a length of at least 15 feet from the ground level to the height of the roof. (Figure 17) 
H.  Landscape/pathways/furnishings/fencing/site lighting. 
1.  Usable space. If buildings are setback up to 15 feet (see Subsection (C)(1) of this section), useable spaces may be created between the right-of-way and the front of the building. These front yard areas may be used for landscaping or for the creation of hardscaped patio spaces. 
a.  Hardscaped areas. Acceptable hardscaping material in this space must complement the materials found in the Broadway streetscape project, but the materials need not match exactly to what is found on Broadway. Standard gray concrete, asphalt, loose gravel, loose cobble, and extensive areas of mulch are not acceptable paving materials for these areas. Changes in grade must meet building codes and are not encouraged. Hardscaped areas will be reviewed on a case by case basis. 
b.  Landscaped areas. 
i.  Landscaped areas should integrate with the Broadway streetscape project and provide appropriate access to the building. Opportunities exist to use plant materials to provide color and interest throughout the Broadway District. Planting areas, planted pots, and containers are candidates for displays of color and character that will add to the ambiance and interest along Broadway. In this context, ornamentals are intended to be lower plant materials, used as massings that range in height from one foot to three feet. 
ii.  Appropriate plantings include annuals, perennials, grasses, small ornamental tree varieties, or shrubs that flower, have colorful winter bark or showy fruits. Heavy screening of the building with trees, shrubs, and other plantings are not allowed; the exception to this situation would be to allow for keeping mature and large-caliper trees that exist on some properties along Broadway. Lawns are allowed provided there is an appropriate hardscaped path to the entrance of the building. Landscaped areas will be reviewed on a case by case basis. 
2.  Front yard fencing. Fencing in front yards shall be no taller than three feet. Fences shall be of wooden pickets, wood and wire, wrought iron, or masonry. If masonry is used, piers are encouraged with more transparent fencing in-between (wrought iron or wood pickets, for example) to increase transparency. Chainlink, rough-sawn wood, vinyl material, or concrete block fencing is prohibited. 
3.  Rear yard fencing. In rear yards, fencing materials shall be wood, masonry, vinyl, or split face concrete block. Chainlink fencing may be used in backyards and service areas for demonstrated security purposes only and must be vinyl-coated black or green. 
4.  Site and building lighting. The nighttime illumination of the Broadway District should help create a warm, inviting place while providing good color rendition of its visitors, objects, and surfaces. Site lighting is intended to facilitate safe and easy movement of pedestrians by adequately illuminating front yard areas. It is also intended to reveal special architectural features and landscaping features that are important to the civic life of the Broadway District. At the same time, care must be taken to minimize problems created by artificial lighting, such as unnecessary illumination, too much illumination, glare, and light pollution to the sky. Luminaires shall be used that cast the light downward (low-cutoff luminaires) rather than outward (broadcast luminaires) in the Broadway District. An appropriate lighting strategy must be employed to allow the internal lighting of the buildings and the storefronts to project an undiluted character and charm to Broadway. A lighting plan is required to be reviewed for all new buildings and remodels in the Broadway District. See Section 4.07.010 for specific lighting standards. 
I.  Parking. 
1.  For parking lots with ten or more parking spaces, one deciduous shade tree shall be required to be planted in the interior of the lot for every ten spaces. All required shade trees shall be located within curbed, planted medians and/or islands to provide spatial definition and shade within paved areas. 
2.  In areas where residential setbacks occur, visibility of parking from the street shall be minimized by placing parking behind the building. Access to rear parking lots shall be from the alley. 
3.  All parking lots adjacent to primary and secondary streets shall be screened using plant material and/or fencing. 
4.  In the Broadway District, one space per residential unit shall be provided on-site only when a retail or restaurant use has been established on the first floor. If a service establishment on the ground floor is established, the parking requirements shall be reviewed on a case by case basis. The use of stacked parking spaces is allowed to meet this requirement. Parking covenants shall be required to control access to the stacked parking spots for the owners, renters, or lessees of residential units in the building. 
5.  In the Broadway District, on-site parking requirements for residential use may be met by enclosed garages. Garages may be located within the 25-foot setback. Service entrances and access must be provided in the instance that garages are located in the rear yard. This standard will be reviewed on a case by case basis. Garage square footage will not be counted towards the floor area ratio standards (refer to Chapter 4.04 for specific zoning standards). (Figure 18) 

Figure 18: Garage located within the rear yard setback under special review only. Note that the configuration of the garage in this case allows for ingress and egress off of the property for residential parking and that there is a service entrance to the ground floor retail space. 
6.  In the Broadway District, basement square footage will not be counted towards the floor area ratio standards (refer to Chapter 4.04 for specific zoning standards). 
J.  Signage. 
1.  Signage separate from the building shall be integrated with the overall site plan and planting plan. 
2.  Projecting signs must be mounted a minimum of eight feet above finished grade, measuring from pavement to bottom of sign. 
3.  Neon lighting on exterior building facades is not permitted in the Broadway District. 
4.  All sign faces are to be no more than 20 square feet. 
5.  Sign material shall be compatible with building facade materials and must be durable to withstand climactic effects of the area. Painted wood or metal is preferred. Highly reflective materials are prohibited. 
6.  All signs shall receive a separate sign permit prior to erection as required in Chapter 4.08. 
7.  Buildings which contain more than one sign shall have a coordinated plan for all signs on the building and property. 
K.  Color. The colors recommended for use in the Broadway District derive from those colors found occurring naturally in the rock, soils, trees, grasses, and water of the Eagle River Valley and the Brush Creek Valley. The colors have been arranged in hue groups of yellows, greens, blues, reds, and grays for the ease of evaluation. (Figures 19-23) In addition, asphalt shingle roof blends, here represented as averaged single colors, which hold the most promise of working effectively with these colors, are also shown in the cool and warm gray palettes. (Figure 24-25) Each color has been matched to the ICI paint system for ease of communication. The natural colors provided should be carefully evaluated when combined to form paint schemes for use on buildings. Many of the rich colors found in nature usually appear softer in their natural context than when seen individually, since perception is usually through filters of distance, atmosphere, distribution, and combination with many other colors. Since colors for buildings are used in larger, unbroken areas, some of the colors provided here may have to be shifted or weakened (made more grayish) before they can be effectively used in an appropriate color scheme. All color schemes shall be reviewed on a case by case basis. 
Figures 19-25 



(Amended 2-13-2000; Ord. No. 08-2017, § 12, 4-11-2017) 
Section 4.07.070. - Chambers Avenue Area. 
A.  General provisions. 
1.  The Chambers Avenue Area contains property zoned Commercial General (CG) and Industrial (I) under the provisions of this Title. 
a.  The Commercial General (CG) zone district is "for commercial and tourist uses including lodging, dining, recreation facilities and compatible uses, and for heavier commercial uses, low impact manufacturing uses, and compatible uses." 
b.  The Industrial (I) zone district is "for a wide range of industrial uses and compatible uses." 
2.  The Chambers Avenue Areas consist of relatively flat and easily developed land adjacent to I-70 and immediately south of the highway interchange at Eagle. Because of its development potential, vehicular accessibility, and visibility from the highway, the Town has zoned this area for general commercial and industrial development. Chambers Avenue parallels I-70 and serves subdivided commercial and industrial parcels along both sides of its length. 
3.  Although the Chambers Areas are somewhat separate from, and independent of, other portions of Eagle, commercial and industrial development here has a very significant impact on the character and perceived quality of Eagle. For the most part, drivers along I-70 view this area from an elevated position, set as a foreground to the larger mountain and Eagle River landscape. In addition to this visibility, the areas have developed with commercial activities serving the I-70 corridor. The Chambers Avenue Areas provide a first impression of Eagle for travelers and tourists. As the area is built out, the urban context here will be a defining feature to the Town's character, response to growth, and overall position in the region. 
4.  Because of the importance of these areas, the overall objectives for development and design guidelines here should be to encourage an overall continuity of commercial and industrial parcel development, to present a favorable image of the community when viewed both along I-70 and from within the areas, and to encourage long-term, quality private investment activity. 
5.  A positive long-range impact to Eagle's quality of life and tax base can be encouraged here by standards that require consideration of the immediate context of Chambers Avenue and the character of the area at large. Although the areas will include traditional commercial and industrial uses, the areas can have a positive, enduring character through careful site planning and architectural styling. Site planning of commercial pads should be considerate of the likely layout of future abutting parcel development. The number and location of curb cuts along Chambers Avenue should be included in site plan review. Parking layout and its visual and functional impact on adjacent parcel utilization will be a very important consideration in addition to the enforcement of site landscaping requirements. The use of indigenous trees and the requirement, when possible, of larger sizes will help establish an attractive context here for future development activity. In addition, architectural design that reflects a mountain-style and celebrates the use of local materials and building details should be strongly encouraged. Overall, parcel development should be planned to fit in rather than stand alone. Consideration should also be given during site plan review of the visual effect of the proposed development both along I-70 and from Chambers Avenue. Ultimately, the areas will be successful if site planning, design and vehicular movement can encourage visitors and residents to partake in several services during a single visit and be motivated to return. 
B.  Chambers Avenue Commercial Zone Area. Parcels zoned Commercial General (CG) have a high visibility along Chambers Avenue and the I-70 corridor. The following standards shall apply to commercially zoned parcels in order to achieve visual continuity and establish a sense of neighborhood: 
1.  Goals and objectives for commercial parcels. The goals and objectives for commercial parcels are: 
a.  Improve the overall appearance of the I-70 corridor by enforcing architectural and landscape standards on development that abuts primary streets and the interstate right-of-way. 
b.  Provide a distinct, visual break between developed areas and rural resource districts to the east. 
c.  Promote coordinated physical organization by enforcing setbacks and landscaped buffers. 
d.  Encourage high quality of individual development by utilizing a palette of materials and architectural details, which reflect traditional building forms of the region. 
2.  Building setbacks. Setbacks shall be as required under this Title. 
3.  Building mass/form/orientation. Buildings shall be similar in size to those found in a rural mountain community. Traditionally, the largest buildings in the vicinity are those found in ranch complexes. The central form of the buildings is usually simple and rectangular, having secondary gable and shed roofed wings. Porches shall project from the central form and be covered by a separate roof. Roofs that are similar to those of traditional ranch buildings, such as simple gable and shed forms, are appropriate. This incremental add-on approach creates visual interest and scale. Roof pitches, trim, window size and placement, and entrance locations also help to delineate the architectural character of a building. 

4.  Architectural detail. 

a.  Facades that face public rights-of-way, including the I-70 corridor, shall include variation in the wall plane. Facades that are greater than 100 feet in length shall include spatial definition in the form of wall projections and/or recesses which must have a depth of at least three percent of the length of the facade. Projections and/or recessions must occupy at least 20 percent of the length of the facade. Group items such as windows to create an interesting composition; these type of features provide visual interest to the pedestrian, reduce monolithic appearance, and add local character to development. Facade projections, recesses, windows and entrances should be integral parts of the building and must not be superficially applied trim, graphics, or paint. 

b.  Provide variation in roof lines and forms. Mansard roofs are not traditionally seen in the region and are prohibited. If total building size exceeds a 10,000 square foot floorplate, flat roofs are permitted provided that no mechanical equipment is visible and that the roof is aesthetically pleasing and fits into the Town. All flat roofs shall have a surrounding parapet wall. For buildings with a floorplate of from 5,000 square feet to 10,000 square feet, a multiple roof treatment is encouraged; flat roofs are not permitted. Minimum roof pitch to be 5:12 for all buildings less than 10,000 square feet. 
c.  Loading docks and service areas must be located to the sides and/or rear of building, unless the building abuts the I-70 corridor. If the parcel abuts the I-70 corridor, all services and loading areas must be located to the sides of the building which do not face the primary street or I-70 and must be screened. 
5.  Building materials. 
a.  Building materials shall be used for all major surfaces that are similar to those employed historically. Segmented, horizontal siding as traditionally seen on wood and wood-clad ranch buildings is appropriate. Horizontal, segmented siding material to be wood, vinyl, or aluminum; maximum overlap dimension shall be eight inches. Stone masonry is appropriate when used as a foundation material; however, stone cladding over large portions of a surface is not a documented historical use and is inappropriate. Concrete block must be split-faced and all windows and entrances on such buildings must have added trim. Modular panel materials, such as Texture 111 and ribbed sheet metal, are not allowed. All facade materials shall have low reflectivity. 
b.  Pitched roof materials shall be wood or asphalt shingles, or standing rib seam sheet metal-matte finish. 
6.  Landscape/sidewalks/furnishings/screening. 

a.  Sidewalks linking the pedestrian system of the block to the building shall be required. 
b.  Buildings that abut the I-70 corridor shall have a minimum 15-foot landscaped buffer paralleling the property line shared with the interstate right-of-way. One tree is required to be planted in such buffer for every 25 linear feet of property line. A minimum of one-third of all required trees shall be evergreen, and shall be placed 20 feet on center minimum and 30 feet on center maximum, in groups of three or five. Shrub massing shall be used in conjunction with tree plantings. Selected shrubs shall have a minimum mature height of eight feet. Refer to detailed plant list in Section 4.07.020(D). 
c.  Any lot on the east side of Chambers Avenue Area adjacent to property in the Rural Resource Zone District must be delineated by a minimum 15-foot wide contiguous landscaped buffer. One tree is required to be planted in such buffer for every 25 linear feet of property line. A minimum of one-third of all required trees shall be evergreen, and shall be placed 20 feet on center minimum and 30 feet on center maximum, in groups of three or five. Shrub massing shall be used in conjunction with tree plantings. Selected shrubs shall have a minimum mature height of eight feet. Refer to detailed plant list in Section 4.07.020(D). 

d.  Formal, irrigated landscape treatment shall not abut native, undisturbed ground without edge treatment. Edge transition shall be in the form of a defined grade break, drainage swale, building wall, mulched and planted bed, or pavement. 
e.  Opaque fencing shall be restricted to side and rear yards. Fencing is not allowed between the front building facade and the primary street. Fencing materials shall be wood, masonry, or split face concrete block. Chainlink may be used for demonstrated security purposes only and must be vinyl-coated black or green and used in conjunction with plant material that is tightly spaced to create a visual screen. Chainlink fencing shall be restricted to rear yards. 
7.  Parking. 
a.  For parking lots with ten or more parking spaces, one deciduous shade tree shall be required to be planted in the interior of the lot for every ten spaces. All required shade trees shall be located within curbed, planted medians and/or islands to provide spatial definition and shade within paved areas. 
b.  All parking lots adjacent to primary and secondary streets shall be screened using plant material and/or fencing. 

c.  Commercial parcels that front Chambers Avenue should have no more than 50 percent of all required parking located between the property line abutting the public right-of-way and the building face. The remaining parking stalls are to be located to the sides or rear of the proposed building. Parking lots are not permitted abutting the I-70 right-of-way. 
8.  Signage. 

a.  All freestanding signs to be monument style (grounded) and integrated with the site plan and planting plan. 
b.  Lighting of signs shall be permitted during the period the commercial enterprise is open for business and for up to one hour following the close of business. 
c.  Plastic is permitted only for internally illuminated signs allowed on those lots which front onto Eby Creek Road. 
d.  All signs shall receive a separate sign permit prior to erection as required in Chapter 4.08. 
e.  Buildings which contain more than one sign shall have a coordinated sign plan for the building and property. 
C.  Chambers Avenue Industrial Zone Area. Parcels zoned for industrial uses are located south of Chambers Avenue on secondary streets and north of the railroad. Due to the location of these parcels, development in this area will not have a significant visual impact on Chambers Avenue. However, standards are required to achieve a coordinated physical organization and character consistent with that of the neighboring districts. 
1.  Goals and objectives for industrial parcels. The goals and objectives for industrial parcels are: 
a.  Promote coordinated physical organization by enforcing setbacks and landscaped buffers, creating a consistent character between the industrial and commercial districts. 
b.  Provide a distinct, visual break between developed areas and rural resource districts to the east. 
c.  Encourage industrial uses in areas having low visibility by reducing architectural and landscape standards applicable to commercial areas. 
d.  Create visual barriers between industrial and commercial areas by requiring screening. 
2.  Building setbacks. Setbacks shall be as required under this Title. 
3.  Building mass/form/orientation. Buildings should be similar in size to those found in a rural mountain community. Traditionally, the largest buildings in the vicinity are those found in ranch complexes. The central form of the buildings is usually simple and rectangular, having secondary gable and shed roofed wings. Porches project from the central form and are covered by a separate roof. This incremental add-on approach creates visual interest and scale. Roof pitches, trim, and entrance locations also help to delineate the architectural character of a building. 

4.  Architectural detail. Roofs that are similar to those of traditional ranch buildings, such as simple gable and shed forms, are appropriate. Mansard roofs are not traditionally seen in the region and are discouraged. Flat roofs are permitted, however, all flat roofs shall have a surrounding parapet wall. 
5.  Building materials. 
a.  Facade materials shall have low reflectivity. 
b.  Pitched roof materials shall be wood or asphalt shingles, or standing rib seam sheet metal-matte finish. 
c.  Sheet metal exterior walls shall not be permitted, except that vertical metal siding is permitted on gables only. 
6.  Landscape/sidewalks/fencing. 
a.  Sidewalks linking the pedestrian system of the block to the building shall be required. 

b.  Industrial lots that abut commercial lots will be required to provide a landscaped and fenced buffer. 
c.  Any lot on the east side of Chambers Avenue Area adjacent to property in the Rural Resource Zone District must be delineated by a minimum 15-foot-wide contiguous landscaped buffer. One tree is required to be planted in such buffer for every 25 linear feet of property line. A minimum of one-third of all required trees shall be evergreen, and shall be placed 20 feet on center minimum and 30 feet on center maximum, in groups of three or five. Shrub massing shall be used in conjunction with tree plantings. Selected shrubs shall have a minimum mature height of eight feet. Refer to detailed plant list in Section 4.07.020(D). 
d.  Fencing materials shall be wood, masonry, split face concrete block, or chainlink. 
7.  Signage. 

a.  All freestanding signs to be monument style (grounded) and integrated with the site plan and planting plan. 
b.  Lighting of signs between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. is prohibited. 
c.  All signs shall receive a separate sign permit prior to erection as required in Chapter 4.08. 
d.  Buildings that contain more than one business shall have a coordinated sign plan for the building and property. 
(Amended 2-13-2000; Ord. No. 08-2017, § 13, 4-11-2017) 
Section 4.07.080. - North Interchange Area. 
A.  General provisions. 
1.  The North Interchange Area contains the following zone districts as per this Title: 
a.  Commercial General "for commercial and tourist uses including lodging, dining, and recreation facilities and compatible uses, and for heavier commercial uses, low-impact manufacturing uses, and compatible uses." 
b.  Public Area "for any use owned and/or operated by a public entity." 
2.  The North Interchange Area incorporates privately owned, commercially zoned land north of the I-70 interchange. The area comprises a linear strip of land with approximately 11/2 miles of I-70 frontage. Steeper pastureland north of this area limits future commercial development activity. This area is completely separated physically and visually from the developed Town by the I-70 corridor. Because of its hillside backdrop and location, development here would have less of an impact to the community, if treated sensitively, than if these uses occurred downtown. Because larger commercial parcels with municipal service infrastructure are available, there will be considerable pressure for development activity here. It is very possible that this area will develop completely independent of other trends in the Town, and be more influenced by county and regional market forces. Commercial activity may, over time, compete with downtown Eagle as the commercial center of the area. Because of its likely development with commercial activities featuring high volumes of user traffic, master planning of large parcels should be strongly encouraged. Careful consideration to the layout of curb cuts along existing public roads should be given. To the extent possible, the preservation of large pieces of indigenous landscape and plant materials should be an important objective. Like the Chambers Avenue Area, architectural design should feature indigenous building materials, styles and details. 
B.  Goals and objectives. The goals and objectives of this section are: 
1.  Improve the overall appearance of the I-70 corridor by enforcing architectural and landscape standards on development that abuts the interstate right-of-way. 
2.  Promote coordinated physical organization by enforcing setbacks and requiring landscaped buffers similar to those seen in the Chambers Avenue Area. 
3.  Encourage high quality individual development by creating a palette of materials and architectural details, which reflect the traditional building styles of the region. 
C.  Building setbacks. 
1.  Setback from Eby Creek Road is to be 25 feet. 
2.  Setbacks from property lines other than those abutting the Eby Creek Road shall be as required under this Title. 
D.  Building mass/form/orientation. 
1.  Buildings shall be similar in size to those found in a rural mountain community. Traditionally, the largest buildings in the vicinity are those found in ranch complexes. The central form of the buildings is usually simple and rectangular, having secondary gable and shed roofed wings. Porches shall project from the central form and be covered by a separate roof. Roofs that are similar to those of traditional ranch buildings, such as simple gable and shed forms, are appropriate. This incremental add-on approach creates visual interest and scale. Roof pitches, trim, and entrance locations also help to inform and influence the overall aesthetic of a building. 
2.  The siting of any new building should respond to existing site features. Removal of existing native plant material should be limited to areas essential for site development. Excessive excavation of hillsides should not be permitted. All cut and fill slopes should be stabilized, contoured to blend with existing, undisturbed terrain, and revegetated using plant material similar to that found on undisturbed land in the immediate vicinity. Slopes greater than 2:1 are not permitted. 

E.  Architectural details. 
1.  Facades that face public rights-of-way, including the I-70 corridor, shall include variation in the wall plane. Facades that are greater than 100 feet in length shall include spatial definition in the form of wall projections and/or recesses which must have a depth of at least three percent of the length of the facade. Projections and/or recessions must occupy at least 20 percent of the length of the facade. Group items such as windows to create an interesting composition; these type of features provide visual interest to the pedestrian, reduce monolithic appearance, and add local character to development. Facade projections, recesses, windows, and entrances should be integral parts of the building and must not be superficially applied trim, graphics, or paint. 
2.  Provide variation in roof lines and forms. Mansard roofs are not traditionally seen in the region and are prohibited. If total building size exceeds a 10,000 square foot floorplate, flat roofs with a surrounding parapet wall are permitted provided that no mechanical equipment is visible and that the roof is aesthetically pleasing and fits into the Town. For buildings with a floorplate of from 5,000 square feet to 10,000 square feet, a multiple roof treatment is encouraged; flat roofs are not permitted. Minimum roof pitch to be 5:12 for all buildings less than 10,000 square feet. 

3.  Loading docks and service areas must be located to the sides and/or rear of the building, unless the parcel abuts the I-70 corridor. If the building abuts the I-70 corridor, all services and loading areas must be located to the sides of the building, which do not face the Eby Creek Road or I-70. 
F.  Building materials. 
1.  Building materials shall be used for all major surfaces that are similar to those employed historically. Segmented, horizontal siding as traditionally seen on wood and wood-clad ranch buildings is appropriate; maximum overlap dimension shall be eight inches. Stone masonry is appropriate when used as a foundation material; however, stone cladding over large portions of a surface is not a documented historical use and is inappropriate. Concrete block must be split-faced and all windows and entrances on such buildings must have added trim. Modular panel materials are not allowed. All facade materials shall have low reflectivity. 
2.  Pitched roof material shall be wood or asphalt shingles or standing rib seam sheet metal-matte finish. 
G.  Landscape/sidewalks/furnishings/screening. 
1.  Sidewalks shall be constructed in all commercial zones. Sidewalks shall be detached from curb and gutter a minimum distance of five feet to accommodate a planting strip between the curb and sidewalk. Sidewalks linking the pedestrian system of the block to the building are required. 
2.  Buildings that abut the I-70 corridor shall have a minimum 15 foot landscaped buffer paralleling the property line in addition to the landscaping of the interstate right-of-way. One tree is required to be planted in such buffer for every 25 linear feet of property line. A minimum of one-third of all required trees shall be evergreen, and shall be placed 20 feet on center minimum and 25 feet on center maximum, in groups of three or five. Shrub massing shall be used in conjunction with tree plantings. Selected shrubs shall have a minimum mature height of eight feet. Refer to detailed plant list in Section 4.07.020(D). 
3.  Formal, irrigated landscape treatment shall not abut native, undisturbed ground without edge treatment. Edge transition shall be in the form of a defined grade break, drainage swale, building wall, mulched and planted bed, or pavement. 

4.  Retaining walls may be necessary in grade changes and should be concrete with a sandblast finish or keyed brick. Where grade and space allow, boulders may be used. The design and layout of the boulder wall should be such that the base course of the boulders are partly submerged into finish grade. Where appropriate, pockets in-between boulders should be planted to achieve a natural appearance. Retaining wall systems should be consistent from parcel to parcel. 
5.  Opaque fencing shall be restricted to side and rear yards. Fencing is not allowed between the front building facade and the primary street. Fencing materials shall be wood, masonry, or split face concrete block. Chainlink may be used for demonstrated security purposes only and must be vinyl-coated black or green and used in conjunction with plant material that is tightly spaced to create a visual screen. Chainlink fencing shall be restricted to rear yards, except when rear yards abut the I-70 corridor. 
H.  Parking. 
1.  For parking lots with ten or more parking spaces, one deciduous shade tree shall be required to be planted in the interior of the lot for every ten parking stalls. All required shade trees shall be located within curbed, planted medians and/or islands to provide spatial definition and shade within paved areas. 

2.  All parking lots adjacent to primary and secondary streets shall be screened using plant material and/or fencing. 
3.  Commercial parcels that front Eby Creek Road should have no more than 50 percent of all required parking located in between the property line abutting the public right-of-way and the building face. The remaining parking stalls should be located to the sides or rear of the proposed building. Limited parking lots are permitted abutting the I-70 right-of-way with substantial landscape screening. 
I.  Signage. 
1.  All freestanding signs to be monument style (grounded) and integrated with the site plan and planting plan. 
2.  Lighting of signs during the period a commercial enterprise is open for business and for up to one hour following the close of business shall be permitted. 
3.  Plastic is permitted only for internally illuminated signs. 
4.  All signs shall receive a separate sign permit prior to erection as required in Chapter 4.08. 
5.  Buildings that contain more than one business shall have a coordinated sign plan for the building and property. 
(Amended 2-13-2000; Ord. No. 08-2017, § 15, 4-11-2017) 
Section 4.07.090. - U.S. Highway 6 Corridor. 
A.  General provisions. 
1.  The U.S. Highway 6 Corridor contains the following zone areas as per this Title: Commercial Limited "for commercial uses of limited size and impact which serve the daily or convenience needs of the residents in the neighborhood." 
2.  U.S. Highway 6 is the historic State highway access that connects various developed segments of the county along the Eagle River Valley. The highway parallels the river and its occasional river crossing provides dramatic views of the corridor at several points along its alignment in the Town. The area consists of private land, mostly commercial zoned, along both sides of the road. Commercial activity historically consisted of small service facilities catering to the traveler. With the development of the I-70 corridor, many of the older commercial structures have been converted to serve more localized uses or are underutilized. As the residential population of the county expands, this corridor will face convenience and service commercial expansion. Guidelines here should focus on retaining the rural architectural style in place and require careful consideration of service area placement and screening, parking lot placement, and curb cuts. Design and placement of landscape medians along frontage will enhance the character of the district, while still allowing unimpeded views of commercial building frontage and controlled signage. 
B.  Goals and objectives. The goals and objectives of this section are: 
1.  Vacant lots should be targeted for development to fill in existing gaps and strengthen the street edge along the U.S. Highway 6 corridor. 
2.  Create a distinct edge between the highway right-of-way and private property through street improvements and landscaping. 
3.  Protect adjacent neighborhoods by requiring screening such as landscaping and fencing. 
C.  Building setbacks. 
1.  Setbacks shall be as required under this Title. 
2.  Existing setbacks within the district vary. Facades and entrances should align from lot to lot and not disrupt the overall street edge created by existing building alignment along U.S. Highway 6. 
D.  Building height. 
1.  New construction shall place the first floor at ground level. 

2.  New buildings adjacent to existing buildings that are less than 35 feet should step down in height and match height of existing buildings. 
E.  Building mass/form/orientation. 
1.  New construction shall maintain and reinforce the pattern of traditional building forms and shapes along the street. The U.S. Highway 6 Area contains a variety of older wooden commercial buildings, wooden residences, masonry buildings, service stations, and mobile homes. A few large frame structures are located on parcels fronting the highway. Older buildings which serviced travelers using U.S. Highway 6 prior to the construction of I-70 are interspersed with newer commercial buildings, creating a vernacular commercial strip along the road. Buildings in this district are set apart from one another and are usually one story in height, although there are a few false front, two story structures. 
2.  Existing buildings are simple and rectangular in shape and many have shed additions. Roof forms vary; roof forms traditionally seen in the district include gable, hip, shed, and flat roofs with parapet. Porches project from the central form and are covered by a separate roof. Most buildings have larger display windows at ground level. 
3.  Many existing buildings along the highway have flat roofs. New buildings should use this as historic precedent. Roof forms similar to those of traditional ranch buildings, such as simple gable and shed forms, are also appropriate. Mansard roofs are not traditionally seen in the region and are inappropriate. 
4.  Buildings shall be sited square to the property lines along U.S. Highway 6 to emphasize the street edge. 
F.  Architectural detail. 
1.  Facades that face public rights-of-way shall include variation in the wall plane. All buildings shall have architectural detailing, reducing the overall building mass. Elements such as front porches, awnings, and exterior trim provide interest and help to reduce the overall scale of a building. Group items such as windows to create an interesting composition; these type of features provide visual interest to the pedestrian, reduce monolithic appearance, and add local character to development. These elements must be integral parts of the building and must not be superficially applied trim, graphics, or paint. 
2.  A solid-to-void ratio that is similar to those found historically in the neighborhood should be used. Large expanses of glass on exterior facades, whether vertical or horizontal, are inappropriate on renovated residential buildings used for commercial purposes. Traditional commercial buildings along U.S. Highway 6 have larger display windows. Display windows are appropriate at ground level only, promoting commercial activity. Glass panels shall have low reflectivity and high transparency, allowing for visual access into the building at the ground level. 
3.  Garage doors should be consolidated and located at one end of the building to reduce vehicular congestion. 
G.  Building materials. 
1.  Building materials shall be used for all major surfaces that are similar to those employed historically. Segmented, horizontal siding as traditionally seen on wood and wood-clad ranch buildings is appropriate; maximum overlap dimension shall be eight inches. Brick masonry is appropriate for large surfaces as exemplified by older one-story motels. Stone masonry is appropriate when used as a foundation material; however, stone cladding over large portions of a surface is not a documented historical use and is inappropriate. Concrete block must be split-faced and all windows and entrances on such buildings must have added trim. Modular panel materials are prohibited. All facade materials shall have low reflectivity. 
2.  Pitched roof material shall be wood or asphalt shingles or standing rib seam sheet metal-matte finish with a minimum slope of 5:12. 
H.  Landscape/sidewalks/furnishings/fencing. 
1.  Sidewalks shall be constructed in all commercial zones. Sidewalks shall be detached from curb and gutter, a minimum distance of five feet to accommodate a planting strip between the curb and sidewalk. Sidewalks linking the pedestrian system of the block to the building are required. 
2.  Opaque fencing shall be restricted to side and rear yards. Opaque fencing is not allowed between the front building facade and the primary street. Fencing materials shall be wood, masonry, or split face concrete block. Chainlink may be used for demonstrated security purposes only and must be vinyl-coated black or green and used in conjunction with plant material that is tightly spaced to create a visual screen. Chainlink fencing shall be restricted to rear yards. 

3.  Opaque privacy fencing, six-foot-high minimum, is required where commercial lots abut residential neighborhoods. Plant material may be used as a screening device only if plant quantities and plant spacing create dense, visual barriers. Opaque chainlink fencing is prohibited. 
I.  Parking. 
1.  For parking lots with ten or more parking spaces, one deciduous shade tree shall be required to be planted in the interior of the lot for every ten spaces. All required shade trees shall be located within curbed, planted medians and/or islands to provide vertical interest and shade within paved areas. 
2.  On-street parking is prohibited. 
3.  All parking lots adjacent to primary and secondary streets shall be screened using plant material and/or fencing. 
J.  Signage. 
1.  All freestanding signs to be monument style (grounded) and integrated with the site plan and planting plan. 
2.  Lighting of signs during the period that a commercial enterprise is open for business and for up to one hour following the close of business each day shall be permitted. 
3.  All signs shall receive a separate sign permit prior to erection as required in Chapter 4.08. 
4.  Buildings that contain more than one business shall have a coordinated sign plan for the building and property. 
(Amended 2-13-2000; Ord. No. 08-2017, § 16, 4-11-2017) 
Section 4.07.100. - Development impact report. 
A.  Purpose. it is the purpose of this section to: 
1.  Ensure that complete information concerning any adverse effects of the proposed development or subdivision on the environment and essential public and private services and facilities, including educational facilities, as well as the health, safety, order, convenience, prosperity and welfare of present and future inhabitants of the Town is available to the Town Board, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the general public; 
2.  Ensure that long-term protection of the environment and the provision of essential public and private services and facilities such as streets, utilities, and educational facilities are considered in major development and subdivision planning and that Land Use and Development decisions, both public and private, take into account the relative merits of possible alternative actions; and 
3.  Ensure that proposed developments and subdivisions promote a healthful and convenient distribution of population, the wise and efficient expenditure of public funds, including the funds of other governmental entities, as well as the adequate provision of essential public services, facilities and requirements, including schools; and 
4.  Provide procedures for local review and evaluation of the environmental and social-economic effects of proposed development projects and subdivisions, including essential public and private services and facilities, prior to granting major development permits or subdivision approvals; and 
5.  Provide for the reasonable and adequate mitigation of on-site and off-site impacts generated by the proposed development or subdivision on the environment and essential public or private services and facilities, including streets, utilities and educational facilities. 
B.  Preliminary impact report. Every development permit application and preliminary subdivision plan shall include a preliminary statement of whether the proposed project will, will not, or could possibly affect the environment, either during construction or on a continuing basis, in each of the following respects: 
1.  By altering an ecological unit or land form, such as a ridgeline, saddle, draw, ravine, hillside, cliff, slope, creek, marsh, watercourse, or other natural land form feature; 
2.  By directly or indirectly affecting a wildlife habitat, feeding, or nesting ground; 
3.  By substantially altering or removing native grasses, trees, shrubs, or other vegetative cover; 
4.  By affecting the appearance or character of a significant scenic area or resource, or involving buildings or other structures that are of a size, bulk, or scale that would be in marked contrast to natural or existing cultural features; 
5.  By potentially resulting in avalanche, landslide, siltation, settlement, flood, or other land-form change of hazard to health and safety; 
6.  By discharging toxic or thermally abnormal substance or involving use of herbicides or pesticides, or emitting smoke, gas, steam, dust, or other particulate matter; 
7.  By involving any process which results in odor that may be objectionable or damaging; 
8.  By requiring any waste treatment, cooling, or settlement pond, or requiring transportation of solid or liquid wastes to a treatment or disposal site; 
9.  By discharging significant volumes of solid or liquid wastes; 
10.  By increasing the demand on existing or planned sewage disposal, storm drainage, water distribution system, streets, or other utility systems to a level which is likely to cause an adverse impact on the environment; 
11.  By involving any process which generates noise that may be offensive or damaging; 
12.  By either displacing significant numbers of people or resulting in a significant increase in population; 
13.  By pre-empting a site which is desirable for recreational uses or planned open space; 
14.  By altering local traffic patterns or causing an increase in traffic volume or transit service need; 
15.  By substantially affecting the revenues or expenditures of the Town government; 
16.  By increasing the demand on existing or planned school facilities to a level which is likely to cause an adverse impact on such school facilities, an adverse impact on educational opportunities, or an adverse impact on the revenues and expenditures of the Eagle County School District RE 50-J; 
17.  By being a part of a larger project which, at any future stage, may involve any of the impacts listed above. 
C.  Development impact report requirements. 
1.  For each area under Subsection (B) of this section for which the response is "will" or "could possibly," a development impact report addressing such concern may be requested by the Town Planner before development review by the Planning Commission or may be required by the Commission or Town Board at any time prior to final approval. In addition, a public facilities impact statement may be required in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 4.14. 
2.  The development impact report shall include technical studies, data, conclusions, summaries, and recommendations, performed by qualified professionals and at a level of detail commensurate with the potential impact of the development. The content, form, preparers and detail shall be adequate to enable the Town staff, Planning Commission and Town Board to Judge the impact of the proposal and the adequacy of the proposed mitigating measures, and shall be subject to approval of the Town Manager. 
3.  The development impact report shall describe temporary and long-term impacts of the project, both primary and secondary, beneficial and detrimental. The report shall include assessment of the following: 
a.  Adverse effects which cannot be avoided if the proposal is implemented. 
b.  Mitigating measures proposed to minimize the impact. 
c.  Cumulative and long-term effects of the proposal, which either significantly reduce or enhance the state of the environment. 
d.  Possible alternatives to the proposed action. 
e.  Irreversible environmental changes resulting from implementation of the proposal. 
f.  Population and economic impacts of the proposal. 
D.  Development impact-Public improvements. 
1.  Every development permit application and preliminary subdivision plan shall be reviewed by the Town Planner to determine whether or not the proposed development will require the installation or construction of public improvements, including, but not limited to, street paving, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, or drainage facilities. If the Town Planner determines that any such public improvements are necessitated by the proposed development, the Town Planner shall make specific recommendations to the Planning Commission and Town Board concerning the construction of such improvements. 
2.  If the Town determines that the proposed development makes necessary any such public improvements, the Town shall require as a condition in the development permit or as a condition of subdivision approval, the construction of such public improvement(s) by the applicant, and the dedication thereof to the Town. The costs of any such improvements shall be borne by the applicant, and the construction thereof shall be at the sole costs, risks, and expense of the applicant, subject to the provisions of any applicable Town ordinance, regulation, or policies. All such improvements shall be constructed in full compliance with the Town's engineering regulations, design standards and construction specifications as may be adopted by resolution or ordinance from time to time. 
3.  If the Town determines that it is necessary and appropriate to require from the applicant security for the construction and installation of the required public improvements, the applicant shall deposit with the Town Clerk a bond or other suitable performance guarantee approved by the Town Attorney in an amount equal to the cost of the construction of the public improvements in the manner set out in Section 4.13.210. Said security shall be released in the manner set out in said section. 
E.  Development impact-Public facilities. Every planned unit development application, development permit application, subdivision preliminary plan, and special use permit application shall be made in accordance with the requirements contained in Chapter 4.14 concerning the assurance of adequate public facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.07.030, 3-5-1986; Amended 2-25-1997) 
Section 4.07.110. - Municipal and park land dedication. 
    Every development shall include: 
1.  A dedication of land to the Town, recreation district, or other entity, as determined by the Town Board, to be used for parks and recreation or municipal functions requiring land pursuant to Section 4.13.190; or 
2.  Payment of a park and municipal land fee pursuant to Section 4.13.190. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.07.040, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.07.120. - Street improvement fee. 
    Every approved development shall include payment of a street improvement fee pursuant to Section 4.13.220. 
Section 4.07.130. - Fire protection impact fee. 
    Every approved development shall require the payment of a fire protection impact fee pursuant to Section 4.13.230. 
Section 4.07.140. - Parking standards. 
    In order to ensure that safe and convenient off-street parking is provided to serve the requirement of all land uses in the Town, and to avoid congestion in the streets, the requirements of this chapter shall be minimum requirements for all land uses, unless specifically excepted herein. Additional spaces above the number required may be installed, but the maximum number of access ways to and from parking areas shall not be exceeded. 
A.  Applicability. 
1.  Except as provided herein, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to all uses established or commenced on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this Title is derived. For uses existing on this date, parking spaces or areas existing on this date shall not be diminished in number or size to less than that required for such use under this chapter. 
2.  When an existing use or building is expanded, as measured in floor area used, off-street parking, loading areas and landscaping shall be provided as required for the added floor area, whether or not they were provided for the existing use or building. 
3.  When the use of an existing building or space is changed to either: 
a.  A use in a different use category as set forth in Subsection (C) of this section; or 
b.  A use in the same use category which requires more off-street parking than the existing use; 
off-street parking, loading areas and landscaping shall be provided as required for the new use, whether or not they were provided for the existing use; provided, however, the requirements contained in this subsection shall not apply in the Central Business Zone District (CBD) or Broadway District. 
4.  Parking as a use accessory to a lawful land use shall be allowed in all zone districts, except that commercial parking, wherein fees are assessed to those using the parking, shall be limited to those zone districts allowing commercial and office uses. 
B.  Parking plan. 
1.  Except for single-family and two-family dwellings, no use requiring parking shall commence before review and approval by the Town Planner of a parking plan. The parking plan shall be drawn to a scale, accuracy and level of detail determined by the Town Planner as necessary to demonstrate compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The parking plan shall depict the following, as required pursuant to this chapter: parking and loading spaces; circulation areas; curb cuts; dimensions and material of screening and/or landscaping; proposed drainage, grading, surfacing and subsurfacing; fire lanes; snow storage areas; facilities and spaces for the disabled; specifications for signs, wheel stops and lighting; and other pertinent details. 
2.  The Town Planner shall have the authority and responsibility to determine compliance of a parking plan with the provisions of this chapter. Such determination shall be made within ten days of submittal of the parking plan and shall be acknowledged on a form provided by the Town and shall be filed at the Town hall. 
C.  Number of parking spaces required. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided according to the following schedule, and when computations result in a fraction, the next highest whole number shall apply. When parking is required for more than one use, the sum of the requirements for all uses shall apply. 
1.  Use category-Residential and lodging uses. 
a.  Single-family dwelling or duplex: two per dwelling unit for units with fewer than three bedrooms, and three per dwelling unit for units with three or more bedrooms. 
b.  Multiple-family dwelling: 11/2 per dwelling unit for units with one bedroom, two per dwelling unit for units with two bedrooms, 21/2 per dwelling unit for units with three or more bedrooms, plus one additional space per six dwelling units. 
c.  Accommodation units, temporary lodging: one per separate unit for temporary or long-term accommodations, including management and employee units. 
d.  Mobile home: two per mobile home. 
e.  Recreational vehicle: 11/2 per campsite in RV park. 
2.  Use category-Institutional and public assembly uses. 
a.  School: to be determined pursuant to Subsection (C)(5) of this section. 
b.  Church: one per five seats or one per 100 square feet of floor area used or designed for public, whichever is greater. 
c.  Hospital: one per two patient beds, plus one per three full-time employees, plus one per part-time or full-time staff doctor. 
d.  Nursing home: one per four patient beds, plus one per three full-time employees, plus one per part-time or full-time staff doctor. 
e.  Housing project for senior citizens: one per dwelling unit, plus one per six dwelling units for visitors. 
f.  Auditorium, assembly hall, gymnasium, skating rink, theater, library, convention hall, exhibition hall, sports arenas, funeral home and other places of public assembly not otherwise listed herein: one per four seats or one per 100 square feet of floor area used or designed for use by the public, whichever is higher. 
3.  Use category-Commercial uses. 
a.  General office, public administration: one per 300 square feet of floor area used or designed for office or public use. 
b.  Medical, dental, veterinary office, service establishment: one per 250 square feet of floor area used or designed for office or public use. 
c.  Retail sales business for sale of goods: parking area equal in square footage to the total floor area of the building, excluding one-half of storage and display areas used for bulky items requiring extensive floor area such as household appliances, furniture, automobiles, farm and construction equipment. 
d.  Indoor restaurant, bar or tavern, handling the sale of food or beverages, or both, primarily for consumption on the premises: 11/2 per 100 square feet of floor area used or designed for use by the public, plus 11/2 per 200 square feet of kitchen floor space. 
e.  Outdoor restaurant, bar or tavern providing food or beverages, or both, to customers in an outdoor area: one per 200 square feet of outdoor floor area. 
f.  Drive-in or drive-through restaurant without indoor eating area for the public: three per 100 square feet of floor area, plus a minimum of six stacking spaces per drive-up window, in accordance with Subsection (L)(2) of this section. 
g.  Drive-through window accessory to indoor restaurant: a minimum of six stacking spaces per drive-up window, in accordance with Subsection (L)(2) of this section. 
h.  Drive-through retail or service establishment or vehicle washing facility: one per employee per major shift, plus stacking spaces in accordance with Subsection (L)(2) of this section. 
i.  Nightclub, lounge, dance hall: one per 100 square feet of floor area or 0.3 space per person maximum rated capacity, whichever is greater. 
j.  Gasoline station: one per 100 square feet of retail or office floor area, plus stacking spaces in accordance with Subsection (L)(2)(a) of this section. 
k.  Vehicle repair or maintenance facility: one per 100 square feet of retail or office floor area, plus three per service bay. 
l.  Bus depot: one per 100 square feet of floor area, in addition to loading and unloading areas. Ten percent of parking spaces required, or a minimum of two spaces, shall be reserved for overnight or long-term parking. 
m.  Bowling alley: four per bowling lane. 
n.  Outdoor commercial recreational use, including swimming pool, skating rink, and park: to be determined pursuant to Subsection (C)(5) of this section. 
o.  Private club, health club: to be determined pursuant to Subsection (C)(5) of this section. 
4.  Use category-Industrial uses. 
a.  Industrial, manufacturing, warehousing, wholesale business: 
1.  One per 1,000 square feet of floor area used or designed for storage, warehousing, distribution, wholesale sales, or a combination thereof. 
2.  Plus one per 350 square feet of floor area used or designed for manufacturing assembly, parking, preparation, research facilities, experimental or testing laboratories, or other such uses. 
3.  Plus one per 300 square feet of floor area used or designed for retail sales or office use. 
b.  Self-storage, mini-warehousing establishment: one per full-time employee on duty, plus vehicular movement areas sufficient to allow on-site loading and unloading. 
5.  Other uses. For uses not specifically listed herein, the use classification for purposes of parking requirements shall be determined by the Town Planner, based on similarity of the proposed use to the listed use classification. If the Town Planner determines that a proposed use is not comparable to any use listed herein, he shall request the Planning Commission to determine off-street parking requirements for the proposed use at a regular Commission meeting. The Planning Commission shall make such determination based on the following criteria: the similarity of the use to those uses listed herein, the zone district of the property, the need for off-street parking in the area where the property is located, the nature and extent of use of the property by the public, the number of employees who will work on the subject property, and the use capacity. 
6.  Uses not known. For unknown commercial space for which all or part of the space has no use designated the parking requirement shall be as follows: parking spaces shall be provided at the rate of one per 225 square feet for the first floor and one per 275 square feet for all other floor area, except that an indoor restaurant, bar or tavern may occupy no more than 25 percent of the floor area without providing for additional spaces. 
D.  Size. Each off-street parking space shall cover an area not less than nine feet wide and 19 feet long. All parallel parking spaces shall be a minimum of 22 feet in length. 
E.  Garages and covered parking. Parking requirements may be met by garages and carports covering or enclosing spaces which comply with minimum size provisions of this chapter. 
F.  Location of parking spaces. 
1.  For single-family dwellings and multifamily dwellings with two through five dwelling units, off-street parking spaces shall be located on the same lot as the dwelling or a common lot associated with the dwelling. 
2.  Off-street parking may be located on any part of the lot occupied by the dwellings or uses for which such parking space is required except that no parking space shall be established in a required front yard setback on any lot containing three or more dwellings. Enclosed underground parking spaces may be located anywhere on the lot. 
3.  For multifamily dwellings with more than five dwelling units and all nonresidential uses parking spaces may be located within a 200-foot radius of the subject property, measured from any point on the property. If the use and the parking area are not owned by the same owner, the owner of the subject use shall submit for approval by the Town Attorney, a binding agreement affording him use of the parking area. 
4.  No parking space shall be located closer than five feet from a window or door of a habitable structure. 
G.  Exclusive use for parking. Except for single-family and two-family dwellings no off-street parking or loading space shall be used for any purpose other than the parking of vehicles. No parking space shall be converted to another use unless it is replaced concurrently with another parking space meeting all of the requirements of this chapter. 
H.  Joint use of parking spaces. Where an owner or developer can document that two separate uses do not require parking during the same hours and that adequate provisions have been made to ensure that the uses will not require parking during the same hours, such owner or developer may petition the Planning Commission for permission to allow parking spaces which otherwise comply with the provisions of this chapter to fulfill the requirements for both uses. Permission for such joint use of parking spaces may be granted subject to such conditions as the Planning Commission finds necessary to carry out the purpose and intent of this chapter. Such request shall follow the Town's review procedures for zoning variance, as set forth in Section 4.05.020, except that hardship criteria shall not apply. 
I.  Common parking area. Common parking areas may be provided in areas designated to serve jointly two or more buildings, units, structures or uses, provided that the total number of parking spaces shall not be less than that required for each use. 
J.  Loading areas. For those uses requiring deliveries or service by truck and which are not contiguous to an alley, an off-street delivery truck berth at least 14 feet wide and 30 feet long shall be provided in addition to the required parking area. Where the property or use is served or designed to be served by tractor-trailer delivery vehicles, the off-street loading berth shall be designed so that delivery vehicles using the loading area do not obstruct traffic movements in the parking area or in the public right-of- way. 
K.  Parking area surfacing. The following requirements shall apply to every residential and nonresidential parking area finished surface: 
1.  Residential parking areas. 
a.  All parking areas serving a single-family dwelling or four or fewer units shall have parking areas surfaced with asphalt, concrete, brick, gravel or road base. 
b.  All parking areas serving five or more units shall have parking areas surfaced with asphalt or concrete. 
2.  Nonresidential parking areas. 
a.  All parking areas serving nonresidential buildings which contain ten or fewer parking spaces and have less than 3,000 square feet of parking area shall have parking areas surfaced with asphalt, concrete, brick, gravel or road base. 
b.  All parking areas serving nonresidential buildings which contain more than ten parking spaces or have more than 3,000 square feet of parking area shall have parking areas surfaced with asphalt or concrete. 
L.  Design of parking areas. The following design standards of this section shall be met for all parking areas, whether or not the parking area is required. 
1.  Access. 
a.  Except single- and two-family dwellings, each access way between a public street and the parking area shall be not less than 15 feet nor more than 35 feet wide at the intersection of the access way with the public street, and a divider stop at least six feet long shall be installed if the access way exceeds 25 feet in width. Each access way shall be clearly and permanently marked and defined through the use of landscaping, rails, fences, walls or other barriers or markers. Said marking and defining may be augmented by painting or striping. 
b.  Except single- and two-family dwellings, access from any parking area onto a collector or arterial street and from any parking area with four or more parking spaces onto a local street shall be designed to permit user vehicles to enter and exit unrestricted in forward drive. Single- and two-family dwellings may stack parking spaces except that unobstructed and direct access must be provided for a minimum of two spaces. Access ways shall be designed so as to reduce the number and proximity of access points along public streets. 
c.  Access ways on the same lot frontage shall be separated by a minimum curb length of 30 feet. For lots of 100 to 200 feet of frontage, the minimum length of curb separation shall be increased by one foot for every five feet of property length beyond 100 feet. For lots exceeding 200 feet of frontage, access ways shall be separated by at least 50 feet. In the case of a corner lot, access ways shall be located not closer than 50 feet to the intersecting street right-of-way line, or where lot frontage is less than 75 feet, the maximum distance possible from the intersecting street right-of-way line, as determined by the Town Planner. 
d.  The intersection of an access way with a public street shall be located not closer than 15 feet to a side lot line, except that a common access way to two adjacent properties with combined width not exceeding 35 feet may be provided at the common lot line. 
2.  Stacking spaces. 
a.  For any drive-in or drive-through retail or service use, there shall be provided stacking space for vehicles waiting for service, sufficient to prevent any such vehicles from extending onto the public right-of-way at any time. In no case shall fewer than two such stacking spaces be provided for each window or counter on the entrance side, and one such space on the exit side where an exit is provided. 
b.  No bays designed to be entered from more than one direction shall be permitted. 
3.  Parking for the disabled. A minimum of one parking space for the disabled shall be provided for each nonresidential use which requires a minimum of 15 parking spaces. For such uses requiring more than 15 spaces, one space designed for the disabled shall be provided for each additional 40 spaces. Such spaces shall be located as close as possible to a major entrance of a building or use. Such spaces shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width, unless located parallel to a sidewalk, in which case they shall be a minimum of nine feet in width. Parallel spaces shall be a minimum of 24 feet in length. All parking spaces for the disabled shall be designated by means of a permanent identification sign. 
4.  Parking area layout. Every parking area shall be designed according to the following table. The top line of figures for each parking angle constitutes minimum design standards and the lower two lines constitute higher standards to be employed at the option of the owner or developer. The owner or developer may select the parking angle and the line of figures for such parking angles and then all figures in that line shall become requirements. 
MINIMUM PARKING SPACE AND DRIVEWAY REQUIREMENT 
Parking Angle Stall Width Length of Stall to Curb Aisle Width Curb Length per Stall Width of Double Row with Aisle 10 9'0" 9.0 12.0 23.0 30.0 9'6" 9.5 12.0 23.0 31.0 10'0" 10.0 12.0 23.0 32.0 20 9'0" 15.0 11.0 26.3 41.0 9'6" 15.5 11.0 27.5 42.0 10'0" 15.9 11.0 29.2 42.0 30 9'0" 17.3 11.0 18.0 45.6 9'6" 17.8 11.0 19.0 46.6 10'0" 18.2 11.0 20.0 47.0 45 9'0" 19.8 13.0 12.7 52.5 9'6" 20.1 13.0 13.0 53.3 10'0" 20.5 18.0 14.1 54.0 60 9'0" 21.0 18.0 10.4 60.0 9'6" 21.2 18.0 11.0 60.4 10'0" 21.5 18.0 11.5 61.0 70 9'0" 21.0 19.0 9.6 61.0 9'6" 21.2 18.5 10.1 60.9 10'0" 21.2 18.0 10.6 60.4 80 9'0" 20.3 24.0 9.1 64.3 9'6" 20.4 24.0 9.6 64.3 10'0" 20.5 24.0 10.2 65.0 90 9'0" 19.0 24.0 9.0 62.0 9'6" 19.0 24.0 9.5 62.0 10'0" 19.0 24.0 10.0 62.0  
5.  Grade of parking. Outdoor parking areas shall not exceed four percent grade and shall be not less than one percent grade. The grade of access ways shall not exceed four percent within 100 feet of the intersection with a public street. 
6.  Landscaping. 

a.  Except in the CBD zone district, at least ten percent of the total un-enclosed parking area, including access ways, shall be devoted exclusively to landscaping of trees, shrubs, and ground cover which reduce the visual impact and assist in defining on-site traffic movement when the number of parking spaces required is ten or more. Such landscaping shall be in addition to the front street buffer as set forth in Section 4.07.020. Hedges provided to fulfill any screening requirements n may be included in the ten percent landscaping requirement. Screening of parking lots from adjacent properties shall be required. Screening must be provided to eliminate headlight glare from lot onto adjacent property and to screen views into parking lots. Planting buffers along the edges(s) of parking lots must be a minimum of five feet wide or a combination of fencing and a two-foot wide buffer may be used. 
b.  Non-living ground cover shall not exceed 20 percent of the required landscaping area. 

7.  Lighting. Security lighting shall be provided in all parking areas with more than ten spaces used or designed for use during evening hours. The lighting shall meet the requirements of the Section 4.07.010. 
8.  Drainage. All parking areas shall be designed and graded to restrict site drainage to a rate no greater than the historical rate, before development, for the 25-year storm, or shall include development of a storm drainage system to convey runoff water to a site approved by the Town Planner. 
9.  Snow storage. All parking areas shall address snow storage and removal of snow. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.07.050, 3-5-1986; Amended 6-2-1991; Amended 11-21-1997; Ord. No. 08-2017, §§ 17-24, 4-11-2017) 
Section 4.07.150. - Fire protection standards. 
A.  Compliance with applicable codes. All approved developments shall comply with the provisions of the current fire code adopted by the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District, as well as building codes adopted by the Town and any other duly adopted code, statute, ordinance or standard related to fire protection unless enforceable equivalent fire protection or mitigation efforts are undertaken by the developer as approved by the Town and the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District. 
B.  Wildland/urban inter-mix areas. Only approved fire resistive construction and landscaping shall be permitted in wildlands/urban inter-mix/interface areas in accordance with the current fire code adopted by the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District and applicable building codes duly adopted by the Town. 
C.  Automatic fire protection systems required. 
1.  Any development which is located more than three driving miles from the nearest actual or to be constructed fire station shall have approved, built-in, automatic fire protection systems installed and maintained in all improvements (occupancies). 
2.  Any development which is more than five driving miles from the nearest actual or to be constructed fire station shall have approved, built-in, automatic fire protection systems which are installed and maintained in all improvements (occupancies). In addition, the developer shall provide all prospective buyers with a statement that the property is considered not to have any fire protection other than built-in fire protection for insurance purposes. The developer and the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District shall mutually agree upon the contents and final form of such statement. The statement shall be recorded in the records of the County Clerk and Recorder with other closing documents at the time of sale of any unit within the development. 
(Amended 2-13-2000) 
Section 4.07.160. - Design variance. 
    A variance from the strict application of the requirements of Chapter 4.06 may be granted by the body authorizing the development permit where a finding is made that there exists on the property in question exceptional topographical, soil, or other subsurface condition, or other extraordinary conditions peculiar to the site, existing buildings, or lot configuration, such that strict application of the regulation from which the variance is requested would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional and undue hardship upon the applicant; or that the public good would be better served by granting the variance. Any design variance request shall be made and reviewed concurrently with the development plan and, if granted, shall be described and acknowledged in the development permit. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.07.060, 3-5-1986; Amended 3-22-1996; Amended 2-25-1997; Amended 8-24-1999; Amended 2-13-2000) 
Section 4.07.170. - Public safety impact fee. 
    Every approved development shall require the payment of a public safety impact fee pursuant to Section 4.13.250. 
(Ord. No. 10-2019 , § 1, 5-14-2019) 
CHAPTER 4.08. - SIGN CODE 

Section 4.08.010. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of this chapter are to: 
A.  Reduce hazards to motorists and pedestrians. 
B.  Eliminate fire hazards caused by the size and placement of signs. 
C.  Reduce the possibility of injuries to those coming near or under signs. 
D.  Reduce needless and destructive competition among signs. 
E.  Reduce and eliminate confusion and conflicts caused between advertising signs, on the one hand, and traffic control signs and devices on the other hand. 
F.  Control and reduce insistent and distracting demand for attention from signs which can be injurious to the mental and physical well-being of the public and destructive to adjacent property values and the natural beauty of the Town. 
G.  Reduce visual degradation of the attractiveness of the Town. 
H.  Promote the health, safety, and public welfare of the Town, and its residents and visitors. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.08.010, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.08.020. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all uses established or commenced on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this Title is derived. For uses existing on this date, any lawfully existing sign shall be considered a legal nonconforming sign and as such may continue in use but may not be altered to refer to a new product, business, service, activity, condition or person and may not be used in a new or different location and shall be subject to Section 4.08.100. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.08.020, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.08.030. - Uniform Sign Code (Reserved). 
Section 4.08.040. - Administrative review. 
A.  Sign permit. Pursuant to the Uniform Sign Code, no sign, as defined in this Title, shall be erected, re-erected, constructed, altered or maintained except in conformance with the Uniform Sign Code and this chapter and except after issuance of a sign permit by the Building Official. Every sign permit application shall also be subject to approval by the Town Planner, who shall review such application for conformance with this chapter and the Town's goals, policies and plans. 
B.  Exemptions. The following shall not require a sign permit, however, these exemptions shall not be construed as relieving the owner of a sign from the responsibility of erecting, maintaining and otherwise complying with the provisions of this chapter or any other law or ordinance regulating such exempted sign: 
1.  Temporary signs, as set forth in Section 4.08.090; 
2.  Signs not visible beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel on which they are located and not visible from any public right-of-way; 
3.  On-site traffic directional signs which do not exceed four square feet of sign area per face, which do not exceed six feet in height above level, and which do not carry any commercial message or identification; 
4.  Non-illuminated traffic directional signs which do not exceed five square feet of sign area per face, and which are not visible from any adjoining property which is in any residential zone district or which is devoted wholly to a residential use; 
5.  Noncommercial signs erected by or at the direction of a public officer in furtherance of the public interest in the performance of his public duty; 
6.  Names of buildings, dates of erection, monumental citations and commemorative tablets which are carved into stone, concrete or similar permanent materials and which are constructed as integral part of a structure; and 
7.  Residential identification signs. 
C.  Application. Application for a sign permit shall include submittal of: 
1.  A drawing to scale which depicts the location of the proposed sign in relation to buildings, setbacks and property lines, plus the sign height and clearance above ground; 
2.  Design and construction plans adequate to demonstrate compliance with the Uniform Sign Code; 
3.  A drawing to scale depicting each sign face with its message, materials, and colors; 
4.  The sign permit fee, which shall be $10.00 for a sign of up to 25 square feet of sign area, and $25.00 for a sign of more than 25 square feet of sign area; and 
5.  If illuminated, manufacture's cut sheets, specifications of light fixtures, lamp source(s), wattage, mounting heights, and light source shielding shall be submitted. 
D.  Expiration. Every sign permit issued shall expire and become null and void if erection of the sign authorized by the permit is not commenced within 180 days from the date of such permit. Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of time within which he may commence work. The Town Planner may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding 180 days upon written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken. No permit shall be extended more than once. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.08.040, 3-5-1986; Amended 2-13-2000) 
Section 4.08.050. - Prohibited signs. 
    The following signs are prohibited within the Town: 
A.  Signs containing statements, words or pictures of an obscene, indecent or immoral character such as will offend public morals or decency in accordance with constitutional standards. 
B.  Signs which create a danger to motorists, pedestrians or other members of the public due to the signs' size, construction, location, movement, content, coloring or manner of illumination. This prohibition includes signs which may be confused with or construed as official traffic control devices, signs which hide from view any official traffic control device, signs which cause glare or which impair the vision of any motorist, signs which obstruct the view in any direction at an intersection, signs which are structurally unsound and other similar signs. 
C.  Signs which move or have any animated or moving parts, including, but not limited to, streamers, spinners and other similar devices. 
D.  Signs which contain, include or are illuminated by any flashing, intermittent or moving light or lights, except those giving the following public service information: time, date, temperature and weather. 
E.  Signs which are lighted by any method other than by indirect illumination, except signs fronting on the I-70 Spur Road as provided in Section 4.08.080(F). 
F.  Any sign advertising a business other than those on the same lot that the sign is located. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.08.050, 3-5-1986; Amended 2-13-2000) 
Section 4.08.060. - Sign lighting. 
    Every sign that is illuminated shall comply with these requirements. 
A.  Objectives. 
1.  Provide quality, context-sensitive lighting for the Town mountain environment. 
2.  Sustain a pristine nighttime sky by controlling glare, light trespass and light pollution. 
3.  Zero tolerance of light pollution and light trespass beyond property lines within and into residential areas. 
4.  Minimize light pollution and light trespass beyond property lines within and into commercial and industrial areas. 
5.  Use proper shielding to eliminate glare at normal viewing angles from all high brightness sources. 
6.  Use lighting to create visual hierarchy which facilitates circulation and way finding. 
B.  Prohibitions. 
1.  All mercury vapor sources are outdated and are therefore prohibited. Existing fixtures should be modified to accommodate more current technologies such as metal halide or fluorescent lamp sources. 
2.  Any searchlight or laser light used for the purpose of advertising, or as a beacon, is prohibited. 
3.  Blinking, tracing, or flashing lights are prohibited. 
4.  High intensity discharge (HID) floodlighting is prohibited. 
5.  Fixtures with high brightness lamps and poor visual cutoff are prohibited. 
6.  Exterior neon sources such that the source can be directly viewed are prohibited. Backlighted applications may be acceptable, and must conform to the same restrictions as cabinet signs. 
C.  Exemptions. 
1.  Low voltage, ornamental landscape lighting which meets yard lighting and lamp shielding requirements is allowed. 
2.  Low-brightness, seasonal holiday lighting is allowed. Note that the National Electrical Code (Section 305-3) allows for temporary lighting installations for up to 90 days. 
3.  Lighting for the purpose of security must meet the criteria of each application category but may be exempted from specific control requirements. 
D.  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cutoff angle (of fixture) means the angle measured upward from the vertical at which the bare source is completely blocked from view. 
    Discomfort glare means glare producing discomfort. It does not necessarily interfere with visual performance or visibility. 
    Footcandle means the basic unit of illuminance (the amount of light falling on a surface). 
    Full-cutoff fixture means a fixture that allows no emission of light above horizontal. 
    Full shielding refers to internal and/or external shields and louvers provided to prevent brightness from lamps, reflectors, refractors and lenses from causing glare at normal viewing angles. 
    Glare means the sensation of annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility due to bright or uncontrolled light sources. 
    IESNA means the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, an organization that establishes standards for the lighting industry. 
    Illuminance means a measure of the amount of light incident on a surface, expressed in footcandles. 
    Light trespass means any form of artificial illumination emanating from a light fixture or illuminated sign that penetrates another property. 
    Luminance means the apparent brightness of a light fixture or lamp as viewed from a specific direction. The luminance of a fixture can vary as the viewing angle varies. 
    Non-cutoff fixture means a fixture that includes no optics to prevent light emission above horizontal. 
    Nuisance glare means glare that causes complaints. 
    Semi-cutoff fixture means a fixture that emits some light above horizontal, but less than a non-cutoff fixture. 
    Timing device means a switching device, a part of which is a clock, set to the prevailing time, that will control the period of operation for outdoor lighting fixtures and signs. 
LAMP SHIELDING AND SPECIAL APPLICATION CHARTS 
Lamp Shielding Chart Refer to this chart for shielding instructions for all exterior lighting applications Lamp Wattage Incandescent Fluorescent H.I.D. Less than 35 None None N/A 36-75 None None Low 76-100 Low Low Medium 101-150 Medium Medium Medium 151-250 Medium 251-500 Full 501-1,000 Full 1,001+ Full Legend: None No shielding (IESNA non-cutoff) Low Low shielding (IESNA semi-cutoff) 1 Medium Medium shielding (IESNA full-cutoff) 2 Full Full shielding (lamp shielded from view outside of property) 3 Full Prohibited (see "exemptions") 1 Requires a semi-cutoff fixture that emits sunlight above horizontal, but less than a non-cutoff fixture. 
  
2 Requires a full cutoff fixture that allows no emission of light above horizontal. 
  
3 Requires a fixture containing internal and/or external shields and louvers to provide brightness from lamps, reflectors, refractors and lenses from causing glare at normal viewing angles.  
SIGN LIGHTING 
Sign Lighting Acceptable Lamp Types and 
Maximum Allowable Wattages Controls Maximum Mounting Height Residential Sign lighting is prohibited in rural or standard residential areas Residential Multifamily Sign lighting is prohibited in residential multifamily areas Residential Medium Density Sign lighting is prohibited in residential medium density areas Public Area Compact fluorescent 
Linear fluorescent 
Incandescent (2)42 W max. 
(2)32 W max. 
100 W max. Sign lights on dusk to dawn See notes below Commercial Limited Compact fluorescent 
Linear fluorescent 
H.I.D. 
Incandescent (2)42 W max. 
(2)32 W max. 
70 W max. 
150 W max. Sign lights on until one hour after 
closing Commercial General Compact fluorescent 
Linear fluorescent 
H.I.D. 
Incandescent (2)42 W max. 
(2)32 W max. 
70 W max. 
150 W max. Central Business District* Compact fluorescent 
Linear fluorescent 
Incandescent (2)42 W max. 
(2)32 W max. 
100 W max. Industrial Compact fluorescent 
Linear fluorescent 
H.I.D. 
Incandescent (2)42 W max. 
(2)32 W max. 
70 W max. 
150 W max. *Cabinet signs are prohibited in Central Business Districts  
General notes: 
1.  The word "sign" refers to any object attached to or apart from a structure intended to convey advertising, image, or identification. Note that the National Electrical Code (Section 305-3) allows for temporary lighting installations for up to 90 days. 
2.  Each proprietor is limited to one illuminated sign per establishment except in the CBD on corner lots. 
3.  In all sign lighting, the source will be fully shielded from pedestrians and motorists. 
4.  Sources should not be visible from inside the associated building or from surrounding buildings. 
Externally lighted signs: 
1.  Downlighting of signs is preferred. 
2.  Uplighting must be shielded and/or fall completely on the sign. 
Internally lighted signs: 
1.  Cabinet signs, where allowed, or signs with interior lighting are to have fluorescent lamps and will not exceed 130 watts. 
2.  The use of sources other than fluorescent for cabinet signs is subject to the approval of the Town. 
(Amended 2-13-2000) 
Section 4.08.070. - Signs in residential zone districts. 
A.  Residential uses. In all residential zone districts, one sign per single-family or multifamily dwelling shall be allowed. Each sign shall have a maximum sign area of one square foot per dwelling unit, up to a maximum area of eight square feet. Such sign may identify the residential use and/or a home occupation. 
B.  Nonresidential uses. For each lot or series of contiguous lots in common ownership in nonresidential use, one flat wall sign shall be allowed, which shall have a maximum sign area of 12 square feet. Any such sign which is lighted shall be lighted by indirect illumination only. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.08.060, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.08.080. - Signs in nonresidential zone districts. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided herein, one flat wall sign or projecting sign per business and one freestanding sign per building lot shall be allowed in Commercial and Industrial Zone Districts. Each property shall have a maximum sign area of one square foot per lineal foot of property frontage along a public street. 
B.  Each flat wall sign or projecting sign shall have a maximum sign area of 30 square feet and a maximum height of 20 feet or the height of the tallest building on the same lot, whichever is lower. 
C.  Each freestanding sign advertising one business shall be of monument style and have a maximum sign area of 30 square feet and a maximum height of five feet. 
D.  Each freestanding sign advertising two or more businesses shall be of monument style and have a maximum sign area of 50 square feet and a maximum height of ten feet. 
E.  No sign shall be located in a rear yard except on properties that adjoin the I-70 right-of-way, these properties shall be allowed one flat wall sign in the rear yard of up to 30 square feet per property. The sign shall be of a color compatible with the building on which it is placed. The sign message shall contain the business name and/or type of business only; phone numbers, product logos and product names are prohibited. Individual business logos are allowed. Signs shall be down lighted only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. and shall comply with Section 4.07.010. 
F.  On those properties fronting on the I-70 Spur Road, which location shall be subject to approval by the Town Planner, each flat wall sign, projecting sign or freestanding sign shall have a maximum sign area of 80 square feet and a maximum height of 30 feet. 
G.  In the CBD zone district, businesses on corner lots may have two flat wall or projecting signs with one sign to be located on each of the two sides facing a public right-of-way. 
1.  Signs separate from buildings shall be monument style and be integrated with the overall site plan and planting plan. 
2.  Projecting signs must be eight feet above finished grade, measuring from pavement to the bottom off sign. 
3.  Neon lighting on the exterior of the building is prohibited. 
4.  All sign faces to be no larger than 20 square feet. 
5.  All signs may be constructed of wood, wood look materials, painted on windows or wall or be a part of an awning installed over doors or windows. Other acceptable materials include stone, glass, and unpainted metals, excluding aluminum. 
H.  Internally illuminated signs are not permitted except on properties adjacent to Eby Creek Road or Market Drive. 
I.  Sign materials shall be compatible with building facade materials and must be durable to withstand climatic effects of the area. Painted wood or metal is preferred, highly reflective materials are prohibited. Plastic is permitted only on internally illuminated signs. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.08.070, 3-5-1986; Amended 2-13-2000) 
Section 4.08.090. - Temporary signs. 
A.  Construction signs. On building construction sites, one sign shall be permitted for all participating building contractors and subcontractors, one for all participating professional firms, one for all participating lending institutions and one for each property owner on the construction site subject to a maximum of three signs for each construction site, and each such sign shall be 24 square feet in sign area or less. All such signs shall be removed within 14 days after the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the project. 
B.  Real estate signs. One real estate sign not exceeding six square feet in sign area shall be permitted on the lot or series of contiguous lots under the same ownership being offered for sale, rent, or lease in residential zone districts, provided that, for a lot or contiguous lots under the same ownership that together exceed two acres, the requirement shall be one sign not to exceed 32 square feet. In nonresidential zone districts, such signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in total sign area. The sign shall be removed not later than seven days after the closing of the real estate conveyance. 
C.  Street banners. Street banners or pennants advertising a public event or a specific short term commercial event or occurrence may be displayed if specifically approved in writing by the Town Manager. The Town Manager may impose requirements concerning the location, height, weight, design, structure, support and allowable time for the display of banners. 
D.  Political campaign signs. Signs announcing candidates seeking public office with pertinent data and signs relating to ballot issues with pertinent data shall be allowed subject to the following limitations: The maximum sign area shall be 24 square feet, and any such sign shall be located a minimum of eight feet from the nearest public street or alley. Any such sign shall be removed within seven days after the election. 
E.  Nameplates. One nameplate per public entrance per business may be suspended under a canopy, with a maximum sign area of two square feet per face. 
F.  Garage sale signs. Garage sale signs shall be installed not more than seven days prior to the sale and shall be removed not more than two days after the sale. 
G.  Other temporary signs. Temporary signs announcing any public, charitable, educational or religious event may be installed for a period of not more than 21 days prior to the event and not more than seven days after the event. Any such sign shall have a maximum sign area of 24 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.08.080, 3-5-1986; Amended 6-2-1991; Amended 2-13-2000) 
Section 4.08.100. - Abandoned signs. 
    A sign which depicts or refers to a product, business, service, activity, condition or person which has changed such that the sign no longer correctly identifies or describes him or it, or which no longer exists in the location referred to in the sign, shall be considered an abandoned sign and shall be removed within 60 days of such abandonment. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.08.090, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.08.110. - Sign variance. 
    A variance from the strict application of the provisions of this chapter may be granted by the Planning Commission, pursuant to the provisions and procedures as set forth for zoning variance in Section 4.05.020. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.08.100, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.08.120. - Enforcement. 
    The Building Official shall order the removal of any sign erected in violation of this chapter. Ten days' notice in writing shall be given to the owner of such sign, or of the building, structure or premises on which such sign is located, to remove the sign or to bring it into compliance with the chapter. Upon failure to comply, the sign shall be removed by the Town and the cost of removal shall be assessed to the owner of the property on which the sign is located and may be collected in the manner of ordinary debt or in the manner of taxes and such charge shall be a lien on the property. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.08.110, 3-5-1986) 
CHAPTER 4.09. - MOBILE HOME PARKS AND SUBDIVISIONS 

Section 4.09.010. - General. 
    In order to further the health, safety and general welfare of the residents and the Town as a whole and to further the stated purposes of this Title, every mobile home park and mobile home subdivision shall be designed and operated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, as well as other applicable chapters of this Title, including, and not limited to Chapters 4.11 and 4.13. All local and State regulations, including, but not limited to, those addressing all public facilities and utilities, shall apply. The provisions of this chapter shall take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, ch. 4.09, intro. ¶, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.09.020. - Applicability. 
A.  No mobile home shall be occupied or otherwise used for dwelling, cooking or sleeping purposes within the Town except while located in a mobile home park or subdivision constructed and operated in accordance with this chapter. No person shall own, operate, create or occupy a mobile home park unless it is approved in accordance with this chapter. 
B.  No mobile home shall be maintained upon any private property in the Town when the same is used for living purposes except in compliance with this chapter, nor shall any mobile home be stored in any front or side yard. 
C.  Establishment of a mobile home park shall follow procedures for PUD as set forth in Chapter 4.11. 
D.  Any mobile home park in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this this chapter is derived may continue to operate and shall be considered a legal nonconforming use. No change shall be made in the design, layout or operation of a nonconforming mobile home park which would make the park less in conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.09.010, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.09.030. - Park and subdivision design. 
A.  Size. No mobile home park or subdivision shall be less than two acres nor more than five acres in size. 
B.  Streets 
1.  Street alignment. Streets shall be designed to take advantage of natural terrain features and shall be largely curvilinear. Streets shall be designed such that lot configuration promotes privacy and layout other than a strict grid pattern. 
2.  Street construction, ownership, and maintenance. Every street in any mobile home park or subdivision shall conform to the Town's street construction regulations and be public streets. Streets in mobile home parks shall be private streets, maintained by the park operator, and hard surfaced. 
C.  Setbacks. The minimum setback along the periphery of a mobile home park or subdivision shall be 50 feet from an arterial street, 30 feet from a collector or a local street, and 20 feet along any boundary not abutting a street. Said setbacks shall serve as a landscaped buffer and shall be bermed a minimum of three feet higher than the street elevation measured from a point of the nearest street surface or above natural grade in the case of boundaries not abutting a street. Said setbacks shall meet the requirements of Section 4.07.020. In addition, entrances and exits to the park or subdivision shall be landscaped so as to provide a clear delineation of traffic flow patterns. 
D.  Accessory uses. Service and other nonresidential uses may be allowed as accessory uses only, clearly for the use of mobile home park residents, with no visible characteristics which would attract users from outside the park. 
E.  Utilities. 
1.  Every mobile home park shall be connected to the Town's water distribution system. 
2.  Every mobile home park shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the International Plumbing Code provisions for mobile home park water, sewerage, fuel, and any other provisions, and with any other applicable State and local regulations. 
F.  Common facilities. 
1.  Central maintenance shed. Central facilities for the storage of implements necessary for the maintenance of common areas, including landscaping, streets and parking, shall be provided. 
2.  Outside storage. An outside storage area shall be provided and made available to all park occupants for the purpose of storing such items as recreational vehicles, snowmobiles, boats, and other large items usually stored outdoors. The outside storage area shall be of a size adequate to serve the population of the park. Rules for the operation of the outdoor storage area shall be developed and enforced by the park operator or homeowners' association. Adequate screening around the periphery of the outside storage area shall be provided. 
3.  Trash receptacles. In mobile home parks common trash receptacles shall be provided in an amount and place necessary to meet the needs of the population. Areas for trash receptacles shall be designed so that the receptacle, as much as possible, cannot be viewed form the primary street in the park. Access to the receptacles must be provided to allow easy ingress and egress by trash hauling vehicles. All pick up areas shall have a concrete floor and be enclosed on three sides. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.09.020, 3-5-1986; Amended 6-2-1991) 
Section 4.09.040. - Mobile home lot requirements. 
    Every mobile home, whether in a mobile home park or in a mobile home subdivision, shall be placed on a mobile home lot. A mobile home lot shall contain no more than one mobile home and shall meet size and setback requirements and shall provide required functional areas. 
A.  Placement. All mobile home lots shall front on a public or private street as set forth in Section 4.09.030(B)(2). All mobile home lots must be designated on the PUD zoning and preliminary plan and must designate whether the lot is to be used for placement of a singlewide mobile home or a doublewide mobile home. 
B.  Minimum lot size. The minimum mobile home lot sizes in mobile home parks shall be 4,000 square feet for singlewide lots and 6,000 square feet for doublewide lots. The minimum lot size for every lot in a mobile home park subdivision shall be 6,000 square feet. The minimum depth for any mobile home lot shall be 100 feet. No doublewide mobile home shall be placed on any mobile home lot smaller than 6,000 square feet. 
C.  Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage for mobile homes, storage sheds and appurtenant structures is 35 percent. 
D.  Minimum setback. All mobile homes and any detached or attached structure must be placed a minimum of 15 feet from the paved surface of the street. No mobile homes may be placed less than 20 feet from another mobile home. 
E.  Mobile home lot provisions. All mobile home lots must make provisions for the following items: 
1.  Mobile home pad. 
a.  The mobile home pad shall be defined as the outline of the actual mobile home, including the paved portion of any outdoor living area or attached deck area. If structural additions to a mobile home are proposed or anticipated, such as carports, attached rooms, decks, and attached storage areas, they shall be considered part of the mobile home pad. No pad shall be within 20 feet of another pad. No pad shall be within 15 feet of the paved street or driving surface. 
b.  The pad shall provide for practical placement on and removal from the lot of the mobile home and retention of the home on the lot in a stable condition and in satisfactory relationship to its surroundings. 
c.  The mobile home pad must be shown on the preliminary plan and final plat. 
2.  Storage buildings. All mobile home lots shall be provided with one storage building with a minimum square footage of 64 square feet. Building materials composing the exterior facade must be consistent with materials used in the park and with each other. Storage buildings shall be provided at the time of final certificate of occupancy for the park or individually when each lot becomes occupied. 
3.  Utility corridor. A minimum five feet wide utility corridor that is aligned adjacent and parallel to the mobile home pad is required. Utility corridors must be shown on the preliminary plan. 
4.  Parking. A minimum of two ten feet by 20 feet parking spaces per mobile home lot are required. Parking spaces must be paved with a minimum of two inches of asphalt. 
5.  Landscaped area. 
a.  All areas of the mobile home lot except the pad and parking lot must be landscaped pursuant to Section 4.07.020. The landscaping must be in place before any certificate of occupancy for the park or subdivision is granted. 
b.  Landscaping on every mobile home lot shall include, but not be limited to, live grass for all areas except the pad, parking area, and storage area; a minimum of one live three-inch caliper tree placed within 15 feet of the paved street surface, and five live 18 inch high shrubs that promote privacy, screening, utility screening and aesthetic appeal from the street view. 
6.  Skirting. Skirting shall be applied to all mobile homes within three months after mobile homes have been moved onto mobile home pads. Skirting shall be of an impervious material compatible with the exterior siding of the mobile home. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.09.030, 3-5-1986; Amended 6-2-1991; Amended 2-13-2000) 
CHAPTER 4.10. - RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS 

Section 4.10.010. - General. 
    In order to further the health, safety and general welfare of the residents, the Town as a whole, and visitors, and to further the stated purposes of this Title, every recreational vehicle park shall be designed and operated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter as well as other applicable chapters. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, ch. 4.10, intro. ¶, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.10.020. - Applicability. 
A.  No recreational vehicle shall be occupied or otherwise used for dwelling, cooking or sleeping purposes within the Town except in a recreational vehicle park approved and operated pursuant to this chapter; except that on a private residential lot, no recreational vehicle shall be so used for more than 14 consecutive days. No person shall own, operate, create or occupy a recreational vehicle park unless it is approved pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  No recreational vehicle shall remain in any RV park for more than six months in any 12-month period. A shorter occupancy period may be set as a condition of the development permit. 
C.  Establishment of a recreational vehicle park shall require a special use permit, pursuant to Chapter 4.05. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.10.010, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.10.030. - Design and operation. 
A.  Size and density. The minimum area for an RV park shall be two acres. The overall gross density in any RV park shall not exceed 20 campsites per acre. 
B.  Setbacks. The minimum setback along the periphery of a RV park shall be 50 feet from an arterial street, 25 feet from a local street and 20 feet along any boundary not abutting a street. 
C.  Campsite. Each campsite shall contain a minimum of 1,500 square feet, and shall be adequate to accommodate a recreational vehicle, an additional motor vehicle, and outdoor cooking and eating facilities. Each campsite for tent camping only shall have a minimum area of 750 square feet. 
D.  RV placement. 
1.  Every campsite shall abut on a roadway with unobstructed access to a street. 
2.  Every RV and any accessory structure, attached or detached, shall be placed on the campsite so that: 
a.  It is completely within the campsite; 
b.  There is a minimum of ten feet between any two RVs; 
c.  It does not obstruct any roadway or walkway or easement in the RV park; and 
d.  It is not located within ten feet of any roadway in the RV park. 
E.  Vehicular circulation. 
1.  Roadways within the RV park shall provide access to each campsite, shall provide for continuous forward movement, shall connect with a street or highway, and shall have a minimum width of 15 feet per lane or 25 feet for two lanes. Curves and turning radii shall be adequate to accommodate the RV in a continuous forward motion. 
2.  Roadways shall be surfaced with compacted gravel or pavement, shall minimize dust and erosion and shall be designed and constructed to facilitate maintenance. 
F.  Parking. In addition to the recreational vehicle placement space in Subsection (D) of this section, a minimum of one automobile parking space per campsite shall be provided on or within ten feet of the campsite. An additional 0.5 parking spaces per campsite shall be provided in a convenient parking area designed in accordance with Section 4.07.140. 
G.  Landscaping. Every RV park shall be in conformance with landscape requirements of Section 4.07.020. In addition, entrances and exits to the park shall be landscaped so as to provide a clear delineation of traffic flow patterns. Landscaping shall be used to provide a buffer between the park and adjacent land uses. 
H.  Accessory uses. Any accessory uses in an RV park shall be clearly incidental to RV use and shall be designed and located to blend with the park's design and natural setting. Any commercial facilities shall be for use by the RV park occupants only and shall not present any visible characteristics that would attract customers from outside the park. Tent camping shall be allowed. 
I.  Outdoor recreation areas. 
1.  At least ten percent of the total gross area of every RV park shall be provided for outdoor recreational use. Recreational areas may include play fields, picnic sites, swimming pools, tennis courts and similar recreational uses, and shall not include parking areas, utilities, clothes drying areas, storage areas, campsites, roadways, nor any required setback area. 
2.  RV parks shall not be subject to the park land dedication requirement of Section 4.07.020. 
J.  Health and sanitation. Every RV park shall be designed and operated in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code provisions for recreational vehicle parks, and with the State Department of Public Health and Environment's "Standards and Regulations for Campgrounds and Recreation Areas," including the following sections as revised from time to time: 6.0 Water Supply, 7.0 Sewage Disposal, 8.0 Sewage Collection, 9.0 Refuse Disposal, 10.0 Insect and Rodent Control, 11.0 Fires, Cooking, and Eating Facilities, 12.0 Sanitary Facilities, 13.0 Service Buildings, 14.0 Privies, and 15.0 Safety. 
K.  RV parks in areas subject to flooding. Any RV park located in a floodplain or any other area subject to flooding shall be designed, constructed and operated in accordance with Chapter 4.16 and Town approved flood studies and with regard to the health and safety of park occupants and downstream property. Such park shall be closed and the park operator shall evacuate all occupants upon notice of threat of imminent flooding, as determined by the Town Manager, the Eagle Police Department, or any federal, state or county agency. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.10.020, 3-5-1986) 
CHAPTER 4.11. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT 

Section 4.11.010. - General. 
A.  This chapter is authorized by C.R.S. Title 24, Art. 67, as amended, the Planned Unit Development Act of 1972. 
B.  A planned unit development (PUD) is a large land area designed for development as a unit, where uses and innovations in design and layout of the development provide public benefits over standard, uniform lot and block patterns and design features. 
C.  In a PUD, the various land use elements are designed so that they inter-relate cohesively with each other. The boundary between the PUD and adjacent land areas requires particular attention to ensure that land use patterns are compatible. 
D.  The PUD review process includes two steps: the PUD zoning plan, which establishes zoning, densities, uses and their locations within the PUD; and development review, as set forth in Chapters 4.06 and 4.07. Where a PUD or any phase thereof involves a subdivision of land, such subdivision shall be reviewed under procedures set forth in Chapter 4.12. Such review may run concurrently with development review, and the review of the PUD zoning plan may occur concurrently with subdivision concept plan review. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.11.010, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.11.020. - Purposes. 
    The purposes of this chapter are to: 
A.  Encourage innovations in residential, commercial and industrial development so that the needs of the population may be met by greater variety in type, design and layout of buildings and land uses and by the conservation and more efficient use of open space; 
B.  Promote the most appropriate use of the land; 
C.  Improve the design, character and quality of new development; 
D.  Facilitate the adequate and efficient provisions of streets, utilities and government services; 
E.  Facilitate efficient provision of solar access; 
F.  Achieve beneficial relationships with the surrounding area; 
G.  Preserve the unique, natural and scenic features of the landscape; 
H.  Preserve open space as development occurs; 
I.  Provide for necessary commercial, recreational and educational facilities conveniently located to housing; and 
J.  Lessen the burden of traffic on streets and highways. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.11.020, 3-5-1986; Amended 6-2-1991) 
Section 4.11.030. - Standards and requirements. 
    Every PUD shall be in conformance with this Code and the Town's ordinances, goals, policies and plans. The standards and requirements of this section shall apply to all PUDs and shall take precedence over other standards and requirements. In a PUD, zone district regulations, as set forth in Chapter 4.04, and design standards, as set forth in Chapter 4.07, may be varied where the Planning Commission and Town Board find that such variation will produce a public benefit over strict application of the regulation varied from, and that such variation is not detrimental to the public good and does not impair the intent and purposes of this chapter. 
A.  Minimum size. Every PUD shall have a minimum gross area of five acres. Exception to this requirement may be made by the Town Board upon recommendation from the Planning Commission at the time of PUD zoning plan approval, provided both bodies find that the PUD size and zoning plan are in conformance with the intent and purposes of this chapter and the Town's goals, policies and plans. The minimum area for a mobile home park shall be two acres. 
B.  PUD zoning. 
1.  Designation. Every PUD shall be divided into one or more PUD zone districts with one or more of the following designations: 
R/PUD Residential PUD MF/PUD Multifamily Residential PUD MHP/PUD Mobile Home Park PUD HD/PUD High Density PUD C/PUD Commercial PUD I/PUD Industrial PUD P/PUD Public PUD  
Such zoning designation shall determine the range of uses potentially allowed in the zone district and the maximum building density allowed. 
2.  Uses. 
a.  The uses potentially allowed within any PUD zone district shall be: 
i.  R/PUD, MF/PUD, and HD/PUD: permitted and special uses as set forth in Chapter 4.04 for the R, RR, RL, RM, RMF and RH zone districts, plus other uses which the Planning Commission and Town Board find to be compatible; 
ii.  MHP/PUD: permitted and special uses as set forth in Chapter 4.04 for the MHP zone district, plus other uses which the Planning Commission and Town Board find to be compatible; 
iii.  C/PUD: permitted and special uses as set forth in Chapter 4.04 for the CBD, CL and CG zone districts, plus other uses which the Planning Commission and Town Board find to be compatible; 
iv.  I/PUD: permitted and special uses as set forth in Chapter 4.04 for the I zone district, plus other uses which the Planning Commission and Town Board find to be compatible; 
v.  P/PUD: permitted and special uses as set forth in Chapter 4.04 for the PA zone district, plus other uses which the Planning Commission and Town Board find to be compatible. 
b.  Within each PUD zone district, specific uses shall be allowed only as set forth in the approved PUD zoning plan and development permit. Conditions may be imposed on such uses by the Town, and any such conditions shall be set forth in the development permit. 
3.  Density. 
a.  Maximum gross density to be allowed in any PUD zone district shall not exceed the following: 
R/PUD 8 dwelling units per acre MF/PUD 15 dwelling units per acre MHP/PUD 11 dwelling units per acre HD/PUD 20 dwelling units per acre C/PUD floor area ratio 1.7:1 I/PUD floor area ratio 1.3:1 P/PUD floor area ratio 1.5:1  
b.  Within each PUD zone district, land with a slope of 30 percent or greater and standing water bodies shall be excluded in calculating the maximum number of dwelling units and the maximum floor area allowed. 
C.  Open space. 
1.  It is recommended that a minimum of 20 percent of the total gross area of a PUD shall consist of common open space. The Town may consider a request by the applicant for less than 20 percent common open space when deemed appropriate because of size, location, or nature of the proposed development. In its consideration of a reduction in the amount of open space, the Town may require compensation in the form of a cash-in-lieu of open space payment and/or construction of appropriate amenities, including off-site improvements. Said compensation of cash-in-lieu of open space and/or amenities shall be utilized by the Town or placed by the applicant to mitigate the reduction of open space or to fulfill the recreational needs of the neighborhood. 
2.  Seventy-five percent of the common open space contained in a PUD shall have a slope of ten percent or less and shall lend itself to utilization for recreational purposes. At least one-half of said common open space shall be developed for active recreation which may include play fields, tennis courts, picnic sites, boating areas, and similar recreation sites. 
3.  Adequate water rights dedication and tap fee payment pursuant to Title 12 and irrigation system development shall be provided for open space areas. For irrigation systems using treated water, tap fees shall be paid and water rights dedicated to the Town. Irrigation system development shall be conveyed to the entity responsible for the ongoing maintenance of the open space. For irrigation systems using raw water, water rights and irrigation system development shall be conveyed to the entity responsible for the ongoing maintenance of the open space. 
D.  Maintenance of open space. 
1.  An organization shall be established, subject to the approval of the Town Attorney, which is responsible for ownership, permanent care and maintenance of open spaces and recreational areas and facilities. 
2.  Such organization shall be established pursuant to an instrument recorded with the County Clerk and Recorder's office, setting forth the character, duration, rights, obligations and limitations of said organization. 
3.  Such instrument shall be recorded prior to the sale of any residence, and membership shall be mandatory for each property owner, and shall be considered a covenant running with the land. 
4.  Open space restrictions shall be permanent. 
5.  Said organization shall be responsible for utilities, maintenance, liability insurance and taxes on open space and recreational facilities. 
6.  Said organization shall have the power to levy assessments which can become liens on individual properties for the purpose of financing the operation and maintenance of common facilities. 
7.  In the event the organization established to own and maintain common open space, recreational areas or commonly owned facilities, or any successor organization, shall at any time fail to maintain such areas or facilities in reasonable order and condition in accordance with the approved PUD plan, the Town may take action as provided by C.R.S. § 24-67-101 et seq. 
8.  In the case of a mobile home park under one ownership, said owner may be designated as the organization responsible pursuant to this Subsection (D). 
E.  Municipal and park land dedication. Every PUD, including MHP/PUD, shall be subject to the requirements of Section 4.13.190 for municipal and park land dedication or fee, except that one-half of such requirement shall be waived in consideration of the active recreation development required in this chapter. 
F.  PUD perimeter. The boundary between a PUD and adjacent land uses shall be landscaped so as to adequately buffer potential incompatibility between land uses. 
G.  Street standards. Every PUD shall be designed and constructed in conformance with the Towns street construction regulations. 
H.  Phasing. Where a PUD is developed in phases, a proportional amount of the required open space and recreation areas shall be included in each phase, such that the project as it is built will comply with the overall density and open space requirements of this chapter at the completion of each phase of development. Phasing shall be accomplished such that at the completion of any phase the development is consistent with the Town's goals and policies. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.11.030, 3-5-1986; Amended 8-9-1988) 
Section 4.11.040. - PUD review procedures. 
A.  Every PUD shall be reviewed in two stages: the PUD zoning plan and the development plan; provided, however, upon agreement between the applicant and the Town Planner, the PUD zoning plan and the development plan may be reviewed simultaneously, at the applicant's option. If reviewed simultaneously, all information required for a PUD development plan review shall be supplied contemporaneously with the applicant's submittal of the PUD zoning plan. 
B.  The purpose of the PUD zoning plan review shall be to establish permissible type, location, and densities of land uses, to determine compatibility of the PUD proposal with the Town's goals, policies, and plans, and with the purposes of this chapter, and to provide a basis for PUD zoning. Review of a subdivision concept plan, as provided in Section 4.12.030, may occur simultaneously with review of the PUD zoning plan, at the applicant's option. The purpose of the PUD development plan review shall be to evaluate the details of the PUD according to the purposes and procedures of Chapters 4.06 and 4.07. Except as otherwise provided herein, no PUD development plan shall be approved until final approval of the PUD zoning plan. 
1.  Pre-application conference. When proposing a PUD, the applicant shall first request a pre-application conference with the Town Planner. The applicant shall provide for the conference: 
a.  An application for PUD review on a form provided by the Town; 
b.  A sketch of the PUD zoning plan, which shall be a free-hand drawing depicting topography of land to be developed, the existing and proposed street system with approximate right-of-way widths, the proposed zoning, densities and types of uses within the PUD and their locations, potential common space areas and park land areas and the location of utilities and existing development on the land; and 
c.  Proof of ownership of the land proposed for development. This land shall be under one ownership or shall be the subject of a joint request for PUD review by the owners of all property to be included. 
2.  PUD zoning plan. After the pre-application conference and at least 30 calendar days before the Planning Commission meeting at which the PUD zoning plan is to be reviewed, the applicant shall submit to the Town Planner: 
a.  A minimum of 22 copies of the PUD zoning plan map, which shall be 24 inches by 36 inches in size, with north arrow and scale and with title and date in lower right corner, at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet, or larger, which depicts the area within the boundaries of the proposed PUD and which depicts all of the information as set forth under Subsection (B)(1)(b) of this section. 
b.  A statement of intent, with explanation of how the proposed PUD provides benefits over standard development design and how the proposed PUD meets each of the purposes of this chapter, as forth in Section 4.11.020. 
c.  A list of names and addresses of the owners of record of all properties adjacent to the subject property. 
d.  The appropriate fee as set forth in Section 4.03.080. 
e.  Request for exception from minimum area requirement if needed. 
3.  Department/agency review. The Town Planner shall distribute copies of the PUD zoning plan to any Town staff and other agencies he deems appropriate. They shall review the zoning plan, with site visits as needed, for conformance with this Code and the Town's goals and policies in their areas of responsibility. They shall submit their comments to the Town Planner at least seven business days before the appropriate Planning Commission meeting. The Town Planner shall compile these comments and shall prepare for the Planning Commission a summary of the issues which the Planning Commission should consider in reviewing the PUD zoning plan. 
4.  Site review. Before the Planning Commission reviews the PUD zoning plan, the proposal shall be reviewed on site by at least three members of the Planning Commission. They may make written recommendations to the full Planning Commission regarding characteristics of the site which may have a bearing on the PUD zoning plan. 
5.  Planning Commission review. The Town Planner shall distribute copies of the PUD zoning plan to the Planning Commission members along with the summary of issues and comments. A copy of the summary and comments shall also be furnished to the applicant. The Planning Commission shall review the zoning plan at a regular meeting at which it shall hold a public hearing on the proposal. Public notice shall be given pursuant to Section 4.03.060. The applicant or his representative shall be present at the meeting to represent the proposal. The Commission shall take one of the following actions at the meeting: 
a.  Approve the proposed general zoning, densities and uses within the PUD and their general locations and recommend to the Town Board the approval of the PUD zoning plan and a determination as to whether the park land dedication shall be a fee or actual land dedication; 
b.  Continue the hearing to the next regular Planning Commission meeting with the requirement that the applicant submit changes or additional information which they find necessary to determine whether the PUD zoning plan complies with this Code and the Town's goals and policies; or 
c.  Recommend denial of the PUD zoning plan, stating the specific reasons for the denial. 
6.  Further review by Planning Commission. In the event the hearing is continued pursuant to Subsection (B)(5)(b) of this section, the applicant shall submit 20 copies of the required changes or information to the Town Planner at least ten business days prior to the Planning Commission meeting at which the proposal is to be reconsidered. The Town Planner shall review the additional submittal with any Town staff or other agencies he deems appropriate and shall distribute copies of the submittal to the Planning Commission members along with the comments. At the continued hearing, the applicant or his representative shall be present to represent the proposal. The Commission shall take one of the following actions: 
a.  Approve the proposed zoning, densities and uses within the PUD and their locations, and recommend to the Town Board approval of the PUD zoning plan and a determination as to whether the park land dedication shall be a fee or land; 
b.  Recommend denial of the PUD zoning plan stating the specific reasons for denial; or 
c.  Continue the hearing pursuant to Chapter 2.20. 
7.  Board of Trustees review. 
a.  After the Planning Commission has made its recommendation for approval or denial of the PUD zoning plan, the Town Planner shall distribute copies of the plan to the Town Board members along with relevant excerpts from Planning Commission meeting minutes and copies of staff or agency comments. The Board shall review the proposed PUD zoning plan at a regular meeting at which it shall hold a public hearing on the application. At the public hearing, the Board shall consider the recommendations of the Planning Commission and the comments, testimony and other evidence presented. The applicant or his representative shall be present to represent the proposal. At such meeting, the Board shall take one of the following actions: 
i.  Approve the proposed PUD zoning plan, subject to any conditions it finds necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare or to ensure compliance with the Town's regulations, goals, policies and plans; 
ii.  Deny the proposed PUD zoning plan, stating the specific reasons for the denial; or 
iii.  Continue the hearing pursuant to Chapter 2.20. 
b.  Any change in the PUD zoning plan made after original submittal of the plan shall require the proposal to be re-entered in the review process at the zoning plan stage, Subsection (B)(2) of this section, unless: 
i.  The change is directed by the Planning Commission; or 
ii.  In the opinion of the Town Planner, the change does not materially change the zoning plan and it complies with this Code and the Town's goals and policies. 
8.  Filing of PUD zoning plan. If a PUD zoning plan is approved, a reproducible Mylar copy shall be filed at Town hall. 
9.  Development/subdivision review. 
a.  Within 24 months of a PUD zoning plan approval, the applicant shall submit a development plan for the PUD. Upon request by the applicant made prior to the expiration of the 24-month period, the Town Board may grant an extension beyond 24 months. If more than 24 months elapse from the date of the PUD zoning plan approval to the date of development plan submittal, and if no extension has been granted, the PUD zoning plan approval shall lapse and be considered void and of no effect. 
b.  The PUD development plan shall be reviewed according to the zoning of the subject property PUD. The proposed zoning densities and uses and their general locations shall be those depicted in the previously approved PUD zoning plan. 
c.  Where a PUD or any phase thereof involves a subdivision of land, such subdivision shall be reviewed under procedures set forth in Chapter 4.12. Such review may run concurrently with the PUD development plan review. If the applicant elects to have the proposed subdivision reviewed concurrently with the PUD development plan, upon approval of the PUD development plan and the final subdivision plat by the Board, the Board shall adopt an ordinance zoning the subject property PUD. The zoning densities and uses and their general locations shall be those depicted in the previously approved PUD zoning plan. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.11.040, 3-5-1986; Amended 6-2-1991; Amended 8-1-1991; Amended 4-16-1995) 
Section 4.11.050. - Amendments to planned unit development zoning and development plans. 
A.  Conditions for amendment. An approved PUD zoning plan or an approved PUD development plan may be amended if the applicant demonstrates that the proposed modification: 
1.  Is consistent with the efficient development and preservation of the entire planned unit development; 
2.  Does not affect in a substantially adverse manner either the enjoyment of land abutting upon, adjoining or across a street from the planned unit development or the public interest; 
3.  Is not granted solely to confer a special benefit upon any person; 
4.  Does not contain proposed uses that detract from other uses approve in the PUD; 
5.  Does not contain an open space plan that differs substantially in quantity or quality from that originally approved; and 
6.  Contains street and utility plans that are coordinated with planned and/or existing streets and utilities for the remainder of the PUD. 
B.  Classification of amendments. For the purposes of considering a proposed amendment to a PUD zoning or development plan, amendments shall be classified as a minor amendment or major amendment. A minor amendment shall include changes in locations, sitings, bulk of structures, or height or character of buildings required by circumstances not foreseen at the time the plan was approved. A major amendment shall include all other modifications such as changes in use, arrangement of lots, and all changes in the provisions concerning open space or density. 
C.  Pre-application conference. 
1.  When proposing any amendment to a PUD zoning or development plan, the applicant shall first request a pre-application conference with the Town Planner to discuss procedures, requirements, and the Town's goals and policies. The applicant shall provide for the conference: 
a.  An application for PUD amendment on a form provided by the Town with any applicable review fee; 
b.  A sketch of any amendments to the PUD zoning plan or development plan, which shall be a free-hand drawing depicting topography of the land, the existing street system and any proposed changes with approximate right-of-way widths, the existing zoning and any proposed changes, densities and types of uses within the PUD and their locations, existing and any proposed changes to common space areas and park land areas; 
c.  A written summary of the modifications requested and a statement setting forth the reasons the proposed modifications meet the conditions for amendment contained in Subsection (A) of this section; and 
d.  Proof of ownership of the land affected by the proposed amendment. This land shall be under one ownership or shall be subject of a joint request for PUD amendment by the owners of all property affected by the proposed amendment. 
2.  At the pre-application conference, the Town Planner shall classify the proposed amendment as a minor or major amendment, based on the classification criteria set forth in Subsection (B) of this section. If the Town Planner cannot determine on the basis of the criteria specified whether the proposal is to be classified as a minor amendment, the Planner shall refer his determination to the Planning Commission at its next regular meeting. If the proposed amendment includes a resubdivision of land, the Town Planner shall refer the applicant to Section 4.12.030. 
3.  Within one week after the pre-application conference, the Town Planner shall prepare and deliver or mail to the applicant a written list of the information which must be submitted and which shall constitute the applicant's PUD amendment application. The Town Planner may require all or part of the information set forth in Section 4.11.040(B), all or part of the information set forth in Section 4.06.030, or any other information which the Town Planner determines is necessary to determine whether the proposed amendment will comply with the Town's regulations, goals and policies. 
D.  Review of PUD amendments. Minor PUD Amendments shall be reviewed in the manner provided for minor development permit reviews, as contained in Section 4.06.060. Major PUD amendments shall be reviewed in the manner set forth for original PUD applications, as contained in Section 4.11.040. 
(Amended 6-2-1991; Amended 8-1-1991; Amended 4-16-1995) 
CHAPTER 4.12. - SUBDIVISION REVIEW 

Section 4.12.010. - General. 
    Every proposal including a subdivision of land shall comply with this chapter and shall include review of a sketch plan, a preliminary subdivision plan in accordance with chapter 4.13, and a final subdivision plat, except as provided herein for lot boundary adjustment, condominium and townhouse plats and minor subdivision; provided, however, upon agreement between the applicant and the Town Planner, the sketch plan requirement may be waived. If waived, the Town Planner may require all or part of the information described in Section 4.12.020(A) to be submitted with the preliminary subdivision plan. All final plats shall be filed with the County Clerk and Recorder in accordance with the laws of the State for every subdivision. No building permit shall be issued before the required final subdivision plat has been approved and recorded. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, ch. 4.12, intro. ¶, 3-5-1986; Amended 11-27-2007) 
Section 4.12.020. - General. 
    In order to further the health, safety and general welfare of the residents, the Town as a whole, and visitors, and to further the stated purposes of this Title, every recreational vehicle park shall be designed and operated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter as well as other applicable chapters which shall take precedence. 
A.  Sketch plan. 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of the sketch plan is two-fold. First, it is to provide the Town the opportunity to describe the community's vision to the applicant. Second, it gives the applicant an opportunity to discuss his development plans, explain how the plans will further the community's vision and obtain input and direction from the Planning Commission and Town Board early in the process. The ultimate goal of this process is to help the applicant develop a plan that fosters the community's vision. 
2.  Sketch plan application submittal. The sketch plan package shall include the following items: 
a.  Land use application form. 
b.  Subdivisions - technical criteria form. 
c.  Application review fee deposit (per Section 4.03.080). 
d.  Title commitment. The title commitment must be current and the date must be no more than 30 days from the date of sketch plan application. An ALTA survey shall accompany all applications involving lands that have not been previously subdivided. 
e.  Context/vicinity map. The context/vicinity map shall show the proposed development in relation to the surrounding area (11/2 mile radius around the property). The map shall be 24 inches high by 36 inches wide and provide the following information: 
i.  Title of project. 
ii.  North arrow, scale (not greater than one inch equals 1,000 feet) and date of preparation. 
iii.  Boundary of proposed project. 
iv.  Existing (for developed land) or proposed (vacant/agricultural land) land uses for the properties shown on the map (i.e., residential, commercial, industrial, park, etc.) - label land use and whether it is existing or proposed. 
iv.  Major streets (show and label street names) 
v.  Existing public water and sewer lines and proposed connections. 
vii.  Town and regional open space/trail network. 
viii.  Major ditches, rivers and bodies of water. 
ix.  Adjacent properties identified by ownership, subdivision name and zoning district. 
f.  Sketch plan. The sketch plan shall be 24 inches high by 36 inches wide and may be a free-hand drawing in a legible medium that clearly shows: 
i.  Title of project. 
ii.  North arrow, scale (not greater than one inch equals 200 feet) and date of preparation. 
iii.  Vicinity map. 
iv.  Legal description. 
v.  Acreage of property. 
vi.  USGS topographic contours. 
vii.  Location and approximate acreage of proposed land uses. 
viii.  Existing easements and rights-of-way on or adjacent to the property. 
ix.  Existing streets on or adjacent to the property (show and label street name). 
x.  Note indicating how the school land dedication will be met (per Section 4.13.080). 
xi.  Note indicating how the municipal and park land dedication will be met (per Section 4.13.190). 
xii.  Table providing the following information for each proposed land use area; proposed density or floor area ratio. 
xiii.  Proposed local, collector and arterial streets. 
xiv.  General locations of existing utilities on or adjacent to the property. 
xv.  Graphic and/or verbal explanation of how the property will be served by public utilities. 
xvi.  Location of any proposed sewer lift stations. 
xvii.  Pedestrian circulation and trails - show how the development will tie into the Town and regional trail/pedestrian networks. 
xviii.  Floodplain boundary with a note regarding source of information (if a floodplain does not exist on the property, please state this on the plan) and high water mark. 
xix.  Geologic hazard areas. 
xx.  Existing and proposed zoning on and around the property. 
xxi.  Land use table - the table shall include land uses, approximate acreage of each land use and percentage of each land use. 
xxii.  Block and lot pattern with approximate lot areas noted. 
g.  General development information. Provide a written description of the existing conditions of the site and proposed development. Include the following items in the description: 
i.  Design rationale - discuss how the development is connected to/integrated with surrounding area, how it responds to site features/constraints and how it is consistent with the subdivision design section (Chapter 4.13) and the purpose of this Title. If it is not consistent with the subdivision design standards section, explain how the intent of the purpose criteria of this Title is met. 
ii.  Proposed number of lots or units, square feet of nonresidential building space and typical lot width and depth (not needed if information is on the sketch plan). 
iii.  General description of plan for drainage and stormwater management (refer to adopted storm drainage design criteria per Section 4.13.050 that may be applicable or otherwise it shall be prepared as required by the Town Engineer). 
iv.  Water supply information, including the number of water taps needed; the amount of raw water that will be provided to the Town; and source of water. 
v.  Statement indicating whether or not any commercial mineral deposits are located on the site. 
vi.  Description of any floodplain hazards on the site (only if additional information is needed than what is shown on the sketch plan map). 
vii.  Show how the proposed development complies with the Eagle Area Community Plan. 
h.  Traffic impact analysis (TIA). TIA shall be based on the projected traffic needs from existing development, future development, and the proposed development. Trip generations from future development over the design period shall be based on zoning, existing land use, proximity to developed areas, historic growth, and other factors expected to influence development. The TIA shall be prepared by a State Licensed Professional Engineer. 
i.  Soils report and map. The report and map shall be based on USDA soils and conservation service information and discuss the existing conditions and any potential constraints/hazards. The report shall also address groundwater issues. 
j.  Geologic report. This report is required only for areas that have the potential for subsidence. It must be prepared by either a registered professional engineer or professional geologist. The report shall address: 
i.  Site conditions; 
ii.  Geologic conditions; 
iii.  Engineering and geologic considerations; 
iv.  Limitations and any necessary additional investigations. 
k.  Miscellaneous site report(s). A report(s) on the site's history, vegetation, wetlands, wildlife, wildfire, radiation (e.g., radon gas) and other conditions which could affect development on the property and which could be affected by the proposed development. 
l.  Utility report. A report on the impacts the development may have on existing utility systems (e.g., are current water and wastewater lines sized sufficiently for added flows, does the current water treatment plan and wastewater treatment plan have sufficient capacity to treat the added flows, do other utility providers, such as gas and electric, have the ability to serve the development, etc.). 
m.  Population report. A report on the population impacts of the development to the Town and region (the region being the planning area of the Eagle Area Community Plan), including number of residents and/or employees. 
n.  A description of the need for development, in terms of the need for additional housing, commercial space, or other uses in the Town and the region (the region being the planning area of the Eagle Area Community Plan). 
o.  A list and description of any lands for which a rezoning action will be requested. 
p.  A list of any potential issues or problems in relation to this Code and the Town's goals and policies. 
q.  An ownership map and a list of names and addresses of owners of record of all adjacent properties. 
r.  A list of names and addresses of owners and lessees' of mineral rights. 
s.  Public hearing notification labels. Provide the Town with six sets of notification labels. The labels shall be addressed to the surrounding property owners (within 300 feet of the property), mineral interest owners of record, mineral and oil and gas lessees for the property. 
t.  A development impact report, as required pursuant to Section 4.07.100, if requested by the Town Planner and Town Engineer. 
B.  Preliminary subdivision plan. 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of the preliminary plan is to provide the Town with an overall master plan for the proposed development allowing the Town: 
a.  To evaluate the application in its response to issues and concerns identified during sketch plan review; 
b.  Determine compliance with the sketch plan approval; and 
c.  Evaluate preliminary engineering design. 
2.  Preliminary plan application submittal. The preliminary plan application package shall include the following items: 
a.  Land use application form. 
b.  Subdivisions - technical criteria form. 
c.  Application review fee deposit (per Section 4.03.080). 
d.  Title commitment. The title commitment must be current and the date must be no more than 30 days from the date of preliminary plan application. If an ALTA survey was required for sketch plan review it shall be updated and submitted with the preliminary plan. 
e.  Surrounding and interested property ownership report. Provide the Town Planner with a current list (not more than 30 days old) of the names and addresses of the surrounding property owners (within 300 feet of the property), mineral interest owners of record, mineral and oil and gas lessees for the property and appropriate ditch companies. The applicant shall certify that the report is complete and accurate and include the following: public hearing notification labels. Provide the Town with six sets of notification labels. The labels shall be addressed to the surrounding property owners (within 300 feet of the property), mineral interest owners of record, mineral and oil and gas lessees for the property. 
f.  Preliminary plan. The preliminary plan shall be 24 inches high by 36 inches wide and provide the following information: 
i.  Title of the project. 
ii.  North arrow, scale (not greater than one inch equals 100 feet) and date of preparation. 
iii.  Vicinity map. 
iv.  Names and addresses of owners, applicant, designers, engineers and surveyors. 
v.  Legal description with reference to its location in the records of the county. 
vi.  Total acreage of the property. 
vii.  Subdivision boundaries, street right-of-way lines and lot lines in solid lines and easements, dedications, and other right-of-way lines in dashed lines, all with dimensions accurate to the nearest 0.01 foot. Bearing of all lines and central angle, tangent distance, chord distance, and arc length of all curves shall be noted. 
viii.  The location and description of all permanent survey control points. 
ix.  Existing contours at one foot intervals (basis for establishing contours shall be noted on the preliminary plan). 
x.  Name and location of abutting subdivisions and owners abutting property (if land is not platted). 
xi.  Lots, blocks, and street layout with approximate dimensions and square footage for each lot. 
xii.  Area and zoning of each lot, with use and setback restrictions unless they are standard for the zone district. 
xiii.  Consecutive numbering of all lots and blocks. 
xiv.  Existing and proposed rights-of-way and easements on and adjacent to the property. 
xv.  Existing and proposed street names for all streets on and adjacent to the property. 
xvi.  Existing and proposed zoning on and adjacent to property. 
xvii.  Location and size of existing and proposed sewer lines, water lines and fire hydrants (Note: Applicant must consult with the appropriate utility service providers regarding the design of all utilities through the subdivision). 
xviii.  Existing and proposed access and/or curb cuts on and adjacent to subject property. 
xiv.  Location by field survey or aerial photography of existing and proposed watercourses and bodies of water such as irrigation ditches and lakes. Watercourses shall include direction of flow. 
xx.  Floodplain boundary with a note regarding source of information (if a floodplain does not exist on the property, please state this on the plan) and high water mark. 
xxi.  General location of existing surface improvements such as buildings, fences, or other structures which will remain on the property as part of the subdivision. 
xxii.  Location and acreages of site, if any, to be dedicated for streets, parks, open space, schools or other public uses. 
xxiii.  Location, function, ownership and manner of maintenance of any private open space. 
xxiv.  Land use table - the table shall include land uses, approximate acreage of each land use, and percentage of each land use (including how the school land dedication will be met per Section 4.13.080 and how the municipal and park land dedication will be met per Section 4.13.190). 
xxv.  Total number of lots. 
xxvi.  Number of each type of dwelling unit proposed, density or floor area ratio proposed. 
g.  General development information. Provide a written description of the existing conditions on the site and the proposed development. Include the following items: 
i.  Explanation of how the preliminary plat is consistent with the sketch plan, and if there are any differences, what they are and how the plan is still compatible with the community's vision. 
ii.  Explanation of how the items of concern expressed by the Planning Commission and Board of Trustees, at the time of sketch plan review, have been addressed. 
iii.  Explanation of how the plan is in compliance with the Town land use code and the Eagle Area Community Plan. 
h.  Preliminary grading and drainage plan and report. This plan and report must be certified by a State Registered Professional Engineer, under the direction of the Town Engineer, including storm drainage concepts such as locations for on-site detention or downstream structural improvements, stormwater quality treatment methods, and soil erosion and sedimentation control plans and specifications (refer to Sections 4.13.050 and 4.13.060). It must also discuss the impacts on and to any existing floodways and/or floodplains on and adjacent to the site as well as any FEMA or Town applications required. 
i.  Master utility plan. This plan shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer and include water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, electric, gas and communication. It is necessary that the engineer consult with the appropriate utility service providers regarding the design of all utilities through the subdivision. Plan and profiles shall be completed to a level that demonstrates delivery and provision of the service to the development. A higher level of completion may be required as determined by the Town Engineer. 
j.  Traffic study. This study must be prepared by a State Professional Traffic Engineer. The traffic study shall include information and data and be formatted and prepared as directed by the Town Engineer. 
k.  Master street plan. This plan shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer. Street plans and profiles shall be provided for all on-site and off-site roadway improvements. Streets shall be designed in accordance with Town standards and as promulgated by the Town Engineer. Plan views and centerline profile shall be depicted at a legible scale. These plans and profiles shall show all intersections with existing streets and all existing and proposed drainage features and easement crossing, or parallel to, the roads. Also shown will be any known areas of high water table, unsuitable soils and other geological hazards. These plans shall include a typical cross-section showing widths, including driving surface, shoulders, curbs and gutters, drainage ditches, cut and fill slopes to the point of intersection with natural ground and the pavement structure details proposed. The plan shall include the extremities of all cut and fill areas. A supplemental sheet shall be included to detail all drainage, retaining and bridge structures to be constructed as part of the roadway. The master street plan shall also include the following: a plan for locations and specifications of traffic control devices. 
l.  Pedestrian circulation plan for trails, sidewalks, walkways, pathways, etc., through the subdivision and for connection to adjacent systems (i.e., local and regional trails). The plan must indicate width, surface, and type of pedestrian way. The design of the trails is required to comply with Town guidelines and standards. 
m.  Engineering specifications and cross-section drawings for any off-site road impacts. 
n.  Draft of proposed covenants and any site design guidelines (i.e., architectural design, landscaping design, etc.), and proposed articles of incorporation and bylaws. 
o.  Mineral, oil and gas rights documentation. Evidence that surface owner has contacted all lessees of mineral, oil and gas rights associated with the site and is working towards resolution. Included in the evidence must be the name of the current contact person, their phone number, and mailing address. 
p.  Soils report and map. An updated copy of the soils report and map provided at the time of sketch plan must be provided. 
q.  Geologic report. An updated copy of the geologic report and map provided at the time of sketch plan must be provided. 
r.  Miscellaneous site report(s). An updated copy of the report(s) provided at the time of sketch plan on the site's history, vegetation, wetlands, wildlife, wildfire, radiation (e.g., radon gas) and other conditions which could affect development on the property and which could be affected by the proposed development. If not included in the initial report, the following additional information is required: 
i.  Information on hydrologic conditions, such as surface drainage and watershed characteristics, natural water features and characteristics, and any potential changes or impacts. 
ii.  Information on vegetation and wildlife, including any potential changes or impacts. 
iii.  Information on population characteristics such as neighborhood patterns and potential displacement of residents or businesses. 
s.  Evidence of adequate water supply and other public and private services needed to serve the facility. 
t.  Evidence of adequate water rights to serve the development pursuant to Title 12; 
u.  Commitment to serve letters from all public and private utilities are required to be provided. 
v.  Evidence that the developer has submitted applications for all other necessary permits to complete the proposed subdivision, if required (i.e., State highway access permit, Army Corp of Engineers dredge and fill permit or an area of activity of State interest, etc.). 
w.  Preliminary cost estimates for all public and private improvements to be installed by the subdivider in dedicated land, rights-of-way or easements. 
x.  A development impact report, pursuant to Section 4.07.100, if not previously submitted as part of the sketch plan submittal. 
y.  A lighting plan pursuant to Section 4.07.010. 
z.  Applications for subdivision preliminary plan approval, containing ten or more residential units, shall include a local employee residency plan pursuant to Section 4.04.110 and the Town's local employee residency requirements and guidelines. 
C.  Final subdivision plat. 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of the final plat is to complete the subdivision of land consistent with the technical standards as an instrument for recording. 
2.  Final plat application submittal. The final plat application shall include: 
a.  Land use application form. 
b.  Subdivisions - technical review form. 
c.  Application review fee deposit (per Section 4.03.080). 
d.  Title commitment. The title commitment must be current and the date must be no more than 30 days from the date of sketch plan application. 
e.  Surrounding and interested property ownership report. Provide the Town Planner with a current list (not more than 30 days old) of the names and addresses of the surrounding property owners (within 300 feet of the property), mineral interest owners of record, mineral and oil and gas lessees for the property and appropriate ditch companies. The applicant shall certify that the report is complete and accurate and include the following: public hearing notification labels. Provide the Town with six sets of notification labels. The labels shall be addressed to the surrounding property owners (within 300 feet of the property), mineral interest owners of record, mineral and oil and gas lessees for the property. 
f.  Final plat. The final plat drawing shall comply with the following: 
i.  The plat shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor and meet applicable State requirements. 
ii.  Lengths shall be shown to the nearest hundredth of a foot and bearings shall be shown in degrees, minutes, seconds. 
iii.  The perimeter survey description of proposed subdivision shall include at least one tie to an existing section monument of record and a description of monuments. The survey shall not have an error greater than one part in 10,000. 
iv.  The final plat shall be 24 inches high by 36 inches wide and shall provide the following information: 
1.  That information required for preliminary plan in Subsection (B)(2)(f) of this section. 
2.  Title of project. 
3.  North arrow, scale (not greater than one inch equals 100 feet) and date of preparation. 
4.  Vicinity map. 
5.  Legal description. 
6.  Basis for establishing bearing. 
7.  Names and addresses of owners, applicants, designers, engineers and surveyors. 
8.  Total acreage of subdivision. 
9.  Bearings, distances, chords, radii, central angles and tangent links for the perimeter and all lots, blocks, rights-of-way and easements. 
10.  Lot and block numbers, numbers in consecutive order, and square footage of each lot or tract. 
11.  Excepted parcels from inclusion noted as "not included in this subdivision" and the boundary completely indicated by bearings and distances. 
12.  Existing and proposed rights-of-way in and adjacent to subject property (labeled and dimensioned). 
13.  Existing and proposed street names for all streets on and adjacent to the property. 
14.  Existing and proposed easements and their type in and adjacent to subject property (labeled and dimensioned). 
15.  Location and description of monuments. 
16.  Floodplain boundary with a note regarding source of information (if a floodplain does not exist on the property, please state this on the plat) and high water mark. 
17.  Signature block for registered land surveyor certifying to accuracy of boundary survey and plat (see appendix for sample). 
18.  Signature block for certification of approval by the Board of Trustees with a signature block for the Mayor and Clerk (see appendix for sample). 
19.  Signature block for certification of approval by the Planning Commission with a signature block for the chairman. 
20.  Signature block for utility providers (need to draft a sample signature block). 
21.  Certification of ownership and dedications of streets, rights-of-way, easements and public sites (see appendix for sample). 
22.  Certification of title to property (see appendix for sample). 
23.  Certification of mortgagee or lienholders (see appendix "G" at the end of this Title). 
24.  Statement concerning vested property rights as required by Section 4.17.100. 
g.  General development information. Provide a written description that the final plat conforms with the preliminary plat. In addition, the description shall address how the proposed development complies to the goals, policies and regulations of the Town. 
h.  Complete on-site and off-site engineered construction plans and specifications for grading, streets, pedestrian/bicycle ways, traffic control, utilities, drainage, erosion sediment control and slope stabilization, revegetation, landscaping and lighting, subject to the following: 
i.  Approved by Town Planner, Town Engineer, Town Manager and Town Attorney. 
ii.  Construction plans and profiles. The plans and profiles shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer licensed in the State, shall be 24 inches high by 36 inches wide and meet the following minimum standards: 
1.  The horizontal to vertical scales shall be chosen to best depict the aspects of the design. 
2.  Maximum horizontal scale: one inch equals 50 feet. 
3.  Maximum vertical scale: one inch equals ten feet. 
iii.  Final traffic study. 
iv.  Final utility impact report. 
v.  Final drainage plans and reports. Based upon the approved preliminary drainage plan, a final report is to be submitted in accordance with applicable storm drainage design criteria and as determined by the Town Engineer. 
vi.  Final soils reports and design requirements. The soils reports shall detail special foundation requirements and pavement design. 
i.  Special documents (as may be needed). Special documents will need to accompany any final plat application (to the extent practical, necessary special documents will be determined during review of the preliminary plan). The documents are, but are not limited to, the following: 
i.  Special improvement district documents. 
ii.  Maintenance bonds. 
iii.  Special agreements (as may be required by the Town). 
iv.  Work in right-of-way permit (from Town). 
v.  Floodplain use permit (from Town and/or FEMA). 
vi.  Grading permit (from Town). 
vii.  State highway utility permit (from State Department of Transportation). 
viii.  State highway access permit (from State Department of Transportation). 
ix.  Construction dewatering permit (from State Department of Public Health and Environment). 
x.  404 permit (from Army Corps of Engineers). 
xi.  Air pollution emission notice (APEN) (from State Department of Public Health and Environment). 
xii.  Work in ditch right-of-way permit (from individual owners). 
xiii.  Subdivision improvements agreement for public and private improvements (SIA) - This agreement assures construction of the required improvements. This document shall be signed by the developer and the Town, the signatures shall be notarized, and the document shall be recorded by the Town Clerk with the County Clerk and Recorder. 
xiv.  General warranty deed. This deed conveys to the Town all public lands other than streets shown on the plat or, in lieu of a deed, a check in an amount to be determined by the Town. 
xv.  Improvements guarantee. A letter of credit from a bank in the State or other acceptable collateral in the amount stipulated to in the SIA or other agreements or contracts, posted in favor of the Town in an amount sufficient to assure construction of public improvements for either part or all of the plat, as the Board of Trustees shall determine. 
xvi.  Approved adjudication of water rights, Fee in lieu of water rights dedication, dedication of water rights and/or a plan of augmentation (as may be applicable). 
xvii.  Protective covenants, homeowners' association (HOA) documents, articles of incorporation for HOA, and architectural design guidelines finalized and in a form for recording. If there are open space areas to remain in private ownership within the subdivision, the HOA documents must have in place a mechanism which will assure maintenance will be funded in perpetuity. 
xviii.  FEMA approved applications (i.e., conditional letter of map revisions (CLOMR) or letter of map revisions (LOMR)). 
xix.  Documentation showing who will own and maintain the open space. 
xx.  Documentation for dedication of public sites for open space or other civic purposes. 
j.  "Clean" final plat for addressing. 
i.  Title of project. 
ii.  North arrow, scale (not greater than one inch equals 100 feet) and date of preparation. 
iii.  Vicinity map. 
iv.  Lot and block numbers, numbered in consecutive order. 
v.  Rights-of-way and street names. 
vi.  Property boundary. 
D.  Waiver of submittal requirements. Upon request by the applicant, the Planning Commission may, when deemed appropriate because of the nature of the proposed development, waive any information requirement of the sketch plan or preliminary subdivision plan, as contained in Subsections (A) and (B) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.12.010, 3-5-1986; Amended 4-16-1995; Amended 4-20-1996; Amended 2-13-2000; Amended 9-8-2002; Amended 11-27-2007) 
Section 4.12.030. - Subdivision review. 
    This section is intended to provide for full review of any proposed subdivision of land in order to ensure that the potential effects of the proposal are considered. Development review, pursuant to Chapter 4.06, may proceed concurrently with subdivision review, at the applicant's discretion. 
A.  Pre-application conference. 
1.  Sketch plan pre-application process. 
a.  Step 1: Pre-application conference. A pre-application conference with a representative from the Town is required before the applicant may submit a sketch plan application. The purpose of the meeting is to allow the applicant to discuss his ideas for developing the property and to give the Town the opportunity to communicate the Town's vision. Topics to be discussed will include: 
i.  Applicant's goals for the property. 
ii.  Town vision and expectations. 
iii.  Subdivision design and development standards. 
iv.  The character and quality of development the Town is seeking. 
v.  Town regulations and standards. 
vi.  The application and review process. 
vii.  Submittal requirements. 
viii.  Schedule. 
b.  Step 2: Planning Commission visioning meeting. This is intended to be a collaborative meeting between the Planning Commission and the developer to ensure that all new development is consistent with the community's goals and that issues are identified early in the development process . Topics that may be addressed in this meeting include: 
i.  How the proposed project complies with the subdivision design and development standards (Chapter 4.13 ) , the Eagle Area Community Plan and the purpose of this Title. 
ii.  The developer's goals and vision for the project. 
iii.  How the proposed development incorporates variety in the type, design and siting of buildings. 
iv.  How the proposed subdivision will be connected to and integrated with surrounding natural and developed areas. 
v.  How the project will impact neighboring properties (i.e., water drainage, traffic circulation, environmental impacts, view corridors). 
vi.  How the design is cost-effective and environmentally responsive to site features and constraints and how potential impacts to natural systems will be mitigated. 
vii.  How the design capitalizes on natural and cultural assets on and around the site to build a positive and distinctive identity. 
viii.  How the proposal promotes the efficient use of land and public streets, utilities and governmental services. 
ix.  Applicants should bring the following items to the meeting: 
1.  Context/vicinity map, which shows the proposed development in relation to the surrounding area. 
2.  Base map, which shows the site features (such as topography, ditches, drainage ways, wildlife habitat, trees and view corridors). 
3.  Images (such as photographs, sketches and/or plans) which illustrate the project intention. For example, an applicant might bring pictures of: 
a.  Important architectural elements (such as a porch, vertical windows, mother-in-law units); 
b.  Proposed architectural styles; ideas for landscaping features such as a xeriscape garden entryway; 
c.  Streetscape components which contribute to the project's character; 
d.  A special feature of the property; and 
e.  Anything else that illustrates what the developer is trying to create. 
2.  Preliminary plan pre-application process. 
a.  Step 1: pre-application conference. A pre-application conference with a representative from the Town is required before the applicant may submit a preliminary plan application. Topics to be discussed will include: 
i.  Town regulations and standards; 
ii.  The application and review process; 
iii.  Submittal requirements; and 
iv.  Schedule. 
3.  Final plat pre-application process. 
a.  Step 1: pre-application conference. A pre-application conference with a representative from the Town is required before the applicant may submit a preliminary plan application. Topics to be discussed will include: 
i.  Town regulations and standards; 
ii.  The application and review process; 
iii.  Submittal requirements; and 
iv.  Schedule. 
B.  Subdivision sketch plan submittal. Twenty-five copies of the subdivision concept plan as set forth in Section 4.12.020(A), shall be submitted to the Town Planner and reviewed in accordance with the procedures contained in Section 4.03.070. The submittal shall be accompanied by the appropriate review fee as set forth in Section 4.03.080. Public notice shall be given pursuant to Section 4.03.060. 
C.  Planning Commission review of subdivision sketch plan. In order to provide for exchange of information and ideas between the applicant and the Planning Commission at the conceptual stage of a proposed development, the applicant shall discuss his proposal with the Commission at a regular Commission meeting before submitting the preliminary subdivision plan. The Town Planner shall provide to the Commission copies of the application for subdivision and the subdivision concept plan for discussion at the Commission meeting. The Commission shall make comments and recommendations regarding the proposal, which shall not be binding but shall be considered by the applicant as he prepares the preliminary subdivision plan. The Commission shall make recommendations to the Town Board regarding the proposal and its conformance with the Town's goals, policies and plans. Such recommendations may relate to the potential impacts of the proposal on the Town, its population, services and facilities, environment, character, existing and potential land uses, and economy. 
D.  Town Board review of subdivision sketch plan. In order to provide for exchange of information and ideas between the applicant and the Town Board at the conceptual stage of a proposed development, after meeting with the Planning Commission the applicant shall discuss his proposal with the Board at a regular meeting before submitting the preliminary subdivision plan. The Town Planner shall provide to the Board copies of the application for subdivision and the subdivision concept plan, and comments from the Planning Commission. The Board shall make comments and recommendations regarding the proposed development, which shall not be binding but shall be considered by the applicant as he prepares the preliminary subdivision plan. The Board shall consider the proposal and its conformance with the Town's goals, policies and plans, and shall consider potential impacts on the Town, its population, services and facilities, environment, character, existing and potential land uses and economy. At the meeting, the Board may recommend that the applicant proceed or not proceed to the preliminary subdivision plan stage, based on its review of the proposal. 
E.  Preliminary subdivision plan submittal. Within two years following the Board's review of the subdivision concept plan, the applicant shall submit a preliminary subdivision plan. Upon a request by the applicant made prior to the expiration of the two-year period, the Town may grant an extension beyond two years. If more than two years elapse from the date of the Board's review of the concept plan to the date of the preliminary subdivision plan submittal, and if no extension has been granted, the applicant shall be required to resubmit the concept plan pursuant to the procedure set out in this section. Twenty-two copies of the preliminary subdivision plan and supplemental information, as set forth in Section 4.12.020(B) shall be submitted to the Town Planner at least 30 days before the Planning Commission meeting at which it is to be reviewed. The submittal shall be accompanied by the appropriate review fee as set forth in Section 4.03.080. 
F.  Staff review of preliminary subdivision plan. The Town Planner shall distribute copies of the preliminary subdivision plan to Town staff and other agencies as he deems appropriate. They shall review the plan with site visits as needed to determine whether the proposal conforms with the Town's regulations, goals, policies and plans in their areas of responsibility. They shall submit their comments to the Town Planner at least seven days before the appropriate Planning Commission meeting. The Town Planner shall compile their comments and shall prepare for the Planning Commission a summary of the issues which they should consider in reviewing the proposal. 
G.  Site review. Before the Planning Commission hearing on a preliminary subdivision plan, the proposal shall be reviewed on site by at least three members of the Planning Commission. They may make written recommendations to the full Planning Commission at its regular meeting regarding compliance of the proposal with the Town's regulations, goals, policies and plans. 
H.  Planning Commission review of preliminary subdivision plan. 
1.  The Town Planner shall distribute copies of the preliminary subdivision plan to the Planning Commission members along with the summary of issues and comments. A copy of the summary and comments shall also be furnished to the applicant. 
2.  The Planning Commission shall review the proposal at a regular meeting at which it shall hold a public hearing on the proposal. Public notice shall be given pursuant to Section 4.03.060. The applicant or his representative shall be present at the meeting to represent the proposal. The Planning Commission shall take one of the following actions: 
a.  Recommend to the Town Board that the preliminary subdivision plan be approved, subject to such conditions as the Commission finds necessary to ensure that the proposed subdivision complies with the Town's regulations, goals, policies and plans, and that any adverse impacts resulting from the proposed subdivision will be reasonably and adequately mitigated by the applicant to minimize such impacts; 
b.  Continue the hearing to the next regular Planning Commission meeting with the requirement that the applicant submit changes or additional information which they find necessary to determine whether the proposal complies with the Town's regulations, goals, policies and plans, and whether any adverse impacts resulting from the proposed subdivision will be reasonably and adequately mitigated by the applicant to minimize such impacts; or 
c.  Recommend denial of the preliminary subdivision plan, stating the specific reasons for denial. 
I.  Further review by Planning Commission. 
1.  In the event the hearing is continued pursuant to Subsection (H)(2) of this section, the applicant shall submit 22 copies of the required changes or information to the Town Planner at least ten days prior to the Planning Commission meeting at which the proposal is to be reconsidered. The Town Planner shall review the additional submittal with appropriate staff and other agencies and shall distribute copies of the submittal to the Planning Commission members, along with comments from staff and agencies. 
2.  At the continued hearing the applicant or his representative shall be present to represent the proposal. The Planning Commission shall take one of the following actions: 
a.  Recommend to the Town Board that the preliminary subdivision plan be approved, subject to such conditions as the Commission finds necessary to ensure that the proposed subdivision complies with the Town's regulations, goals, policies and plans, and that any adverse impacts resulting from the proposed subdivision will be reasonably and adequately mitigated by the applicant in order to minimize such impacts; 
b.  Recommend denial of the preliminary subdivision plan, stating the specific reasons for denial; or 
c.  Continue the hearing pursuant to Chapter 2.20. 
J.  Town Board review of preliminary subdivision plan. After the Planning Commission has made its recommendation for approval or denial of the preliminary subdivision plan, the Town Planner shall distribute copies of the preliminary subdivision plan and supplemental information to the Town Board, along with relevant excerpts from Planning Commission minutes and copies of staff or agency comments. The Board shall review the plan at a regular meeting at which it shall hold a public hearing on the proposed preliminary subdivision plan. At such public hearing, the Board of Trustees shall consider the recommendations of the Planning Commission and the comments, testimony and other evidence presented. The applicant or his representative shall be present to represent the proposal. At such meeting, the Board shall take one of the following actions: 
1.  Approve the proposed preliminary subdivision plan, subject to any conditions it finds necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare or to ensure compliance with the Town's regulations, goals, policies and plans, after finding that the proposal does comply with the Town's regulations, goals, policies, and plans, and that any adverse impacts resulting from the proposed subdivision will be reasonably and adequately mitigated by the applicant to minimize such impacts. If the preliminary subdivision plan is approved, the Board shall authorize staff to draft a subdivision improvements agreement, to include any legal, financial or other agreements between the subdivider and the Town which shall include such conditions as the Board finds necessary to ensure that the proposed subdivision complies with the Town's regulations, goals, policies and plans; 
2.  Deny the proposed preliminary subdivision plan, stating the specific reasons for denial; or 
3.  Continue the hearing pursuant to Chapter 2.20. 
K.  Final subdivision plat submittal. Within two years of the approval of a preliminary subdivision plan by the Board, the applicant shall submit a final subdivision plat. Upon a request by the applicant made prior to the expiration of the two-year period, the Town Board may grant an extension beyond two years. If more than two years elapse from the date of the preliminary subdivision plan approval to the date of final subdivision plat submittal, and if no extension has been granted, the preliminary subdivision plan approval shall lapse. In such an event, the applicant shall be required to initiate a new application for subdivision. Twenty-two copies of the final subdivision plat, as set forth in Section 4.12.020(C), along with five copies of any protective covenants, shall be submitted to the Town Planner and reviewed in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 4.03.070. 
L.  Staff review of final subdivision plat. 
1.  Prior to Planning Commission review, the Town Planner shall review the final subdivision plat with appropriate staff and agencies for conformance with the approved preliminary subdivision plan and for compliance with the requirements for final subdivision plat. 
2.  The Town's Engineer of surveying consultant shall compare the legal description of the subject property with the county records to ensure that: 
a.  The property described contains all contiguous single ownership; 
b.  The lots and parcels have descriptions which both close and contain the area indicated; and 
c.  The plat is correct in accordance with surveying and platting standards of the State. 
M.  Planning Commission review of final subdivision plat. At a regular meeting, the Planning Commission shall review the proposed final subdivision plat. The Planning Commission shall take one of the following actions: 
1.  Recommend approval of the proposed subdivision final plat after determining that the proposed plat is in conformance with the approved preliminary subdivision plan and meets the requirements for a final subdivision plat; 
2.  Recommend denial of the proposed final subdivision plat after determining that the above conditions have not been met; 
3.  Require the applicant to resubmit the proposed final subdivision plat with corrections at a regular Planning Commission meeting for Planning Commission approval, after determining the proposed final subdivision plat is not in conformance with the approved preliminary subdivision plan or does not meet the requirements for a final subdivision plat; or 
4.  Recommend that approval of the final subdivision plat be approved with conditions. 
N.  Town Board review of final subdivision plat. 
1.  At a public hearing, the Town Board shall review the proposed final subdivision plat and proposed subdivision improvements agreement, which shall include any legal, financial or other agreements between the subdivider and the Town. Public notice shall be given as provided in Section 4.03.060. At the public hearing, the Board of Trustees shall consider the recommendations of the Planning Commission and the comments, testimony and other evidence presented. The applicant or his representative shall be present to represent the proposal at such meeting. The Board shall take one of the following actions: 
a.  Following the conclusion of the public hearing, approve the proposed final subdivision plat and subdivision improvements agreement, subject to any conditions it finds necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare or to ensure compliance with the Town's regulations, goals and policies, after finding that the proposed subdivision does comply with the Town's regulations, goals, policies, and plans, and that any adverse impacts resulting from the proposed subdivision will be reasonably and adequately mitigated by the applicant to minimize such impacts; 
b.  Following the conclusion of the public hearing, deny the proposed final subdivision plat and/or subdivision improvements agreement, stating the specific reasons for denial; or 
c.  Continue the hearing pursuant to Chapter 2.20. 
2.  Upon approval of a final subdivision plat and subdivision improvements agreement, the Board shall enact an ordinance authorizing the Town Board certification of the plat and accepting any dedications shown thereon. The plat and subdivision improvements agreement shall be recorded with the County Clerk and Recorder within 30 days of the Town Board's certification. In the event development within the subdivision has not started within three years of the approval date of the final subdivision plat, the approval of the subdivision shall be deemed null and void. For purposes of this section the term "start of development" shall mean either the commencement of construction of public improvements within the subdivision, or the sale of an individual lot, townhome or condominium unit within the development, or the issuance of the first building permit for construction within the subdivision, whichever event first occurs. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.12.020, 3-5-1986; Amended 8-9-1988; Amended 6-2-1991; Amended 4-20-1996; Amended 2-13-2000; Amended 5-8-2007; Amended 11-27-2007) 
Section 4.12.040. - Lot line adjustment. 
    This section is intended to minimize review time and extent for proposals involving changes in lot lines with little or no impact on development potential while providing for an accurate plat to be filed with the County Clerk and Recorder for the purpose of official records. The term "lot line adjustment" and the provisions of this section shall apply to subdivisions in which a lot line or a portion thereof is being moved to a location different from that shown on an official plat filed with the County Clerk and Recorder and where the potential for development of resulting parcels remains substantially unchanged, in relation to number of lots, number of units, size of buildings, types of uses allowed, and similar factors. Such determination shall be made by the Town Planner at the pre-application conference. 
A.  Pre-application conference. When proposing a lot line adjustment, the applicant shall first request a pre-application conference with the Town Planner to discuss review procedures, requirements and the Town's regulations, goals and policies. The applicant shall provide for the conference: 
1.  An application for lot line adjustment on a form provided by the Town; and 
2.  A copy of the previously recorded subdivision plat(s) covering the subject lots, on which are drawn the proposed lot line changes. 
B.  Final subdivision plat submittal. Twenty-two copies of the revised plat and an AutoCAD (Release 10 or greater) drawing file(s) filed electronically and which shall meet all requirements for final subdivision plat as set forth in Section 4.12.020(C) shall be submitted to the Town Planner and reviewed in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 4.03.070. The submittal shall be accompanied by the review fee, as set forth in Section 4.03.080, and by a list of the names and addresses of owners of record of all properties adjacent to the subject properties. 
C.  Staff review of final subdivision plat. 
1.  Prior to the Planning Commission review, the Town Planner shall review the final subdivision plat with appropriate staff and agencies, for compliance with the Town's regulations, goals and policies and the requirements for final subdivision plat. 
2.  The Town's Engineer or surveying consultant shall compare the legal description of the subject property with the county records to ensure that: 
a.  The property described contains all contiguous single ownership; 
b.  The lots and parcels have descriptions which both close and contain the area indicated; and 
c.  The plat is correct in accordance with surveying and platting standards of the State. 
D.  Planning Commission review of final subdivision plat. The Town Planner shall distribute copies of the plat plus staff and agency comments to Planning Commission members. The Planning Commission shall review the proposal at a regular meeting. The applicant or his representative shall be present at the meeting to represent the proposal. The Planning Commission shall take one of the following actions: 
1.  Recommend to the Town Board that the lot line adjustment and resubdivision be granted, subject to such conditions as the Commission finds necessary to ensure that the lot line adjustment complies with the Town's regulations, goals, policies and plans, that any adverse impacts resulting from the proposed lot line adjustment will be reasonably and adequately mitigated by the applicant to minimize such impacts; 
2.  Continue the matter to a later Planning Commission meeting with the requirement that the applicant submit changes or additional information which it finds necessary to determine whether the proposal complies with the Town's regulations, goals, policies and plans, and whether any adverse impacts resulting from the proposed lot line adjustment will be reasonably and adequately mitigated by the applicant to minimize such impacts; or 
3.  Recommend to the Town Board the denial of the lot line adjustment and resubdivision, stating the specific reasons for denial. 
E.  Town Board review of final subdivision plat. 
1.  Subsequent to the Planning Commission's recommendation, the Town Planner shall submit copies of the plat, along with excerpts from Planning Commission meeting minutes and copies of staff and agency comments. The Board shall review the proposal at a public hearing at which the applicant or his representative shall be present to represent the proposal. Public notice shall be given pursuant to Section 4.03.060. At the public hearing, the Board of Trustees shall consider the recommendations of the Planning Commission and the comments, testimony and other evidence presented and based thereon shall take one of the following actions: 
a.  Following the conclusion of the public hearing, approve the lot line adjustment, subject to such conditions as the Board finds necessary to ensure that the proposed lot line adjustment complies with the Town's regulations, goals, policies and plans, and that any adverse impacts resulting from the proposed lot line adjustment will be reasonably and adequately mitigated by the applicant to minimize such impacts, and, after finding that the final subdivision plat meets the requirements for approval, authorize Town Board certification of the plat. When necessary, the Board shall approve a subdivision improvements agreement to include any legal, financial or other agreements between the subdivider and the Town, which agreement may be subject to Board approval at a subsequent Board meeting; 
b.  Following the conclusion of the public hearing, deny the lot line adjustment, stating the specific reasons for denial; or 
c.  Continue the hearing to a future Board of Trustees meeting with the requirement that the applicant submit changes or any additional information which it finds necessary to determine whether the lot line adjustment complies with the Town's regulations, goals, policies and plans, and whether any adverse impacts resulting from the proposed lot line adjustment will be reasonably and adequately mitigated by the applicant to minimize such impacts. 
2.  The final subdivision plat and any subdivision improvements agreement shall be recorded with the County Clerk and Recorder within 30 days of the Town Board's approval of the lot line adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.12.030, 3-5-1986; Amended 6-2-1991; Amended 4-16-1995; Amended 4-20-1996; Amended 5-8-2007) 
Section 4.12.050. - Division of property into condominium or townhouse units. 
    The following procedures shall be followed before sale of individual units in a multifamily dwelling, or of individual commercial or other space within a larger building, whether or not there is tenancy in common. Any such building shall be subject to the building lot, height and setback requirements of its respective zone district. 
A.  Procedures. 
1.  Except as provided in this Subsection (A), if no change is proposed in the potential for development beyond that existing or approved, division of property into condominium or townhouse units shall follow the procedures for lot line adjustment set forth in Section 4.12.040. 
2.  For those developments which have undergone a development plan review or subdivision review within the previous three years, and for which an intent to subdivide into townhouses and condominiums was declared during that review, a final plat may be signed by the Mayor after approval by the Town Board at a regular meeting, without the necessity for a public hearing before the Town Board or a review by the Planning and Zoning Commission. An administrative hearing on the proposed final plat of a condominium or townhouse subdivision shall be held before the Town Planner, or his designee, within 45 days following certification by the Town Planner that the application is complete. Public notice of such administrative hearing shall be given pursuant to Section 4.03.060. The applicant or his representative shall be present at said hearing to represent the proposal. Following such hearing, the Town Planner, or his designee, shall take one of the following actions: 
a.  Recommend to the Town Board that the condominium or townhouse subdivision be granted and that the final plat be approved; or 
b.  Recommend denial of the proposed subdivision, stating the specific reasons for denial. 
3.  Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Town Planner, or his designee, under the procedure set forth above, may appeal such decision to the Town Board by filing ten copies of a letter of appeal with the Town Clerk within seven days of the decision of the Town Planner from which the appeal is taken. The letter of appeal shall state the specific grounds upon which the appeal is based and shall have attached to it any documentary evidence. The Town Planner shall distribute copies of the appeal submittal to Town Board members, along with copies of the minutes from the administrative hearing at which the proposal was reviewed, copies of the staff or agency comments, and the Town Planner's summary of issues. The Town Board shall hold a public hearing on such appeal at a regular meeting within 30 days of the date of the filing of the appeal. Public notice shall be given as required for the administrative hearing. The applicant or his representative shall be present at the public hearing, and following such hearing the Town Board shall affirm the decision of the Town Planner, or reverse or modify such decision. 
B.  Final plat for condominium or townhouse units. In addition to the plat requirements set forth in Section 4.12.020(C), the final plat for condominium or townhouse units shall show the location of the existing or proposed building to be divided. 
C.  Review by Town Engineer or surveying consultant. The Town's Engineer of surveying consultant shall compare the legal description of the subject property with the county records to ensure that: 
a.  The property described contains all contiguous single ownership; 
b.  The lots and parcels have descriptions which both close and contain the area indicated; and 
c.  The plat is correct in accordance with surveying and platting standards of the State. 
D.  Condominium or townhouse documents. At least 15 days prior to Planning Commission review of the final plat of a condominium or townhouse subdivision and prior to conveyance of any condominium or townhouse units, the applicant shall file with the Town a copy of the condominium declaration as required by the State of Colorado's Condominium Ownership Act, C.R.S. § 38-33-101 et seq., as well as copies of proposed Articles Incorporation, and bylaws of homeowners or property owners association, if applicable. 
E.  Division of existing structure. When reviewing a proposal to divide an existing structure into condominium or townhouse units, the Town Board may require the subject property to come into compliance with this Code and ordinances as necessary to safeguard the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.12.040, 3-5-1986; Amended 4-16-1995; Amended 4-20-1996) 
Section 4.12.060. - Minor subdivision. 
A.  A minor subdivision is a subdivision which creates: 
1.  Only residential lots for a maximum of four dwelling units, which is a resubdivision of previously subdivided land, and which does not include development of or dedication of any public or private improvements in addition to those already existing; or 
2.  No more than four commercial lots, which is a resubdivision of previously subdivided land, and which does not included development of or dedication of any public or private improvements in addition to those already existing. 
B.  An application for a minor subdivision shall follow the review procedures as set forth for lot line adjustment in Section 4.12.040. Such subdivision shall be subject to all other standards and requirements for a subdivision contained in this Title. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.12.050, 3-5-1986; Amended 6-2-1991; Amended 4-16-1995; Amended 2-13-2000) 
CHAPTER 4.13. - SUBDIVISION DESIGN, IMPROVEMENTS AND DEDICATIONS 

Section 4.13.010. - Purpose. 
    In order to further the purpose of this Title, it is the purpose of this chapter to ensure that for all subdivisions and developments, except as provided otherwise in this Title: 
A.  The developer provide, pay for and install or cause to be installed, on-site and off-site public improvements where needed. Such improvements shall include, but not be limited to, water distribution systems, storm drain structures, wastewater lines, pumps and appurtenant devices, curbs and gutters, street base course material and wearing course material, bridges, electrical transformers, street lights, underground communications systems and wiring, gas distribution systems, fire hydrants, fire alarms and other fire-control devices, street signs and traffic control devices, and community facilities as the Town may determine; and 
B.  Provisions are made for the preservation, replacement or installation of trees, shrubs, ground cover and vegetation, structures and provisions to stabilize soil and to prevent erosion, and culverts or other devices to enclose open ditches and inhibit access to them by children; and 
C.  Reservations and dedications to the Town of lands or easements, or fees in lieu of dedications, are made where needed by the nature of the development for public purposes, including, but not limited to, utility easements and easements for drainage purposes, pedestrian easements, park land, and other community facilities; and 
D.  Provisions are made for delayed or phased development if necessary to ensure that the Town or special districts can provide necessary and timely municipal services and facilities; and 
E.  Provisions are made to ensure the completion of installation of curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street paving and other improvements and to ensure that dedications are made. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.13.010, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.13.020. - Applicability. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Title, the requirements and provisions of this chapter shall apply to every subdivision and development. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.13.020, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.13.030. - Land subject to natural hazards. 
    Land subject to natural hazards, such as flooding, including all land within the 100-year floodplain, shall not be developed or approved for development except in conformance with Chapter 4.16, until plans, certified by a registered professional engineer, are submitted to and approved by the Town Engineer, the Planning Commission, and the Town Board which will prevent such conditions from endangering life, health and/or other property. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.13.030, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.13.040. - Fire protection. 
A.  Compliance with applicable codes. The subdivision shall comply with all provisions of the current fire code adopted by the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District, applicable building codes, and any other duly adopted code, statute, ordinance or standard relating to fire protection, unless enforceable, equivalent protection or mitigation efforts are undertaken by the developer as approved by the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District and the Town. 
B.  Wildland/urban inter-mix areas. Approved fire resistive construction and landscaping in accordance with the current fire code adopted by the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District and duly adopted Town building codes shall be required when wildland/urban inter-mix/interface areas within a subdivision. 
C.  Automatic fire protection systems required. 
1.  For any area within a subdivision which is more than three driving miles from the nearest actual or to be constructed fire station, approved, built-in, automatic fire protection systems shall be installed and maintained in all subdivision improvements (occupancies). 
2.  In all areas within a subdivision which are more than five driving miles from the nearest actual or to be constructed fir station, approved, built-in, automatic fire protection systems shall be installed and maintained in all subdivision improvements (occupancies). In addition, the developer shall provide to all prospective buyers of property within a subdivision a statement that the property is considered not to have any fire protection other than built-in protection for insurance purposes. The developer and the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District shall mutually agree upon the contents and final form of such statement. Such statement shall be recorded in the records of the County Clerk and Recorder with the closing documents for the subject property at the time of sale of such property. 
(Amended 2-13-2000) 
Section 4.13.050. - Drainage. 
A.  Drainage plan. Every development plan and preliminary subdivision plan shall include a drainage plan which shall: 
1.  Be produced and certified by a registered professional; 
2.  Be subject to the approval of the Town Engineer; 
3.  Be designed to restrict site drainage to a rate no greater than the historical rate, before development, for the ten-year storm, or include development of a storm drainage system to convey runoff water to an acceptable drainage channel off-site; 
4.  Identify existing channels, dry washes and stream beds with their ten-year storm calculations; 
5.  Identify the 100-year floodplain, indicating: 
a.  The high hazard area, where water velocities can be expected to be four feet per second or higher, or the water depth can be expected to exceed two feet; and 
b.  The low hazard area, where such velocities and depths are not anticipated with the 100-year storm; 
6.  Include calculations and quantities of flow at points of concentration within the development; 
7.  Identify possible breach points where irrigation ditches and dry washes intersect; 
8.  Depict the above information for the entire drainage basin unless the Town Engineer determines other boundaries for the plan; 
9.  Include a vicinity map locating the development and the boundaries of its drainage basin. 
10.  A plan for maintenance of drainage ways stating the party responsible for maintenance. 
B.  Drainage improvements. Drainage improvements shall be provided by the developer and designed to meet the criteria of this section and the Town's street construction regulations. Where the proposed development results in the need for off-site drainage improvements, such improvements shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
C.  Drainage easements. Drainage easements shall be designed to meet the criteria of this section. The minimum width for a drainage easement shall be ten feet. An additional 15 feet shall be required where needed, as determined by the Town Engineer, for vehicular access to maintain the system. No permanent structure shall be located within the easement. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.13.040, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.13.060. - Erosion and sediment control, stabilization, and revegetation. 
A.  Applicability. The requirements to provide an erosion and sediment control plan applies to all subdivisions and, when deemed necessary by the Town Planner, Building Official or Planning and Zoning Commission for development permits, building permits, and grading permits for fills and excavations in excess of 250 cubic yards. 
B.  Plan for erosion and sediment control. 
1.  The plan for erosion and sediment control shall be designed to ensure: 
a.  That natural drainage patterns are preserved and protected from increased water flows which may otherwise tend to alter such patterns or subject existing channels and adjacent areas to increased erosion, keeping any disturbance of natural vegetation and soil cover to a minimum; 
b.  That appropriate consideration of soil types is made in the design of cuts and fills, building sites, septic tanks and other land uses; 
c.  That structures, including settling ponds, filtration galleries, and sand traps, are provided as necessary to prevent or minimize sedimentation of rivers, streams and drainage structures, and to prevent increased degradation of rivers and streams; 
d.  That fugitive dust is minimal and remains on property; that mud and debris tracking to the public right-of-way is minimized. 
2.  The following practices shall be incorporated into the plan for erosion and sediment control: 
a.  Keep cut and fill operations to a minimum so as to create the least erosion potential; 
b.  Retain and protect natural vegetation whenever feasible; 
c.  Minimize the exposed ground area and the duration of exposure; 
d.  Protect exposed critical areas with temporary vegetation and/or mulching during development; 
e.  Trap sediment in runoff water by use of debris basins, sediment basins, erosion control fencing, silt traps or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized; 
f.  Prevent surface water from damaging cut and fill slopes; 
g.  Locate cuts and fills so as not to endanger adjoining property; keep cuts less than 2:1 unless a subdivision variance or development permit variance is granted; 
h.  Avoid fills on natural watercourses or constructed channels; 
i.  Develop the grading plan so that water is not diverted onto the property of another landowner unless a written easement agreement allowing such drainage is received from the other landowner and duly recorded; and 
j.  Exercise proper measures for dust control during earthwork operations, including watering of disturbed areas; 
k.  Provide gravel at entrances to the public right-of-way to prevent tracking mud. Minimize the number of entrances from the right-of-way; 
l.  Minimize time period in which the plan is implemented; and 
m.  Temporary or permanent irrigation may be required. 
C.  Slope stabilization and revegetation. 
1.  The plan for slope stabilization and revegetation shall be designed to ensure: 
a.  That adequate provision is made for revegetation and soil stabilization during and after development of the site; and 
b.  That all cuts and fills are adequately designed, engineered and vegetated to control erosion as well as stability of the entire mass; keep cuts less than 2:1 unless otherwise expressly approved by the Town. 
Temporary or permanent irrigation may be required. 
2.  The following practices shall be incorporated into the plan for slope stabilization and revegetation: 
a.  Stabilize disturbed soils as quickly as practicable; 
b.  Establish and install permanent vegetation and structural erosion control measures as soon as practicable; 
c.  Place and compact fills so as to minimize sliding or erosion of soil and to provide a stable surface for establishment of vegetation; 
d.  Stockpile topsoil and reuse it after final site grading on slopes and other critical areas to be stabilized with vegetation; and 
e.  The use of retaining walls or structures to stabilize cut or its fill slopes will not be permitted without the written approval of the Town Engineer and the Planning Commission. 
D.  Remedial measures during construction. All permit holders must take adequate measures to ensure that during construction off-site effects of fugitive dust, blown trash and tracking of mud are minimized. The Building Official may order measures to correct any off-site effects, including the following: regular watering of disturbed areas, placement of gravel at entrances to the property, hand or machine shoveling and cleaning of dirt and mud from adjacent properties and rights-of-way and hand removal of blown trash. The Building Official may order a plan for revegetation be immediately implemented if disturbed soil areas are not revegetated on a timely basis. 
E.  Fills and excavations not accompanied by a building permit or subdivision construction plan. 
1.  Any person intending to fill and/or excavate in excess of 250 cubic yards shall be required to submit a plan for erosion and sediment control. The Town Planner and/or Building Official shall determine which elements of Subsection (B) of this section shall be provided by the applicant. No construction shall occur until such plans are approved by the Town. A performance guarantee may be required by the Town Planner or Building Official pursuant to Section 4.06.020. For any fills and/or excavations which occur without a permit, the Town may require a plan for erosion and sediment control and/or a performance guarantee for corrective measures, or to ensure completion of requirements of this section. 
2.  For any areas of exposed soils which pose an erosion, water quality or fugitive dust problem, the Town Planner and/or Building Official may require immediate remedial action, including regrading and revegetation or submission of a plan for erosion and sediment control and a performance guarantee to ensure completion of the necessary corrective measures and the requirements of the section. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.13.050, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.13.070. - Lot and block design. 
    Each lot in a development shall be designed to provide an adequate, readily accessible building site for a structure devoted to the intended use of the land. 
A.  Each lot shall have a minimum of 25 feet of frontage on a dedicated public street and shall allow vehicular access from a public street; except that lots whose principal use is a portion of a multifamily or nonresidential building may be allowed to front on a private road which meets the Town's street construction regulations and the requirements of Section 4.04.100(E). 
B.  Lots and blocks shall be designed to afford the maximum solar access to each building site. 
C.  Lot sizes shall be in conformance with applicable zone district regulations or planned unit development regulations. Where individual water or sewage systems are proposed, lot sizes shall be in conformance with the current standards of the State Department of Public Health and Environment. 
D.  If any part of a residential development borders a railroad right-of-way, lots adjacent to such right-of-way shall either have a minimum depth of 150 feet or be provided with a landscaped 50-foot buffer adjacent to the railway or a parallel street adjacent to the railway shall be provided. No dwelling unit shall be located within 50 feet of the railroad right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.13.060, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.13.080. - School land dedication. 
    Every approved major residential development and major residential subdivision, or major development or major subdivision for partial residential use, as defined in Chapters 4.06 and 4.12, shall include a dedication of land to the Town, as determined by the Board of Trustees, for use by the Eagle County School District RE50-J ("school district"), roughly proportional to school needs generated by the proposed residential uses. In the alternative, the Board of Trustees may require the payment of cash in lieu of such dedication as further described below. The dedication of such land, or payment of cash in lieu thereof, shall be made at the time of annexation of any land proposed for residential development or partial residential development, if the amount of land or payment required can be ascertained; or at the time of approval of the final subdivision plat; or the issuance of a major development permit, whichever may first occur. Every major subdivision and major development which increases the number of dwelling units above that approved as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall make the additional dedication or fee payment based upon the increase number of units, as provided herein, at the time of approval of the final plat, or issuance of a major development permit, whichever may first occur. 
A.  Description. 
1.  Dedicated land shall be suitable for use by the school district, and shall not contain steep slopes, rock formations, adverse topography, utility easements, or other features which may make the site unsuitable for use. 
2.  A minimum of 80 percent of the land dedicated shall have a slope of ten percent or less and shall lend itself to utilization for school district purposes. 
3.  Adequate water rights dedication must be provided for all school land dedicated, pursuant to Title 12. 
4.  Title to the school land dedicated or conveyed shall be good and its transfer rightful, and such land shall be free and clear of all liens and encumbrances whatsoever, except for current general property taxes and patent reservations. 
B.  Amount. The owner of the land proposed for a major subdivision or major development permit for residential uses, or partial residential uses, shall dedicate land in an amount roughly proportional to the school needs generated by the proposed residential uses and the future inhabitants thereof. It shall be a rebuttable presumption that the application of the formulas set forth below provides for a land dedication that is roughly proportional to such school needs: 
1.  Single-family and duplex units: Number of units x .014495 = dedication requirement in acres. 
2.  Multifamily units; Number of units x .002676 = dedication requirement in acres. 
3.  Mobile home units; Number of units x .022300 = dedication requirement in acres. 
4.  The Town may consider a request by the land owner for a smaller dedication of school land when deemed appropriate because of size, location, or nature of the proposed development. Similarly, the Town may require a larger dedication of school lands when deemed necessary because of the size, location, density or nature of the proposed development. 
C.  Maintenance and use of dedicated land. 
1.  When land is dedicated for the purpose of providing a site for a school, related recreational facilities, administration facilities, or other school district needs, the land shall be conveyed by the Town to the school district by general warranty deed, free and clear of any liens or encumbrances. 
2.  All lands conveyed by the Town to the school district pursuant to this section shall be maintained by the school district, and the school district may sell such land to a third party. All proceeds from such sale shall be held by the school district and shall be used for the acquisition of other school land or for the construction of expansion of school facilities. 
D.  Payment in lieu of dedication. 
1.  When the dedication of sites and land areas for school needs are not reasonably necessary to serve the proposed subdivision and future residents thereof because of the size, location, proximity to existing facilities, topography or nature of the proposed development, the Board of Trustees, upon recommendations from the school district and other affected entities, shall require, in lieu of such dedication of land, the payment in cash by the applicant of an amount not to exceed the full market value of such sites and land areas. 
2.  The full market value shall mean the current market value of the unimproved land after completion of platting. Such value shall be set annually by the Board of Trustees on a per acre basis after considering recommendations from the school district and other appropriate parties. The same value per acre shall be used throughout the Town. 
3.  If the applicant does not agree with the established value per acre, the applicant may submit the report of a qualified appraiser who is M.A.I. certified, which establishes a different value. The Town Board shall review the report and determine if such appraised value is reasonable. Based upon its review of the applicant's appraisal, and all other relevant information available to it, the Town Board shall then determine the value of such land for purpose of payment of cash in lieu of dedication. 
4.  When cash in lieu of a school land dedication is required, such funds shall be transferred to the school district within 60 days following payment to the Town for the acquisition of reasonably necessary sites for the construction of school facilities, or for the construction of employee housing required by the school district, or for the purchase of employee housing required by the school district, or for the development or capital improvements to school sites within the Town. If housing units are purchased, a deed restriction restricting their use to school district employee housing shall be required and ownership shall remain in the name of the school district. 
5.  All funds collected pursuant to this section shall be accounted for in the manner required by C.R.S. § 29-1-801 et seq., and other applicable law. 
E.  Limitations on use of dedicated school lands or cash paid in lieu thereof. 
1.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, any dedicated school lands which are not utilized for the construction or expansion of school facilities within ten years from the date of dedication shall be refunded by the school district to the land owner making the dedication. Any fees paid in lieu of such land dedication which are not utilized for the acquisition, construction, or expansion of school facilities within ten years of the date of collection shall be refunded by the school district, with applicable interest, to the land owner form which the fees were collected. Any proceeds from the sale of the school lands pursuant to Subsection (C) of this section which are not utilized for the acquisition, construction, or expansion of school facilities within ten years from the date of dedication of the land sold shall be refunded by the school district, with applicable interest, to the land owner making such dedication. The school district shall give written notice by first class mail to the last address on file with the Town to the land owner entitled to such conveyance or refund. If such land owner does not file a written claim for such property or refund with the school district within 90 days of the mailing of such notice, such right to reconveyance or refund shall be deemed forfeited and such land or funds shall revert to the school district for any lawful purposes. 
2.  The school district may, for good cause shown, request the Town to extend the ten-year period of time specified in Subsection (E)(1) of this section. Such request shall be made at a public hearing held by the Board of Trustees. The Board, in its discretion, for good cause shown, may extend such period of time for an additional period as the Town Board deems reasonable and necessary. 
3.  The Town is specifically exempted from the requirements of this section. 
(Amended 8-11-1995) 
Section 4.13.090. - Streets and alleys. 
A.  Layout and design. 
1.  The street pattern shall be designed to afford safe and convenient access to all lots within the subdivision. 
2.  Streets shall conform to the Town's major street plan and shall be named accordingly. 
3.  The street pattern shall have a logical relationship to topography. 
4.  Streets shall be aligned to afford maximum solar access to each building site. 
5.  Where a proposed development borders an arterial, as designated in the Town's major street plan, street intersections with the arterial street shall be at minimum intervals of 1,000 feet. 
6.  Street design and layout shall meet the design criteria set forth in the Town's design and construction specifications for streets. 
7.  Where the proposed development results in the need for off-site street improvements, such improvements shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
B.  Construction. All streets and related improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the Town's street construction regulations and standards for water system development, which shall be promulgated from time to time by the Town Board. 
C.  Street name signs. Street name signs shall be provided by the developer, subject to approval by the Town's traffic engineer. 
D.  Traffic control devices. All traffic control signs, signals or devices shall be provided by the developer in conformance with the most current edition of the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices," as published by the U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, and shall be subject to approval by the Town's traffic engineer before installation. 
E.  Street lights. Street lighting shall be provided by the developer in conformance with Section 4.07.010. 
F.  Street maintenance, notice. The Town shall not be responsible for the maintenance of streets in new subdivisions until approved pursuant to Section 4.13.240(C). Until such streets have been approved, the Town shall post at all entrances to the subdivision a sign which states: 
"Notice: Roads within this Subdivision have not been Accepted by the Town for Maintenance." 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.13.070, 3-5-1986; Amended 2-13-2000) 
Section 4.13.100. - Easements. 
A.  Dedication of easements. 
1.  Unless otherwise determined by the Town, all easements necessary to provide service to a subdivision or other development shall be dedicated to the Town, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances, including, but not limited to, water easements, wastewater easements, electric easements, natural gas easements, telephone service easements, telecommunications service easements, cable television service easements, general utility easements, access easements, and bicycle and pedestrian pathway easements. The dimensions of such easements shall be subject to approval by the Town Engineer. 
2.  Every certificate of dedication contained on a final plat dedicating an easement to the Town shall include the following: 
"The dedication of easement(s) shown hereon to the Town preclude the installation of improvements, including, but not limited to, trees, shrubs and rocks, the deposit of materials, or the alteration of the existing ground elevation, within the easement area, which could in any manner impair the Town's or other service provider's use of the easement as provided in this dedication." 
B.  Encroachments within easements prohibited. Unless otherwise permitted by the Public Works Director, no person shall construct improvements, deposit materials, or alter the existing ground elevation within an easement dedicated to the Town which could in any way impair the Town's or other service provider's use of such easement. Encroachments that do not alter the existing grade and ground elevation and that do not in any manner restrict vehicular access to and along the dedicated easement shall not require and easement encroachment permit; provided, however, neither the Town nor any service provider shall be responsible for damage to surface encroachments such as landscaping resulting from use of such easements for their intended purpose. 
C.  Easement encroachment permit. In the event a property owner desires to construct improvements, deposit materials, or alter the existing ground elevation or grade within an easement dedicated to the Town, such property owner may apply to the Public Works Director for an easement encroachment permit. Such application shall be made on a form promulgated by the Public Works Director and shall be accompanied by a site plan depicting the property, the subject easement, and the proposed encroachment. Such application for a permit may be approved by the Public Works Director in his sole discretion. Encroachments that do not restrict vehicular access to and along an easement and that do not alter the existing grade or ground elevation shall not require a permit. Unless otherwise provided in the permit, an easement encroachment permit shall be revocable upon 60 days' notice from the Town to the property owner. The Town may require an easement encroachment permit to be recorded in the records of the County Clerk and Recorder. All recording costs shall be borne by the property owner. 
(Amended 9-13-2002) 
Section 4.13.110. - Sidewalks and bikeways. 
A.  Sidewalks and bikeways shall be provided by the developer to allow convenient pedestrian access through or across the development and joining with pedestrian ways and bikeways of adjacent properties. 
B.  Sidewalks and bikeways shall be designed and constructed in conformance with the Town street construction regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.13.080, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.13.120. - Access. 
A.  Lot and block patterns shall allow for access onto a street from each lot. The use of an easement or alley for principal access to a lot shall not be allowed. 
B.  No more than one access point from an arterial or collector street shall be provided to any development unless the applicant documents that additional access points would be significantly beneficial to the safety and operation of the street or that provision of only one access point would be detrimental to public safety. Such documentation shall be subject to approval by the Town's Traffic Engineer. 
C.  Private access onto any public street shall be designed to permit user vehicles to enter and exit in forward drive, except for access from a single-family or two-family lot onto a local street or collector street. 
D.  As provided by C.R.S. § 43-2-147, as amended, any development requiring access onto a State highway shall obtain a permit for such access in accordance with the Colorado State Highway Access Control Code before the issuance of a development permit. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.13.090, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.13.130. - Off-street parking. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Title, every subdivision and development shall comply with the provisions of Section 4.07.140. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.13.100, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.13.140. - Water distribution. 
A.  The developer shall provide additional water rights pursuant to Title 12, storage, and distribution facilities to serve the proposed development, including all areas of park land dedication, common open space, and private recreation facilities. Any such facilities shall be in conformance with Title 12. 
B.  The water main distribution system of a development shall be designed to connect with the Town's water system, to be compatible with the existing system and to make water available to each lot in the proposed development. Fire hydrants shall be located to ensure protection to each lot and shall be approved by the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District. Design of the system shall be to the Town's specifications and water distribution regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.13.110, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.13.150. - Wastewater collection. 
A.  Where the Eagle Sanitation District wastewater collection system is accessible, the wastewater collection system shall be designed to connect with the system and provide service to each lot in a proposed development. Design of the system shall be the responsibility of the developer, with all plans subject to Eagle Sanitation District specifications and the approval of the Town's Engineer. 
B.  Where the sanitation district wastewater collection system is not accessible, the developer shall be responsible for installation of a wastewater collection and treatment system for the development. Such system shall meet all federal, state and local laws and regulations concerning design, installation, and operation of the system. 
C.  Connection to a public wastewater system shall be made when it becomes available. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.13.120, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.13.160. - Underground utilities. 
    Except in the Industrial Zone District, all wires, cables or other equipment for the distribution of electric energy, and telecommunication signals, with the exception of transformers, meters, junction boxes and like equipment, shall be placed underground. Where subdivisions or developments are approved along or with crossing existing overhead power and communications facilities, energy and telecommunications may be obtained from these existing facilities. The service connections to these facilities shall be placed underground unless otherwise approved by the Town Board due to economic, engineering or aesthetic reasons. Utility easements and rights-of-way shall be provided in the subdivision or development. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.13.130, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.13.170. - Boundary survey and monumentation. 
A.  The boundary survey, internal property lines and monumentation as depicted in the final plat for a subdivision shall meet all requirements established under State law. 
B.  Survey data shall be checked by the Town Engineer prior to approval of the final plat. 
C.  Monuments shall be set to specifications of the Town Engineer with at least one monument on the boundary established as a permanent benchmark. 
D.  All survey traverses shall close to within one foot in 10,000 feet, or within a tolerance of 0.01 percent. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.13.140, 3-5-1986; Amended 6-2-1991) 
Section 4.13.180. - Dedications, general. 
    Dedication of land and easements, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances, shall be made by means of a subdivision plat or deed at time of final plat. Dedications shall be made to fulfill the foregoing requirements for utility easements, drainage easements, pedestrian easements, streets and alleys, as well as other public dedications as needed. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.13.150, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.13.190. - Municipal and park land dedication. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this section every new subdivision of land not platted within the Town shall include either a dedication of land to the Town, recreation district, or other entity, as determined by the Town Board, to be used for parks and recreation or for municipal functions requiring land; or payment of a park and municipal land fee in an amount as provided in this chapter. Re-subdivisions of already subdivided land, condominiums and townhouse subdivisions are exempt from this municipal park land dedication requirement. 
A.  Description. 
1.  Dedicated land may include floodplain lands, national and State historical or natural features, and proposed public areas set aside in State, regional, county or Town plans. Dedicated park land shall not include sites for technical, private or public schools, sites for service organizations which are not open to the general public, and sites unsuitable for public use due to features which may be harmful to health and safety. Wetlands are excluded from a credit against the minimum requirement for park land dedication. 
2.  A minimum of 80 percent of land dedicated shall have a slope of ten percent or less and shall lend itself to utilization for municipal and public recreation purposes, including, but not limited to, the following: playing fields, tennis courts, picnic sites, trails, boating areas, maintenance buildings, and offices. 
3.  Wherever a development proposal includes any part of a pedestrian, bicycle, equestrian or skiing trail designated by the Town in its plans, a public easement shall be dedicated in compliance with the plan, and such easement may be included in the required park land dedication. 
4.  Adequate water rights dedication must be provided for all municipal and park land dedication, pursuant to Title 12. 
5.  The Town, at its sole discretion, may elect to use the land dedication for any municipal function which it deems necessary. Such use shall be compatible with surrounding uses. 
B.  Amount. 
1.  Park and municipal land shall be dedicated in the ratio of 0.012 acres per resident of the proposed development, to be computed as follows: 
a.  3.5 residents per single-family dwelling unit. 
b.  3.0 residents per two-family dwelling unit. 
c.  2.5 residents per multifamily dwelling unit or mobile home. 
2.  For commercial or industrial uses, eight percent of the total gross area shall be dedicated for park lands. 
C.  Private recreation facilities. The total acreage required to be dedicated for public park and municipal lands as calculated above may be reduced by up to 50 percent in exchange for provision of private recreation facilities that provide for the recreational needs of the residents of the proposed development, if the Town Board finds all of the following: 
1.  The private recreation facilities will fulfill a major portion of the recreational demands of the residents; 
2.  The private recreation facilities will be completed at the same time as or prior to the housing or nonresidential facilities in the development; 
3.  There exists a mechanism to ensure the continued private maintenance of the facilities; and 
4.  Adequate water rights dedication and tap fee payment pursuant to Title 12 and irrigation system development will be provided for private recreation facilities. For irrigation systems using treated water, tap fees shall be paid and water rights conveyed to the Town. Irrigation system development shall be conveyed to the entity responsible for the ongoing maintenance of the private recreation facilities. For irrigation systems using raw water, water rights and irrigation system development shall be conveyed to the entity responsible for the ongoing maintenance of the private recreation facilities; and 
5.  Adequate provisions are made, subject to the approval of the Town Attorney, to ensure Subsections (C)(1) and (2) of this section. 
D.  Payment in lieu of dedication. 
1.  In the event the Town Board determines that park or municipal land is not needed within the area of development due to the size of the development or proximity of other parkland, then the Board may require the applicant to: 
a.  Make a cash payment in lieu of land dedications; 
b.  Dedicate other property owned by the applicant for use as park land; or 
c.  A combination of Subsection (D)(1)(a) and (1)(b) of this section. 
2.  The Town Board shall, by resolution, set the per-acre fee for the cash in lieu payment which may be updated from time to time. 
4.  If the Town determines to accept other property not within the development as full or partial fulfillment of the requirements of this section, the acreage required for dedication shall be computed as described in Subsection (B) of this section. If the acreage is not sufficient to meet the requirements of Subsection (B) of this section, the remaining requirement may be met with a cash-in-lieu payment. 
4.  Payment in lieu of land dedication shall be due and payable at the time of final subdivision plat approval and shall be described in the subdivision agreement or development permit. 
5.  Of the proceeds from a payment in lieu of land dedication, a minimum of 50 percent shall be placed in a park land fund to be established and maintained for the acquisition and improvement of land for parks, playgrounds and recreation areas, which may benefit the residents of the Town in general, as well as those of the proposed subdivision or development. The remainder of the proceeds, if any, shall be placed in the Town capital improvements fund. Such determination shall be made at the sole discretion of the Board of Trustees. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.13.160, 3-5-1986; Ord. No. 13-2017, §§ 3-10, 4-25-2017) 
Section 4.13.200. - Design variance. 
A.  A variance from the strict application of the requirements of Sections 4.13.030 through 4.13.120, inclusive, may be granted by the Town Board or Planning Commission, whichever body authorizes the development permit or subdivision agreement, where a finding is made that there exists on the property in question exceptional topographical, soil or other subsurface condition or other extraordinary conditions peculiar to the site or existing buildings or lot configuration such that strict application of the requirement of the regulation from which the variance is requested would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional and undue hardship upon the applicant or owner of the property in question and that the public good would be better served by granting of the variance. Such variance shall not be granted if the same would be detrimental to the public good or impair the intent and purposes of this Title. Such design variance request shall be made and reviewed concurrently with the development plan or preliminary subdivision plan and, if granted, shall be described and acknowledged in the development permit or subdivision agreement. 
B.  The design standards set forth in Sections 4.13.030 through 4.13.120, inclusive, but not the Town's street construction regulations, may be modified by the Planning Commission for a planned unit development without a separate requirement for a design variance. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.13.170, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.13.210. - Nonconforming design, improvements, and dedications. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Title, any development which is not in conformance with the requirements of this chapter for design, improvements or dedications shall be made to conform with such requirements before being issued a development permit or a building permit for construction of a new building. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.13.180, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.13.220. - Street improvement fee. 
A.  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to: 
1.  Adopt a rational system for identifying growth related costs incurred by the Town and provide for new and expanded street facilities made necessary by expanded population levels and economic activity levels. The Town desires to adopt a fee structure to ensure that the Town's street facilities needed to support new development meet or exceed the adopted level of service (LOS) standards established by the Town for public streets. Arterial streets and collector streets shall have a LOS of C or higher except as may further be provided under the Town's adopted level of service standards. Local streets shall have a LOS of B or higher. 
2.  Ensure that the fees established by this section are based upon, and do not exceed, the cost of providing additional rights-of-way, street construction, and street improvements necessitated by the new land developments for which the fees are levied. 
3.  Implement the methodology and analysis for the determination of the impact of new development on the need for, and cost of, additional rights-of-way, street construction, and street improvements in the own, as contained in the Town of Eagle Transportation Study prepared by Matthew J. Delich, P.E. 
4.  Recognize that most new commercial and industrial uses will generate sales and/or use tax revenues which can be used for constructing necessary street improvements resulting from such commercial or industrial uses. 
5.  Regulate the use and development of land so as to ensure that new development bears a roughly proportionate share of the additional cost of capital expenditures not paid for from the sales and use tax capital improvement fund which are necessary to provide adequate streets in the Town. 
6.  Ensure that the system of fees implementation herein will be linked to an implementable capital improvements program designed to provide the street improvements for which the fees are imposed. 
B.  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bank means any financial institution. 
    Capital improvement includes transportation planning, preliminary engineering, engineering design studies, land surveys, right-of-way acquisition, engineering, permitting, and construction of all the necessary features for any street construction project, including, but not limited to: 
1.  Construction of new through lanes; 
2.  Construction of new turn lanes; 
3.  Intersection improvements including the construction of round-a-bouts; 
4.  Construction of new drainage facilities, sidewalks, bicycle lanes, curbs, gutters, and landscaping in conjunction with new street construction; 
5.  Purchase and installation of traffic signalization; and 
6.  Relocation of utilities to accommodate new street construction. 
    Commercial general means any premises that is devoted to any commercial purpose or public or governmental purpose not included within the definitions of retail, bank, restaurants, convenience store office, or industrial development set forth herein. 
    Convenience store with gas pumps means an establishment that sells convenience foods, sundries, newspapers, magazines and gasoline. 
    Developer means a person commencing a land development activity which generates traffic and which requires the approval of a subdivision final plat, except lot line adjustments pursuant to Chapter 4.12; approval of a planned unit development pursuant to Chapter 4.11; approval of a development permit pursuant to Chapter 4.06; or issuance of a special use permit pursuant to Section 4.05.010. 
    Development approval means the approval of any final subdivision plat, except lot line adjustments; planned unit development; development permit; or special use after December 1, 1997. 
    Expansion of capacity of a street applies to all street and intersection capacity enhancements and includes, but is not limited to, extensions, widening, intersection improvements, construction of round-a-bouts, signalization, and expansion of bridges. 
    Fast food restaurant means a restaurant with a large carry out business, and that typically is open long hours, serves three meals a day, has a turnover of one hour or less, and fills orders in ten minutes or less. Such a restaurant very often has a drive-through window. 
    Floor area means the area on each floor of a building included with the surrounding exterior walls exclusive of open courts. 
    High turnover sit down restaurant means a moderately priced restaurant with a turnover of less than one hour and usually serves three meals per day. Such a restaurant has very little or no carry out business and frequently operates under a franchise or is part of a chain. 
    Industrial development means any premises devoted primarily to manufacturing, processing, assembly or storage of tangible personal property, warehouses, distribution and wholesale uses, utility service facilities, and other accessory buildings reasonably required for maintenance or security of the above uses. 
    Land development activity generating traffic means any change in land use or any construction of buildings or structures, or any change in the use of a structure that attracts or produces vehicular trips. 
    Level of service shall have the same meaning as set for the in the Transportation Research Board's Highway Capacity Manual, Special, Report 209 (1994), or as otherwise defined in the Town's most recent transportation study. 
    Office development means any premises devoted primarily to office use and includes single tenant office buildings, multi-tenant office buildings, medical clinics and offices, veterinary clinics, research facilities, and experimental or testing laboratories. 
    Quality restaurant means a restaurant that usually has a turnover of one hour or longer, does not have carry out service, and usually does not operate under a franchise and is not part of a chain. 
    Residential, multifamily, includes apartment units, condominium units and townhome units. 
    Residential, single-family, includes detached family residences, duplexes, mobile homes, and travel trailers. 
    Retail means any premises devoted primarily to the sale of merchandise to the general public, including, but not limited to, small establishments, large or "big box" stores, and grocery stores and supermarkets. 
C.  Imposition of street improvement fee. Any person who seeks to develop land within the Town by obtaining approval of a planned unit development pursuant to Chapter 4.11; a subdivision final plat pursuant to Chapter 4.12, except lot line adjustments; a development permit pursuant to Chapter 4.06; or a special use permit pursuant to Section 4.05.010, in order to make an improvement to land which will generate additional traffic is required to pay a street improvement fee in the manner and amount set forth in this section. 
D.  Computation of amount of street improvement fee. 
1.  At the option of the developer, the amount of the street improvement fee may be determined in accordance with the schedule established by resolution of the Board of Trustees, as it may be amended from time to time. In the event a particular use does not reasonably fit into one of the categories listed in said fee schedule, or the estimated number of trip ends for a use significantly departs from the schedule listed in said resolution, the Town Planner shall calculate the fee based on the data contained in the publication, Trip Generation, 9th Edition, Institute of Transportation Engineers. 
a.  If the approval requested is for mixed uses, then the fee shall be determined through using the applicable schedule of apportioning the space committed to uses specified on the schedule. 
b.  For applications for an amendment or change to an approval previously obtained, the amount of the fee is the difference between the fee now applicable and any amount previously paid pursuant to this section. 
c.  In the case of change of use, redevelopment, or expansion or modification of an existing use which requires a development approval, the street improvement fee shall be based upon the net positive increase in the fee for the new use as compared to the previous use. 
d.  In event the amount of the fee cannot be calculated at the time of subdivision final plat approval because the subdivision contains non-residential development and the specific type of uses and floor area for such uses are unknown, the Town may elect to defer computation and payments of the fee until approval of development permits within the subdivision, or the Town may require that an estimated fee be paid. If an estimated fee is paid, any underpayment shall be recovered at the time of development permit approval. In the event an overpayment is made, such overpayment shall be refunded, without interest, within 30 days following the date the street improvement fee can be completely computed for the subdivision. 
2.  If the developer elects not to have the street improvement fee determined in accordance with Subsection (D)(1) of this section, the developer shall prepare and submit to the Town Planner a site-specific fee calculation study for the land development activity for which approval is requested. The site-specific fee calculation study shall follow the prescribed methodologies and formats for the study established by the Town Planner. The traffic engineering and/or economic documentation submitted shall show the basis upon which the site-specific fee calculation was made, including, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  Traffic engineering studies. 
i  Documentation of trip generation rates appropriate for the proposed development activity. 
ii  Documentation of trip length appropriate for the development activity. 
iii  Documentation of any other trip data appropriate for the proposed land development activity. 
b.  Economic documentation studies. 
i  Documentation of the cost per lane per mile for street construction and any other street improvements necessitated by the proposed development activity. 
ii  Documentation of credits attributable to the proposed development activity which can be expected to be available to replace the portion of the service volume used by the traffic generated by the proposed development activity. 
Site-specific fee calculation studies shall be prepared and presented by professionals qualified in their respective fields. The Town Planner shall consider the documentation submitted by the developer but is not required to accept such documentation he reasonably deems to be inaccurate or not reliable, and may, in the alternative, require the developer to submit additional or different documentation for consideration. If an acceptable site-specific calculation study is not presented, the developer shall pay the street improvement fees based upon the schedule shown is Subsection (D)(1) of this section. Determinations made by the Town Planner pursuant to this subsection may be appealed to the Board of Trustees by filing a written request with the Town Manager within ten days of the Town Planner's determination. Following the submittal of such request, the Town Board shall hold a public hearing to determine the amount of the street improvement fee which shall be paid prior to the approval of the proposed development. 
E.  Payment of fee required. A developer requesting subdivision approval shall pay the street improvement fee required by this section prior to the recording of a final plat, except as otherwise provided in this section for a nonresidential subdivision. A developer requesting approval of a planned unit development shall pay the street improvement fee prior to the approval of the development permit or in the case of a special use permit the developer shall pay such fee prior to the issuance of the permit. 
F.  Street improvement fee fund established. 
1.  All fees collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited in a public works fund to be created by resolution of the Town Board, and shall be used for the projects therein identified. Such fund shall be established to comply with the provisions of C.R.S. § 31-15-302(1)(f ) (I). All funds collected pursuant to this section shall be accounted for in the manner required by C.R.S. § 29-1-801 and other applicable law. 
2.  Funds collected from street improvement fees shall be used for the purpose of capital improvements to, and expansion of, street facilities associated with the arterial and collector street network as designated by the Town. 
3.  No fund shall be used for periodic or routine maintenance. 
4.  In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are issued for the advanced provision of capital facilities for which street improvement fees may be expended, such fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the facilities provided are of the type described in Subsections (F)(1) and (2) of this section. 
G.  Refund of fees paid. 
1.  If a development approval expires without commencement of construction or development, the developer shall be entitled to a refund, without interest, of the street improvement fee paid as a condition for its issuance, except that the Town shall retain one percent of the fee to off-set a portion of the cost of collection and refund. The developer must submit an application for such a refund to the Town Manager within 30 days of the expiration of the development approval granted. 
2.  Any funds not expended or encumbered by the end of the calendar quarter immediately following ten years from the date the street improvement fee was paid shall, upon application of the then-current land owner, be returned to such land owner with interest at the legal rate, provided that the land owner submits an application for a refund to the Town Manager within 180 days of the expiration of the ten-year period. 
H.  Credit for improvements. 
1.  No credit shall be given for site related improvements or site related right-or-way dedications, including access roads leading to the development, driveways and streets within the development, acceleration and deceleration lanes, and right and left turn lanes leading to those streets, and traffic control measures for such streets. 
2.  Upon approval of the Town Board, any developer obligated to pay a fee as set forth in this section shall receive a credit against the amounts due or to become due for street improvements installed and paid for by such developer when such street improvements are in addition to the site related improvements required to be installed pursuant to this Title. 
I.  Exemption from payment of fee. The Board of Trustees may, by resolution, grant an exemption from all or any part of the street improvement fees required by this section upon a finding that such waiver is in the best interests of the public by encouraging activities that provide significant social, economic or cultural benefits. Whenever a street improvement fee is waived, the Town Board shall direct that the waived fee be paid by the general fund or other appropriate fund. 
J.  Unpaid street improvement fee, lien. All street improvement fees shall be a lien upon each lot or parcel of land within a development from the due date thereof, as set forth in this section, until paid. If such fees are not paid when due, in addition to any other means provided by law, the Town Clerk shall certify such delinquent charges to the Treasurer of the county and the charges shall be collected in the same manner as though they were part of the taxes. The Town reserves the right to withhold or revoke any permits, certificates or other approvals to any developer who is delinquent in the payment of street improvement fees. 
K.  Review of fees. The fees imposed by this section and monies expended from the public works fund shall be reviewed and adjusted as follows: 
1.  The street improvement fees established in this section shall be adjusted annually effective January 15 of each year. The adjustment shall be equal to the percentage change in construction costs for State public buildings type II-N (weighted 15 percent), type III-N (weighted 15 percent) and type V-N (weighted 70 percent) as set forth in the preceding year's December issue of the Building Standards Newsletter published by the International Conference of Building Officials. The fees described in Subsection (D) of this section shall be adjusted by the Town Planner accordingly and the Town Planner and Town Clerk shall maintain copies of the current fees table. 
2.  The Town Manager shall report to the Town Board, in conjunction with the presentation of the proposed budget, annually, on the actual and proposed expenditures and projects accomplished and to be accomplished from the public works fund. 
(Amended 11-21-1997; Amended 2-20-1998; Ord. No. 2017-3, § 1, 2-14-2017) 
Section 4.13.230. - Fire protection impact fee. 
A.  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to: 
1.  Adopt a rational system for identifying and mitigating growth related costs incurred by the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District and provide for new and expanded fire protection services and facilities made necessary by expanded population and economic activity levels. The Town desires to adopt a fee structure to ensure that the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District's facilities and equipment needed to support new development meet or exceed the adopted level of service (LOS) standards established by the Town for fire protection services. 
3.  Ensure that the fees established by this section are based upon, and do not exceed, the cost of providing additional capital improvements necessitated by new land developments for which the fees are levied. 
4.  Implement the methodology and analysis for the determination of the impact of new development on the need for, and cost of, additional capital improvements as contained in the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District's Study of Fiscal Impact, dated September, 1999. 
5.  Regulate the use and development of land so as to ensure that new developments bear a roughly proportionate share of the cost of capital expenditures necessary to provide adequate fire protection by the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District with the Town. 
6.  Ensure that the system of fees implemented herein will be linked to an implemented capital improvements program designed to provide the facilities and equipment for which the fees are imposed. 
B.  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Capital improvement includes fire protection planning, preliminary architectural and engineering services, architectural and engineering design studies, land surveys, land acquisition, site improvements and off-site improvements associated with new or expanded facilities; the construction of buildings and facilities; and the purchase of fire suppression apparatus and equipment, including communications equipment, with an average useable life of at least three years, necessary to adequately protect and defend new development and its inhabitants, while maintaining the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District's current insurance services organization (I.S.O.) rating. "Capital improvement" does not include periodic or routine maintenance of facilities and equipment, personnel costs or operational expenses. 
    Developer means a person commencing a land development activity requiring the availability of additional fire protection services and which requires the approval of a subdivision final plat, except lot line adjustments pursuant to Chapter 4.12; approval of a planned unit development pursuant to Chapter 4.11; approval of a development permit pursuant to Chapter 4.06; or issuance of a special use permit pursuant to Section 4.05.010. 
    Development approval means the approval of any final subdivision plat, except lot lines adjustments; a planned unit development; a development permit; or a special use following the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
    Fire protection means the prevention and extinguishments of fire; the protection of life and property from fire; and the enforcement of municipal, county, district and State Fire Prevention codes. 
    Land development activity requiring additional fire protection services means any change in land use or any construction of buildings or structures, or any change in the use of a structure that could require the rendering of additional fire protection services over and above the previous use. When a change of use, redevelopment or modification of an existing use requires development approval, the impact fee shall be based upon the net increase in the impact fee for the new use as compared to the previous use. 
C.  Imposition of fire protection impact fee. Any person who, after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, seeks to develop land within the Town by obtaining approval of a planned unit development pursuant to Chapter 4.11; a subdivision final plat pursuant to Chapter 4.12, except lot line adjustments; a development permit pursuant to Chapter 4.06; or a special use permit pursuant to Section 4.05.010 after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, constituting land development activity requiring the availability of additional fire protection services is required to pay a fire protection impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this section. 
D.  Computation of the amount of fire protection impact fee. 
1.  At the option of the developer, the amount of the fire protection impact fee may be determined in accordance with the fee schedule established by resolution of the Board of Trustees, as it may be amended from time to time. 
a.  Fees for commercial and industrial uses are calculated by dividing the total square footage by 1,000 and multiplying by the amount listed in said fee schedule. Example: Retail store of 3,600 square feet divided by 1,000 = 3.6 x $475.00 = $1,710.00 fire protection impact fee owed. 
b.  If the approval requested is for mixed uses, then the fee shall be determined through using the applicable schedule by apportioning the space committed to uses specified on the schedule. 
c.  For applications for an amendment or change to an approval previously obtained, but not constructed, the amount of the fee is the difference between the fee now applicable and any amount previously paid pursuant to this section. 
d.  In the case of a change of use, redevelopment, expansion or modification of an existing use which requires a development approval, the fire protection impact fee shall be based upon the net positive increase in the fee for the new use as compared to the previous use. 
e.  In the event the amount of the fee cannot be calculated at the time of subdivision final plat approval because the subdivision contains non-residential development and the specific type of uses and the floor area for such uses are unknown, the Town may elect to defer computation and payment of the fee until approval of the development permits within the subdivision, or the Town may require that an estimated fee be paid. If an estimated fee is paid, any underpayment shall be recovered at the time of development permit approval. In the event an overpayment is made, such overpayment shall be refunded, without interest, within 30 days following the date the fire protection impact fee can be completely computed for the subdivision. 
2.  If the developer elects not to have the fire protection impact fee determined in accordance with Subsection (D)(1) of this section, the developer shall prepare and submit to the Town Planner a site-specific fiscal impact and fee calculation study for the land development activity for which approval is requested. The site-specific fiscal impact and fee calculation study shall follow the prescribed methodologies and formats established by the Town Planner following consultation with the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District. The fiscal impact study submitted shall show the basis upon which the site-specific fee calculation was made. The site-specific fiscal impact and fee calculation study shall be prepared and presented by professionals qualified in their respective fields. The Town Planner shall consider the documentation submitted by the developer but is not required to accept such documentation he reasonably deems to be inaccurate or not reliable, and may, in the alternative, require the developer to submit additional or different documentation for consideration. If an acceptable site-specific fiscal impact and fee calculation study is not presented, the developer shall pay the fire protection impact fee based upon the schedule shown is Subsection (D)(1) of this section. Determinations made by the Town Planner pursuant to this subsection may be appealed to the Board of Trustees by filing a written request with the Town Manager within ten days of the Town Planner's determination. Following the submittal of such request, the Town Board shall hold a public hearing to determine the amount of the fire protection impact fee which shall be paid prior to the approval of the proposed land development activity. 
E.  Time for payment fee. A developer requesting subdivision approval shall pay the fire protection impact fee required by this section prior to the recording of a final plat, except as otherwise provided in this section for nonresidential subdivisions. A developer requesting approval of a planned unit development shall pay the fire protection impact fee prior to the approval of the development plan. A developer requesting issuance of a development permit or special use permit shall pay such fee prior to the issuance of the permit. 
F.  Use of funds. 
1.  All fees collected pursuant to this section shall be transferred to the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District within 60 days following payment to the Town in accordance with an intergovernmental agreement between the Town and the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District. All funds collected pursuant to this section shall be accounted for in the manner required by C.R.S. § 29-1-801 et seq., and other applicable law. 
2.  Funds collected from the payment of fire protection impact fees shall be used for the purpose of land acquisition and capital improvements to, and the expansion of, fire protection services. Fire protection impact fee revenues shall be used exclusively for additional capital improvements or expansions of such improvements with and for the benefit of the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District. Funds shall be expended in the order in which they are collected. 
3.  No funds shall be used for periodic or routine maintenance, personnel costs or operational expenses. 
4.  In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are used for the advanced provision of capital improvements for which fire protection impact fees may be expended, such fee revenue may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the improvements provided are of the type described in Subsection (F)(2) of this section. 
5.  The Town shall be entitled to retain up to one percent of the fire protection impact fees it collects as an administrative fee to off-set the cost of administering this section. 
G.  Refund of fees paid. 
1.  If a development approval expires without commencement of construction or development, the developer shall be entitled to a refund, without interest, of the fire protection impact fee paid as a condition for its issuance, except that the Town shall retain one percent of the fee to off-set a portion of its costs of collection and refunding. The developer must submit an application for such refund to the Town Manager within 30 days of the expiration of the development approval granted. 
2.  Any funds not expended or encumbered by the end of the calendar quarter immediately following ten years from the date the fire protection impact fee was paid by a developer shall, upon application of the then-current landowner, be returned to such landowner with interest at the legal rate, provided that the landowner submits an application for a refund to the Town Manager within 180 days of the expiration of such ten-year period; provided, however, the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District may, for good cause shown, request the Town to extend the ten-year period of time specified in this subsection. Such request shall be made at a public hearing held by the Board of Trustees. The Board, in its discretion, for good cause shown, may extend such period of time for an additional period as the Town Board deems reasonable and necessary. 
H.  Credit for improvements. Upon approval by the Town Board, any developer obligated to pay a fee as set forth in this section shall receive a credit against the amounts due or to become due for fire protection capital improvements installed, purchased and paid for by such developer when such fire protection capital improvements are in addition to those required under this Title. 
I.  Exemption from payment of fee. The Board of Trustees may, by resolution, grant an exemption from all or any part of the fire protection impact fee required by this section upon a finding that such waiver is in the best interest of the pubic by encouraging activities that provide significant social, economic or cultural benefits. Whenever a fire protection impact fee is waived, the Town Board shall direct that the waived fee be paid by the Town's general fund or other appropriate fund to the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District. 
J.  Unpaid fire protection impact fee-lien. All fire protection impact fees shall constitute a lien upon each lot or parcel of land within a development from the due date thereof, as set forth in this section, until paid. If such fee is not paid when due, in addition to any other means provided by law, the Town Clerk shall certify such delinquent fee to the Treasurer of the county and the fee shall be collected in the same manner as though it were part of the taxes. The Town reserves the right to withhold or revoke any permits, certificates or other approvals granted to any developer who is delinquent in the payment of fire protection impact fees. 
K.  Adjustment and review of fee. The fee imposed by this section and monies expended by the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District for capital improvements shall be reviewed and adjusted as follows: 
1.  The fire protection impact fee established in this section shall be adjusted annually for inflation effective January 15 of each year. The adjustment shall be based upon the percentage change in the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics Consumer Price Index for Denver-Boulder, all items, all urban consumers, or its successor index. 
2.  The Town Manager shall, annually, in conjunction with the presentation of the Town's proposed budget, recommend any further adjustments to the fee imposed by this section, following consultation with the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District. 
(Ord. No. 2017-3, § 2, 2-14-2017) 
Section 4.13.240. - Assurance for completion of public improvements. 
A.  Public improvements and warranty. The subdivision agreement or development permit shall set forth the plan, method and parties responsible for the installation of all required public improvements and shall make reasonable provision for the completion of said improvements in accordance with design and time specifications. All water lines, fire hydrants and other water distribution facilities, drainage structures, wastewater lines, public streets and sidewalks, required park land and open space improvements, street lights and signs, survey monuments and other public improvements, as shown on the concept plan and accompanying plans and documents submitted to the Town, shall be installed and completed at the expense of the developer. Said public improvements shall be designed and built in conformance with all Town design standards. The developer shall warrant any and all public improvements which are conveyed or dedicated to the Town, pursuant to the subdivision improvements agreement, for a period of one year from the date the Town's Engineer certifies that the same conform with the approved specifications. Specifically, but not by way of limitation, the developer shall warrant the following: 
1.  That the title conveyed shall be good and its transfer rightful; 
2.  Any and all facilities conveyed shall be free from any security interest or other lien or encumbrance; and 
3.  Any and all facilities so conveyed shall be free of any defects in materials or workmanship. 
B.  Inspections. The Town shall have the right to make engineering inspections and required testing during construction of such public and private improvements in such reasonable intervals as the Town may request in accordance with the Towns street construction regulations and water distribution regulations. Inspection, acquiescence and approval of any engineering inspector of the construction of physical facilities, at any particular time, shall not constitute the approval by the Town of any phase of the construction of such public and private improvements. Such approvals shall be made by the Town only after completion of construction and in the manner hereinafter set forth. 
C.  Completion of public improvements. Upon completion of construction by the developer of such public and private improvements, the Town Engineer shall inspect the improvements and certify with specificity its conformity or lack thereof to the specifications. The developer shall make all corrections necessary to bring the system into conformity with Town standards and the utility, drainage and street improvements plans and others, as approved. The Town shall be under no obligation to provide any water service or street maintenance until all such facilities are brought into conformance with the specifications and approved by the Town Engineer. 
D.  Related costs, public improvements. The developer shall provide all necessary engineering designs, surveyor's field surveys and incidental services related to the construction of the public improvements, at its sole cost and expense. The legal description of said utility service lines shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor at the developer's sole expense. 
E.  Improvements to be the property of the Town. All public improvements shall be dedicated to the Town and warranted for a period of 12 months following completion, as above provided. Upon completion of construction in conformity with the plans, and any properly approved changes, the developer shall convey to the Town, by bill of sale, all physical facilities necessary for the extension, maintenance and repair of municipal utility service. Acceptance of said conveyance shall be made by the Town only by a majority vote of the Board of Trustees. 
F.  Performance guarantee. 
1.  In order to secure the construction and installation of the public improvements above-described and shown on the developer's concept plan, preliminary plan, utility, drainage, landscaping, park improvements, street improvements plans and other documents submitted to the Town, for which the developer is responsible, the developer shall furnish the Town with: 
a.  A certificate or other evidence, in good and sufficient form, approved by the Town Attorney of a performance bond or an irrevocable letter of credit to secure the performance and completion of the public and private improvements in an amount equal to 110 percent of the estimated costs of said facilities; or 
b.  Such other collateral as may be satisfactory to the Town Attorney. Such performance guarantee shall be provided within 30 days following the effective date of the ordinance approving the subdivision, unless otherwise determined by the Town Board of Trustees. 
2.  The estimated cost of such improvements shall be a figure mutually agreed upon by the developer's engineer and the Town's Engineer. The purpose of such cost estimate is solely to determine the amount of security and may be revised from time to time to reflect the actual cost. No representation shall be made as to the accuracy of these estimates, and the developer agrees to pay the actual cost of all such public or private improvements. 
3.  Upon the developer's failure to perform its obligations hereunder, and as provided by any subdivision improvements agreement, and in accordance with all plans, drawings, specifications and other documents submitted to the Town as approved, within the applicable time periods, the Town may give written notice to the developer and the surety on a performance bond or the issuer of an irrevocable letter of credit, that the Town, as agent for the developer, is proceeding with the task of installing the public or private improvements in the development in whole or in part. Upon this assumption by the Town, the surety or issuer of the irrevocable letter of credit shall be authorized to disburse funds, upon written request form the Town, showing the proposed payee and the amount to be paid. Copies of any such request shall be sent to the developer's last known address. The developer shall be given an opportunity to appear before the Town Board of Trustees concerning any such assumption by the Town, within 30 days of the giving of such notice by the Town. 
4.  The developer shall in writing designate and irrevocably appoint the Mayor of the Town as its Attorney-in-fact and agent for the purpose of completing all public or private improvements required by this Title or any applicable subdivision improvements agreement in the event of a default by the developer. If any legal proceedings are commenced by the developer concerning the Town's assumption of the task of installing the public or private improvements, and if the developer does not prevail in said legal proceedings, the surety or issuer of the letter of credit as well as the Town shall be entitled to recover the reasonable Attorney's fees incurred therein from the developer. 
G.  Building permits for construction of a building. 
1.  Issuance of a building permit. The following improvements, as required in this chapter, shall be installed and shall be approved by the Town Engineer prior to the issuance of a building permit for the construction of any building in the development: 
a.  Permanent property corner monuments. 
b.  Wastewater mains and service laterals to each lot and all necessary wastewater infrastructures to provide service to the subdivision (i.e., lift station). 
c.  Water mains and service lines to each lot and all necessary water infrastructures to provide service to the subdivision. 
d.  Fire hydrants. 
e.  Storm drainage structures and conveyances, including associated erosion control devices as needed to prevent siltation of new or existing storm drainage facilities. 
f.  Street paving with curb and gutter as required. 
g.  Soil stabilizing structures. 
h.  Final utilities, including telephone, cable television, electrical service and gas lines or as required by the subdivision improvements agreement or development permit. 
2.  Issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The following improvements, as required in this chapter, shall be installed and shall be approved by the Town Engineer prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy: 
a.  Sidewalks, bikeways and trails. 
b.  Street lighting. 
c.  Permanent soil stabilization and revegetation measures. 
d.  Land dedication conveyances. 
e.  Landscaping of common open spaces, park and recreation areas, whether dedicated to the Town or to a homeowners' association. 
f.  Non-potable irrigation system, if applicable. 
g.  All other required public or private improvements pursuant to the applicable subdivision improvements agreement or development permit and this Title. 
h.  All other documents as required by the Town Planner. 
3.  Variance or hardship. In cases where strict application of the requirements of Subsection (G)(2) of this section would place undue hardship on the applicant for a certificate of occupancy, he may provide security subject to approval by the Town Attorney and by the Town Manager to cover the cost of completion of the required improvements and the maintenance of any incomplete street sections which might be involved. This security shall be to assure the Town that the improvements are installed in the event that the applicant fails to install them as agreed. As improvements are completed, the applicant may apply to the Town Manager for release of all or part of the security, which release shall also be subject to approval by the Town Engineer and the Town Attorney. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.13.190, 3-5-1986; Amended 4-16-1995; Amended 11-27-2007) 
Section 4.13.250. - Public safety impact fee. 
A.  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to: 
1.  Adopt a rational system for identifying and mitigating growth-related costs incurred by the Eagle Police Department and provide for new and expanded public safety infrastructure made necessary by expanded population and economic activity levels. The Town desires to adopt a fee structure to ensure that the Eagle Police Department's facilities and equipment needed to support new development meet or exceed the adopted level of service standards established by the Town for public safety services. 
2.  Ensure that the public safety impact fees are based upon, and do not exceed, the incremental costs of providing capital improvements necessitated by new development for which the fees are levied. 
3.  Implement the methodology and analysis for the determination of the impact of new development on the need for, and cost of, additional capital improvements as contained in the Eagle Police Department's Study of Fiscal Impact dated December 2018. 
4.  Regulate the use and development of land so as to ensure that new developments bear a roughly proportionate share of the cost of capital expenditures necessary to provide adequate public safety and protection by the Eagle Police Department with the Town. 
5.  Ensure that the system of fees implemented herein will be linked to an implemented capital improvements program designed to provide the facilities and equipment for which the fees are imposed. 
B.  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Capital improvement includes without limitation police protection planning, preliminary architectural and engineering services, architectural and engineering design studies, land surveys, land acquisition, site improvements and off-site improvements associated with new or expanded facilities; the construction of buildings and facilities; and the purchase of public safety and police apparatus and equipment, including communications equipment, with an average useable life of at least five years, and other similar expenditures necessary to adequately protect and defend new development and its inhabitants while maintaining the Eagle Police Department's current insurance services organization rating. "Capital improvement" does not include periodic or routine maintenance of facilities and equipment, personnel costs or operational expenses. 
    Development approval means the approval of any final subdivision plat, other than a lot line adjustment; a planned unit development; a development permit; or a special use. 
    Land development activity means any change in land use or any construction of buildings or structures, or any change in the use of a structure that requires the rendering of additional public safety services over and above the demand of the previous use. 
    Public safety services means the services undertaken by the Eagle Police Department for the welfare and protection of the general public to maintain public order and safety, including without limitation enforcing the law, conducting neighborhood patrols, providing for traffic calming, responding to medical emergencies, disasters, and threats of violence, performing welfare checks, and preventing, detecting, and investigating criminal activities. 
C.  Imposition of public safety impact fee. Any person who seeks approval of any development activity requiring the availability of additional public safety services shall pay a public safety impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this section. 
D.  Computation. 
1.  At the option of the applicant, the amount of the public safety impact fee may be determined in accordance with the fee schedule established by resolution of the Board of Trustees, as amended. 
a.  If the approval requested is for mixed uses, the fee shall be determined using the applicable schedule by apportioning the space committed to uses specified on the schedule. 
b.  For applications for an amendment or change to an approval previously obtained, but not constructed, the amount of the fee is the difference between the fee now applicable and any amount previously paid pursuant to this section. 
c.  In the case of a change of use, redevelopment, expansion or modification of an existing use, the fee shall be based upon the net positive increase in the fee for the new use as compared to the previous use. 
d.  If the amount of the fee cannot be calculated at the time of approval, because the specific type of uses and the floor area for such uses are unknown, the Town may elect to defer computation and payment of the fee until approval of the development permits, or the Town may require that an estimated fee be paid. If an estimated fee is paid, any underpayment shall be recovered at the time of development permit approval. If an overpayment is made, such overpayment shall be refunded, without interest, within 30 days following the date the fee can be completely computed. 
2.  If the applicant elects not to have the public safety impact fee determined in accordance with subsection(D)(1) hereof, the applicant shall prepare and submit to the Town Planner a site-specific fiscal impact and fee calculation study for the land development activity for which approval is requested. The site-specific fiscal impact and fee calculation study shall follow the prescribed methodologies and formats established by the Town Planner following consultation with the Eagle Police Department. The fiscal impact study shall show the basis upon which the site-specific fee calculation was made, and shall be prepared and presented by professionals qualified in their respective fields. The Town Planner shall consider the documentation submitted by the applicant, but is not required to accept such documentation he reasonably deems to be inaccurate or not reliable, and may, in the alternative, require the applicant to submit additional or different documentation for consideration. If an acceptable study is not presented, the applicant shall pay the public safety impact fee based upon the fee schedule. A determinations of the Town Planner pursuant to this subsection may be appealed to the Board of Trustees by filing a written request with the Town Manager within ten days of the Town Planner's determination. 
E.  Time for payment. 
1.  An applicant for subdivision approval shall pay the public safety impact fee prior to the recording of a final plat. 
2.  An applicant for a planned unit development shall pay the public safety impact fee prior to the approval of the development plan. 
3.  An applicant requesting issuance of a development permit or special use permit shall pay such fee prior to the issuance of the permit. 
F.  Use of funds. 
1.  All public safety impact fees shall be transferred to the Eagle Police Department within 60 days following payment to the Town, and shall be accounted for in the manner required by C.R.S. § 29-1-801, et seq., and other applicable law. 
2.  Funds collected from public safety impact fees shall be used exclusively for the benefit of the Eagle Police Department for purposes of land acquisition and capital improvements to, and the expansion of, public safety services. Funds shall be expended in the order in which they are collected. No funds shall be used for periodic or routine maintenance, personnel costs or operational expenses. 
3.  If bonds or similar debt instruments are used for the advanced provision of capital improvements for which public safety impact fees may be expended, such fee revenue may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments. 
4.  The Town shall be entitled to retain up to one percent of the public safety impact fees collected as an administrative fee to offset the cost of administering this section. 
G.  Refunds. 
1.  If a development approval expires without commencement of construction or development, the applicant may file a written request for a refund, without interest, of the public safety impact fees paid. The request shall be filed with the Town Manager within thirty days of the expiration of such approval. The Town shall retain one percent to offset the costs of collection and refunding. 
2.  Any funds not expended or encumbered by the end of the calendar quarter immediately following ten years from the date the public safety impact fee was paid shall, upon application of the then-current landowner, be returned to such landowner with interest at the legal rate, provided that the landowner submits an application for a refund to the Town Manager within 180 days of the expiration of such ten-year period; provided, however, the Eagle Police Department may, for good cause shown, request the Town to extend the ten-year period of time specified in this subsection. Such request shall be made at a public hearing held by the Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees, in its discretion and for good cause shown, may extend such period of time for an additional period as the Board of Trustees deems reasonable and necessary. 
H.  Credit. Upon approval by the Board of Trustees, any applicant obligated to pay the public safety impact fee shall receive a credit against the amounts due or to become due for public safety capital improvements installed, purchased and paid for by such applicant when such public safety capital improvements are in addition to those required under this title. 
I.  Exemption. The Board of Trustees may, by resolution, grant an exemption from all or any part of the public safety impact fee upon a finding that such waiver is in the best interest of the public by encouraging activities that provide significant social, economic or cultural benefits. 
J.  Lien. All public safety impact fees shall constitute a lien upon each lot or parcel of land within a development from the due date thereof until paid. If such fee is not paid when due, in addition to any other means provided by law, the Town Clerk shall certify such delinquent fees to the County Treasurer to be collected in the same manner as taxes. The Town reserves the right to withhold or revoke any permits, certificates or other approvals if public safety impact fees are unpaid. 
K.  Adjustment and review. The public safety impact fee and the funds expended by the Eagle Police Department for capital improvements shall be reviewed and adjusted as follows: 
1.  The public safety impact fee shall be adjusted annually for inflation effective January 15 of each year. The adjustment shall be based upon the percentage change in the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics Consumer Price Index for Denver-Boulder, all items, all urban consumers, or its successor index. 
2.  The Town Manager shall, annually, in conjunction with the presentation of the Town's proposed budget, recommend any further adjustments to the public safety impact fee, following consultation with the Eagle Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 10-2019 , § 2, 5-14-2019) 
CHAPTER 4.14. - ASSURANCE OF ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES 

Section 4.14.010. - Intent. 
A.  It is the intent of this chapter to: 
1.  Adopt a program to ensure that land for public facilities and the public facilities needed to support new development meet or exceed adopted level of service standards approved by the Town; 
2.  Ensure that no subdivision approval, planned unit development approval, development permit approval, or special use permit is granted or issued which would cause a reduction in the level of service for any public facilities below the adopted level of service standards approved by the Town; 
3.  Ensure that adequate public facilities or, in the case of schools, the availability of land needed to support new development or a special use are available concurrent with the impacts of such development or use; 
4.  Establish uniform procedures for the review of the adequacy of public facilities needed to service new development, new subdivisions or new special uses; 
5.  Facilitate implementation of the goals and policies of the Town's master plan, including the Eagle Area Community Plan relating to adequacy of public facilities; and 
6.  Ensure that all applicable legal standards and criteria are properly incorporated in these procedures and requirements. 
B.  It is the intention of this chapter that, in the case of schools, the adequacy of public facilities may be satisfied by the adequate provision of land that is available to the county school district and specifically designated for the construction of new schools. 
(Ord. No. 13-2017, § 11, 4-25-2017) 
Section 4.14.020. - Applicability. 
    Except as provided below, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to all applications for subdivision approval pursuant to Chapter 4.12; planned unit development approval pursuant to Chapter 4.11; development permit approval pursuant to Chapter 4.06; and special use permit approval pursuant to Section 4.05.010. In cases where multiple land use applications are required, compliance with APF (Chapter 4.14) shall be required to be demonstrated with the land use application last in sequence (time). No applications for such approval shall be granted unless a positive determination of adequacy or positive determination of adequacy subject to conditions has been made by the Town Board, in its discretion, in accordance with this chapter. This chapter shall not apply to any special use, development, project, structure or activity that does not result in the creation of new residential, commercial, or industrial structure or change of use that materially impacts existing public facilities. For purposes of this chapter, the following shall be deemed not to materially impact existing public facilities: 
1.  Subdivisions, planned unit developments, development permits, or special use permits for ten or fewer single-family or ten or fewer multifamily units located on one or more contiguous parcels of land held under the same or substantially the same ownership; and 
2.  Nonresidential developments containing 12 or less equivalent residential units (EQRs), as defined in Chapter 12.26, on one or more contiguous parcels of land held under the same or substantially the same ownership. 
Sequential land use applications on contiguous property for the purpose of the avoidance of these regulations are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 13-2017, § 12, 4-25-2017) 
Section 4.14.030. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adopted level of service means the level of service (LOS) standards as adopted by the Town. 
    Applicant means the property owner, or duly designated representative of the property owner who submits an application for development approval. 
    Application for development approval means an application for approval of a subdivision preliminary or final plan, approval of a planned unit development, approval of a development permit, or approval of a special use permit. 
    Capacity means the maximum demand that can be accommodated by a public facility without exceeding the adopted level of service standards for such facility. 
    Capital improvements program means a program adopted by the Town for providing public facilities, including the Town's street improvements plan. 
    Determination of adequacy means a determination that each public facility will or will not be available concurrent with the impacts of the proposed development of special use at the adopted levels of service standards or will be available subject to certain conditions. A determination of adequacy shall be made by the Board of Trustees, Planning Commission or administrative personnel that is vested with authority pursuant to this Title to review and render a final approval of an application for development approval. 
    Level of service means an indicator of the extent or degree of service provided by, or proposed to be provided by, a public facility based upon and related to the operational characteristics of the public facility or the capacity per unit of demand for each public facility. 
    Planned capital improvements means a capital improvement or an extension or expansion of a capital improvement which does not presently exist, but which is included within a capital improvements program. 
    Public facilities means capital improvements provided by the Town or another governmental entity, including, but not limited to, facilities for providing water, wastewater, fire protection, emergency services, public schools, parks, and transportation facilities which are required by this chapter to be adequate and available as a condition of development or special use approval. In the case of schools, public facilities may also include land owned by the county school district or land to be dedicated that is specifically intended for the construction of schools. 
Section 4.14.040. - Public facilities information report. 
A.  All applications to which this chapter is applicable pursuant to Section 4.14.020 shall be accompanied by a public facilities information report. Such report shall include sufficient information to allow the Town to coordinate with applicable service providers to determine the impact of the proposed subdivision, development or special use on public facilities pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter. The information required shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
1.  The total number and type of structures or dwelling units, and the gross density of the proposed subdivision, development or special use; 
2.  The location of the proposed subdivision, development or special use; 
3.  An assessment of the anticipated impacts on the Town street system from the proposed subdivision, development, or special use and, if applicable, a statement of any steps proposed to address potential impacts; 
4.  If an Applicant seeks an exemption from the requirements of this chapter based upon a claim that the applicant has a vested right to undertake and complete the subdivision, development or special use without an evaluation of the impact on public facilities, information sufficient to permit the Town to determine the validity of the applicant's claim of exemption; and 
5.  All information required by Sections 4.14.110 through 4.14.140; and 
6.  Any other appropriate information as may be deemed necessary by the Town Planner in evaluation the adequacy of public facilities consistent with the provisions of the chapter. 
B.  If the public facilities information report is incomplete or the submission requirements have not been satisfied, the Town Planner shall so notify the applicant of any deficiencies in writing. If the public facilities information report is complete and the submission requirements have been satisfied, the Town Planner shall evaluate the proposed subdivision, development or special use for compliance with the applicable adopted level of service standards and shall submit a recommendation regarding the adequacy of the public facilities. 
(Ord. No. 13-2017, §§ 13, 14, 4-25-2017) 
Section 4.14.050. - Recommendation by Town Planner. 
A.  Upon receipt of a completed public facilities information report, the Town Planner shall evaluate the proposed subdivision, development, or special use, using the criteria set forth in this chapter and any other applicable or relevant and appropriate criteria including: 
1.  The number and type of structures or units proposed by the applicant; 
2.  The proposed timing and phasing of the subdivision, development, or special use, if applicable; 
3.  The specific public facilities impacted by the proposed subdivision, development or special use; 
4.  The extent of the impact of the proposed subdivision, development, or special use on all public facilities; 
5.  The capacity of existing public facilities, and, if applicable, in the case of schools the availability of land to construct new schools, to serve the proposed subdivision, development or special use which will be impacted by the proposed subdivision, development, or special use based on the adopted levels of service; 
6.  The demand on the existing capacity of public facilities from all existing and approved subdivisions, developments, and uses; 
7.  The availability of existing capacity of the public facility to accommodate the proposed subdivision, development, or special use, and, if applicable, in the case of schools the availability of land to construct new schools; 
8.  If existing capacity is not available, any capacity that is planned to be added and the year in which such planned capacity is projected to be available to serve the proposed subdivision, development, or special use; 
9.  If the applicant seeks an exemption from the requirements of this chapter based upon a claim that the applicant has obtained and possesses a vested right to undertake and complete the subdivision or development, an opinion from the Town Attorney regarding the validity of the claim; 
10.  In the case of schools, if adequate land is currently not available for the construction of new schools necessary to serve the proposed development, the adequacy of any additional land that is proposed to be dedicated as an element of the proposed subdivision, development, or special use specifically for the construction of a new school. 
B.  If the Town Planner concludes that each public facility will be available concurrent with the impacts of the proposed subdivision, development or special use at the applicable adopted levels of service, or in the case of schools that either facilities are available concurrent with the impacts of the proposed subdivision, development or special use, or that land sufficient to allow for the construction of new schools is available or will be made available, the Town Planner shall make a positive recommendation of adequacy. 
C.  If the Town Planner concludes that any public facility may not be available concurrent with the impacts of the proposed development, subdivision or special use at the adopted levels of service based upon existing public facilities, the Town Planner may make a negative recommendation of adequacy or, in the alternative, may make a positive recommendation with appropriate conditions consistent with the following: 
1.  Deferral of further subdivision final plat or development permit or special use permit approval until all public facilities are available and adequate if existing public facilities are not adequate to meet the adopted levels of service for the development or special use proposal; 
2.  Reduction of the density or intensity of the proposed subdivision, development, or special use, including conditions regarding the phasing of the subdivision, development, or use to a level consistent with the available capacity of the public facility; or 
3.  Provision by the applicant of the public facilities, or in the case of schools land sufficient to allow for the construction of new schools, necessary to provide capacity to accommodate the proposed subdivision, development or special use at the adopted level of service at the time that the impact of the proposed subdivision, development, or special use will occur; and 
4.  Any other reasonable conditions that may, in the case of schools, include, but not be limited to, the dedication of land that is intended specifically for the construction of new schools, to ensure that all public facilities will be adequate and available concurrent with the impacts of the proposed subdivision, development, or special use. 
D.  The Town Planner's recommendation of adequacy shall be made part of any staff report accompanying any administrative, Planning Commission, or Town Board review of applications for development approval. 
(Ord. No. 13-2017, §§ 15, 16, 4-25-2017) 
Section 4.14.060. - Determination of adequacy. 
A.  Following receipt of the recommendation of adequacy and as a part of the Town's procedures for review and final approval of any application for development approval, and subject to compliance with all other regulations applicable to the application and request for approval, the Town Board, Planning Commission, or administrative staff member vested with authority to approve any subdivision, development or special use may: 
1.  Make a positive determination of adequacy; 
2.  Make a negative determination of adequacy; or 
3.  Make a positive determination of adequacy with appropriate conditions consistent with the conditions contained in Section 4.14.050(C). 
B.  If the determination of adequacy is different from the Town Planner's recommendation of adequacy, the decision-making body shall make specific findings explaining the basis for concluding that the Town Planner's recommendation of adequacy should not be adopted. 
(Ord. No. 13-2017, § 17, 4-25-2017) 
Section 4.14.070. - Effect and expiration of determination of adequacy. 
A.  A positive determination of adequacy shall be deemed to indicate that public facilities are or will be available and adequate to serve the proposed subdivision, development or special use until such time that the determination of adequacy expires. No application for subdivision final plat approval, planned unit development plan approval, development permit approval, or special use permit approval shall be granted unless a positive determination of adequacy or a positive determination of adequacy subject to conditions has been made by the Town. 
B.  A positive determination of adequacy issued pursuant to the chapter shall be deemed to expire at the earlier of: 
1.  The expiration, waiver, lapse, or revocation of the subdivision, development or special use approval for which the positive determination of adequacy was made; 
2.  Failure by the applicant to timely comply with the conditions attached to a positive determination of adequacy; or 
3.  Three years following the date of issuance of a positive determination of adequacy, if development has not commenced. 
(Ord. No. 13-2017, § 18, 4-25-2017) 
Section 4.14.080. - Criteria for determining availability and adequacy of public facilities. 
A.  Level of service standards. Compliance with level of service standards shall be measured in accordance with the standards set forth in this chapter, as they may be amended from time to time. 
B.  Range of impacts. Any proposed subdivision development or special use which could result in a range of potential impacts shall be reviewed as if the greater impact would result. The review and evaluation of public facilities required by this chapter shall compare the capacity of public facilities to the maximum projected demand which may result from the proposed subdivision, development or special use. 
C.  Existing demand and capacity. Where the adequacy and availability of a public facility is based upon an evaluation of available capacity, the existing demand upon the public facility shall be determined by considering: 
1.  The existing demand placed upon the pubic facility from all users, whether within or outside the Town; 
2.  The projected demand for the public facility created by the anticipated completion of approved but uncompleted development, considering anticipated phasing of construction; 
3.  The projected demand upon the public facility created by the anticipated completion of any proposed subdivision, developments or special uses for which a public facilities impact statement has been approved by the Town; 
4.  The extent to which existing demand may be reduced or mitigated by the adoption of conservation or other measures designed to reduce demand; and 
5.  Anticipated future improvements to public facilities. 
D.  Capital improvements. No improvement proposed or undertaken by an applicant to increase existing capacity of a public facility or an improvement proposed to be made to avoid a deterioration in the adopted levels of service shall be accepted by the Town unless the improvement is included within the Town's capital improvement program or unless the improvement is determined by the Board of Trustees to directly and substantially advance one or more established goals or policies of the Town and the improvement is part of an improvements agreement between the Town and the applicant. An applicant's commitment to construct or expand a public facility prior to the issuance of a building permit may be included as a condition for the determination of adequacy and any such commitment shall include, at a minimum, the following: 
1.  A finding that the planned capital improvement is included within the capital improvement program or directly and substantially advances one or more established goals and policies of the Town; 
2.  An estimate of the total funding needed to construct the planned capital improvement and a description of all the costs associated therewith; 
3.  A schedule for commencement and completion of construction of the planned capital improvement with specific target dates for multi-phase or large-scale capital improvement projects; 
4.  At the option of the Town and pursuant to an agreement between the Town and the applicant, and only if the planned capital improvement will provide capacity exceeding the demand generated by the proposed subdivision, development or special use, a reimbursement to the applicant for the pro rata cost of providing the excess capacity. 
E.  Availability of land or the dedication of land for schools. School facilities may be deemed adequate if the county school district owns land sufficient to construct a new school that can provide capacity to serve the proposed subdivision, development or special use. If land is not currently available, school facilities may be deemed adequate if the applicant dedicates land as an element of the subdivision, development or special use sufficient in size to accommodate construction of a new school. In such cases, the dedication of land shall be provided concurrent with the initial final plat or the initial building permit (whichever comes first) for the subdivision, development or special use. 
(Ord. No. 13-2017, §§ 19-22, 4-25-2017) 
Section 4.14.090. - Administration. 
A.  Rules and regulations. The Town Board may adopt, by ordinance or resolution, any necessary rules, regulations, administrative guidelines, and processes to efficiently and fairly administer and implement this chapter. 
B.  Administrative fees. The Town Board may establish, by ordinance or resolution, fees and a fee schedule for each of the administrative procedures, determinations, and approvals required by this chapter. 
Section 4.14.100. - Vested rights. 
A.  Nothing in this chapter shall limit or modify the rights of an applicant to complete any subdivision or development for which the applicant has obtained and possesses a vested right to undertake and complete the subdivision or development pursuant to C.R.S. Title 4, Art. 68, as amended, and as implemented by Chapter 4.17, or pursuant to State law. 
B.  A determination of adequacy shall not affect the otherwise applicable provisions of this Title, all of which shall be operative and remain in full force and effect without limitation. 
Section 4.14.110. - Public schools. 
A.  Public school facilities shall be deemed to be adequate and available for a proposed subdivision, development or special use in one of three ways: 
1.  If existing county school district's schools facilities intended to serve residents of the subdivision, development or special use meet or exceed the applicable adopted level of service standards set forth Subsection (C) of this section, or: 
a.  Provision of adequate public school facilities are a condition of the subdivision, development or special use approval and are guaranteed to be provided at or before the approval of a final plat, issuance of special use permit, or issuance of the first building permit within the proposed subdivision, development, or particular phase thereof; or 
b.  Necessary public school facilities are under construction and will be available at the time the impacts of the proposed subdivision, development, or particular phase thereof, or special use will occur; 
2.  If the county school district owns land sufficient in size and location to allow for the construction of new school facilities that can adequately serve residents of the proposed subdivision, development or special use, and that the district's long-range plans are to construct a school on such land and that this school is intended to serve the area subject to the proposed subdivision, development or special use; or 
3.  If land sufficient in size and location to allow for the construction of new school facilities that can reasonably serve the residents of the proposed subdivision, development or special use will be dedicated by the applicant of the subdivision, development or special use to the county school district, and that the district's long-range plans are to construct a school on such land. 
B.  All applications to which this chapter is applicable pursuant to Section 4.14.020 that contain residential units shall be accompanied by a summary of the total number of dwelling units and the type and the size of dwelling unit. This information will be used by the county school district to estimate the number of school-aged children expected to be generated by the proposed development. 
C.  The following level of service standards (LOS) shall apply: 
1.  The maximum number of students per classroom. The following are guidelines used by the county school district for maximum class size: 
Kindergarten, First Grade 25 students per class Second and Third Grade 30 students per class Grades Four through Six 30 students per class Grades Seven through 12 A school average of 25 students per class(The nature of a departmentalized school is that some classes will be larger than others)  
The guidelines outlined above are established by the county school district when economically feasible. Maximum and average classroom sizes are dependent upon a number of factors and are subject to change over time. 
2.  Projected enrollments (as estimated based on Section 4.14.080(C)) of schools that will serve the residents of the proposed subdivision, development or special use do not exceed the capacity of said schools. School capacity shall be based on the average of the "stressed" and "functional" capacities as outlined in Eagle County School District Building Capacity Study, dated October 19, 2012, or as may be amended by the district. 
D.  The Town and the county school district agree to cooperate and collaborate on monitoring the rate of new residential development, existing school capacity and plans for future school capacity. The purpose of this effort is to provide an accurate data base for making future decisions on the adequacy of school facilities as contemplated by this chapter. 
1.  On an annual or as-needed basis, the county school district will provide to the Town a report summarizing the capacity of all existing schools that serve residents of the Town. 
2.  On an annual or as-needed basis, the Town will provide to the district a report summarizing the location and type of all existing residential development within the Town boundary. 
3.  The Town will notify the district of any new proposals for residential development that may not otherwise be addressed by this chapter. 
4.  On an annual or as-needed basis, the county school district will provide the Town with a report summarizing any plans for new school development contemplated for land the district owns or land that may be dedicated to the district. This report will indicate the anticipated type and size of school to be developed, however, any future plans outlined in this report shall not be binding on the district. 
(Amended 11-21-1997; Amended 9-17-1998; Amended 1-26-1999; Amended 3-25-2014; Ord. No. 13-2017, §§ 23, 24, 4-25-2017) 
Section 4.14.120. - Fire protection services. 
A.  Public safety facilities and equipment for fire protection and first response emergency medical services shall be deemed to be adequate and available for a proposed subdivision, development or special use if the facilities and equipment available to provide such services to the subdivision, development or special use will meet or exceed the applicable adopted level of service (LOS) standards set forth in Subsection (C) of this section, and: 
1.  Adequate public safety facilities and equipment for fire protection and first response emergency medical services are currently in place or will be in place prior to issuance of a special use permit or the first building permit within a subdivision, development or a particular phase thereof; 
2.  Provision of adequate public safety facilities and equipment for fire protection and first response emergency medical services are a condition of the subdivision, development or special use approval and are guaranteed to be provided at or before the approval of a final plat, issuance of special use permit, or issuance of the first building permit within the proposed subdivision, development, or particular phase thereof; 
3.  Necessary public safety facilities and equipment for fire protection and first response emergency medical services are a condition of the subdivision, development or special use approval and are guaranteed to be provided at or before the approval of a final plat, issuance of special use permit, or issuance of the first building permit within the proposed subdivision, development, or particular phase thereof; 
4.  Provision for adequate public safety facilities and equipment for fire protection and first response emergency medical services are guaranteed by an executed and enforceable development agreement or subdivision improvements agreement which ensures that such facilities will be in place at the time that the impacts of the proposed subdivision, development, or any particular phase thereof, or special use will occur; or 
5.  The Town Board determines that fire protection and first response emergency medical services risks are sufficiently mitigated through the provision of approved, built-in, automatic fire protection systems in all improvements (occupancies); the use of approved fire resistive construction in all improvements (occupancies); the use and maintenance of approved fire resistive landscaping; and/or the private provision of approved first response emergency medical services. In such event, mitigation of fire protection and first response emergency medical service risks will meet the equivalent minimum level of service standards as set forth below and as amended from time to time. 
B.  All applications to which this chapter is applicable pursuant to Section 4.14.020 shall be accompanied by a public safety impact plan. The Town Planner, in consultation with the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District, shall approve the methodology used to develop the fire protection and first response emergency medical services aspects of such public safety impact plan. 
C.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, the following level of service (LOS) standards shall apply: 
1.  The provisions of the current fire code, building code and any other duly adopted code, statute, ordinance, or standard related to fire protection are being met; or approved, enforceable, equivalent protection or mitigation efforts are undertaken. 
2.  Adequate response times will be maintained if the new development is approved. Response times will adhere to the following except as indicated below: 
a.  Provide first response basic life support (BLS) and automatic external defibrillation (AED) in under six minutes for 90 percent of all calls requiring emergency medical assistance within the Town. 
b.  Provide rescue services within eight minutes for 90 percent calls within the Town. 
c.  The response time requirement for fire response only may be waived at the option of the Town Board in consultation with the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District if approved, built-in, automatic fire protection systems are installed and maintained in all improvements (occupancies). 
3.  Capability of providing adequate fire flows. These flows represent performance standards for the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District using only its firefighting apparatus and equipment. They do not replace the flow requirements set forth in the fire code, as adopted by the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District. The fire flow requirements set forth in such fire code anticipate the need for additional resources (mutual aid) and are based upon fire loading for particular occupancies. 
a.  250 GPM initial attack flow within two minutes of arrival for 90 percent of all fires. 
b.  250 GPM sustained flow within five minutes of arrival for 90 percent of all fires. 
c.  500 GPM sustained flow within eight minutes of arrival for 80 percent of all structure fires. 
d.  1,000 GPM sustained flow within five minutes of arrival for all areas within 1,000 feet of a fire hydrant. 
e.  3,500 GPM sustained flow within 15 minutes of arrival for hydranted areas. 
4.  Consistent and adequate emergency dispatching services is maintained. 
5.  Approval of the proposed subdivision, development or special use will not increase (worsen) the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District's insurance services organization (I.S.O.) fire protection class rating. 
6.  These LOS standards may be amended from time to time as changes in the Town's fire protection and emergency medical services delivery systems and technology change, and as community expectations change. 
D.  All or some of the LOS standards contained in Subsection (C) of this section may be waived at the sole discretion of the Board of Trustees, following consultation with the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District, upon satisfaction of the following conditions: 
1.  Applicant's mitigation of fire protection risks will meet or exceed equivalent protection as set forth in the provisions of the current fire code adopted by the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District, the Town's building code, and any other duly adopted code, statute, ordinance or standard related to fire protection; and the applicant's mitigation of fire protection risks meet or exceed the equivalent minimum LOS standards as set forth in Subsection (C) of this section; and 
2.  Applicant's proposed plan to mitigate fire protection and first response emergency medical service risk will be done in such a manner so as not to increase (worsen) the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District's insurance service organization (I.S.O.) fire protection class rating; and 
3.  Applicant's proposed mitigation plan is guaranteed by an executed and enforceable agreement, with performance guarantees, if necessary, between applicant and the Town. 
(Amended 9-29-1999; Ord. No. 13-2017, § 25, 4-25-2017) 
Section 4.14.130. - Emergency medical services. 
A.  Public safety facilities and equipment for emergency medical response shall be deemed to be adequate and available for a proposed subdivision, development or special use if the facilities and equipment available to provide such series to the subdivision, development or special use will meet or exceed the applicable adopted level of service (LOS) standards set forth below, and: 
1.  Adequate public safety facilities and equipment for emergency medical services are currently in place or will be in place prior to issuance of a special use permit or the first building permit within a subdivision, development or a particular phase thereof; 
2.  Provision of adequate public safety facilities and equipment for emergency medical services are a condition of the subdivision, development or special use approval and are guaranteed to be provided at or before the approval of a final plat, issuance of special use permit, or issuance of the first building permit within the proposed subdivision, development, or particular phase thereof; 
3.  Necessary public safety facilities and equipment for emergency medical services are under construction or contract to purchase and will be available at the time the impacts of the proposed subdivision, development, or particular phase thereof, or special use will occur; 
4.  Provision for adequate public safety facilities and equipment for emergency medical services are guaranteed by an executed and enforceable development agreement or subdivision improvements agreement which ensures that such facilities will be in place at the time that the impacts of the proposed subdivision, development, or any particular phase thereof, or special use will occur; or 
5.  Emergency medical series risks are mitigated through the provision of approved private provision of approved emergency medical services. In such an event, mitigation of emergency medical service risks shall meet the equivalent minimum level of service standards as set forth in Subsection (C) of this section and as amended from time to time. 
B.  All applications to which this chapter is applicable pursuant to Section 4.14.020 shall be accompanied by a public safety impact plan. The Town Planner, in consultation with the Western Eagle County Ambulance District, shall approve the methodology used to develop the emergency medical services aspects of such public safety impact plan. 
C.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, the following level of service (LOS) standards shall apply: 
1.  Adequate response times will be maintained if the new development is approved. Response times will adhere to the following except as indicated below: 
a.  Provide first response basic life support (BLS) and automatic external defibrillation (AED) in under six minutes for 90 percent of all calls requiring emergency medical assistance within the Town. 
b.  Provide advanced life support within eight minutes for 90 percent of all requiring emergency medical assistance within the Town. 
2.  Consistent and adequate emergency dispatching services is maintained. 
3.  These LOS standards may be amended from time to time as changes in the Town's emergency medical services delivery systems and technology change, and as community expectations change. 
D.  All or some of the LOS standards contained in Subsection (C) of this section may be waived at the sole discretion of the Board of Trustees, following consultation with the Western Eagle County Ambulance District, upon satisfaction of the following conditions: 
1.  Applicant agrees to mitigate emergency medical service risks through the provision of approved private emergency medical services; and 
2.  Applicant's proposed mitigation plan shall meet the equivalent minimum LOS standards set forth above; and 
3.  Applicant's mitigation plan is guaranteed by an executed and enforceable agreement, including performance guarantees, if necessary, between the Town and the applicant. 
(Amended 9-29-1999; Ord. No. 13-2017, § 26, 4-25-2017) 
Section 4.14.140. - Street facilities. 
A.  Street facilities shall be deemed to be adequate and available for a proposed subdivision, development or special use if the subdivision, development or special use meets or exceeds the applicable adopted level of service standards set forth below, and: 
1.  All necessary street facilities are currently in place or will be in place prior to issuance of a special use permit or the issuance of the first building permit for the development; 
2.  Provision of required street facilities are a condition of the subdivision, development or special use approval and are guaranteed to be provided at or before the approval of a final plat, or the issuance of the special use permit, or issuance of the first building permit for the proposed subdivision or development; 
3.  Required street facilities are under construction and will be available at the time that the impacts of the proposed subdivision, development or special use will occur; 
4.  Provision for street facilities needed to achieve the adopted level of service standards are guaranteed by an executed and enforceable development agreement or subdivision improvements agreement which ensures that such facilities will be in place at the time that the impacts of the proposed subdivision, development or special use will occur; or 
5.  Street facilities needed to achieve the adopted level of service standards are included in the capital improvements program; and: 
a.  The capital improvements program contains a financially feasible funding system from available revenue sources which are adequate to fund the streets required to serve the proposed subdivision, development, or special use; and 
b.  The street facilities are likely to be constructed and available at the time that the impacts of the proposed subdivision, development or special use will occur. 
B.  The Town transportation study guidelines provides information on submittal requirements, level of service standards, and determination of adequacy of facilities. Major elements are summarized in this subsection; however, when preparing a submittal, the Town recommends consulting the full document for guidance. 
1.  Traffic impact study submittal requirements. All applications to which this chapter is applicable pursuant to Section 4.14.120 shall be accompanied by a traffic impact study (TIS) performed by a registered professional engineer in the State. The following "levels of effort" shall be required for a TIS: 
a.  Where the daily trip end generation is less than 500 (50 peak hour trip ends) and no access changes are proposed for the development or use, the TIS may be waived at the Town's discretion upon written request from the applicant. Every request for a waiver of the TIS requirement shall contain information sufficient to permit the Town Planner to determine whether the proposed development or special use qualifies for a waiver. 
b.  Where the proposed development or special use will present the following conditions, an intermediate level TIS will be required: 
i  The daily trip end generation is between 500 and 1,000; and 
ii  There are less than 100 peak hour trip ends (when the peak hour occurs on the adjacent facility); and 
iii  The LOS of the adjacent facility, when the development or special use is completed, equals or exceed the LOS standard established for that facility. 
c.  A full TIS shall be prepared by the applicant for all other proposed developments or special uses and, in particular, for developments or special uses with greater than 1,000 daily trip ends or more than 100 peak hour trip ends (during this peak hour on the adjacent facility). 
d.  The Town may require a TIS due to special concerns involving impact to the street system or to track the phased implementation of large developments. All TISs shall be performed at the cost and expense of the applicant and submitted in writing to the Town with formal submittal of the application for the approval requested. 
2.  Level of service standards (LOS). The level of service (LOS) standards for arterial and collector streets in Eagle is level of service C or higher. The LOS standards for local streets is level of service B or higher. The level of service for an intersection shall be the overall level of service for all the movements. The normal analysis periods are the peak hours of usage of the streets. 
(Amended 12-21-1997; Amended 9-29-1999; Ord. No. 13-2017, §§ 27, 28, 4-25-2017) 
CHAPTER 4.15. - ANNEXATION 

Section 4.15.010. - Annexation procedures. 
    The following procedures shall govern the annexation of all lands to the Town: 
A.  Annexation shall be accomplished in accordance with C.R.S. Title 31, Art. 12, as amended. 
B.  All petitions for annexation and all petitions for an annexation election filed pursuant to C.R.S. § 31-12-107 shall be accompanied by a request for zoning of the area proposed for annexation on an application form provided by the Town in accordance with Section 4.05.030. All petitions for annexation shall also be accompanied by a statement setting forth the proposed water rights to be dedicated to the Town at the time of annexation on a form supplied by the Town in accordance with Chapter 12.06. 
C.  Following approval of a resolution of intent in accordance with C.R.S. § 31-12-106 or after a petitions for annexation or a petition for annexation election has been found to be valid in accordance with the provisions of C.R.S. § 31-12-107, as amended, the procedures set forth in Section 4.05.030 shall be instituted for the purpose of determining the zoning of the land proposed for annexation; provided, however, the proposed zoning ordinance shall not be passed on final reading prior to the date when the annexation ordinance is passed on final reading. Any area annexed to the Town shall be brought under the Town's zoning ordinance and map within 90 days after the effective date of the annexation ordinance, irrespective of any legal review which may be instituted. During such 90-day period or portion thereof, the Town shall not issue any building or occupancy permit for any portion of the newly annexed area. 
D.  In the event the area proposed to be annexed is also proposed for development or subdivision, the Town or the developer may, at its option, institute the procedures set forth for development review in Chapter 4.06 or for subdivision review set forth in Chapter 4.12 at any time after a resolution of intent has been passed in accordance with C.R.S. § 31-12-106 or after a petition for annexation or a petition for annexation election has been found to be valid in accordance with the provisions of C.R.S. § 31-12-107. The ordinance accepting the proposed subdivision shall not be passed or a development permit issued prior to the date when the annexation ordinance is passed on final reading. 
E.  The Town may, at its option, at any time after a petition for annexation has been found to be valid in accordance with the provisions of C.R.S. § 31-12-107, require the petitioner to submit a concept plan for the area proposed to be annexed in accordance with Section 4.12.020(A). 
F.  All annexation plats filed with the Town shall, in addition to the requirements set forth in C.R.S. Title 31, Art. 12, as amended, also include all of the information set forth in C.R.S. § 38-51-106. Said annexation plats shall also contain all of the applicable certifications set forth in the appendices to this Title. 
G.  The external boundaries of all annexations shall, prior to the recording of the annexation plat, be monumented on the ground in accordance with C.R.S. § 38-51-101, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.14.010, 3-5-1986) 
CHAPTER 4.16. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION REGULATIONS 

Section 4.16.010. - Authorization and findings of fact. 
A.  Statutory authorization. The legislature of the State has, in C.R.S. Title 29, Art. 20, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the Board of Trustees of the Town does hereby adopt the floodplain management regulations provided in this chapter. 
b.  Findings of fact. 
1.  The flood hazard areas of the Town are subject to periodic inundation, which can result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the health, safety and general welfare of the public. 
2.  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.15.010, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.16.020. - Title and purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to promote public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
A.  Protect human life and health; 
B.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
C.  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
D.  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
E.  Minimize damage to critical facilities, infrastructure and other public facilities such as water, sewer and gas mains; electric and communications stations; and streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
F.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
G.  Ensure that the Town has information available to determine if a property is located in a flood hazard area. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.15.020, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.16.030. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods: 
A.  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
B.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
C.  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
D.  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; 
E.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.15.030, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.16.040. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined in this section, words, terms or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    100-year flood means a flood having a recurrence interval that has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded during any given year (one-percent-chance-annual-flood). "One-hundred-year flood" and "one percent chance flood" are synonymous with the term "100-year flood." The term does not imply that the flood will necessarily happen once every 100 years. 
    100-year floodplain means the area of land susceptible to being inundated as a result of the occurrence of a 100-year flood. 
    500-year flood means a flood having a recurrence interval that has a 0.2 percent chance of being equaled or exceeded during any given year (0.2-percent-chance-annual-flood). The term does not imply that the flood will necessarily happen once every 500 years. 
    500-year floodplain means the area of land susceptible to being inundated as a result of the occurrence of a 500-year flood. 
    Addition means any activity that expands the enclosed footprint or increases the square footage of an existing structure. 
    Alluvial fan flooding means a fan-shaped sediment deposit formed by a stream that flows from a steep mountain valley or gorge onto a plain or the junction of a tributary stream with the main stream. Alluvial fans contain active stream channels and boulder bars, and recently abandoned channels. Alluvial fans are predominantly formed by alluvial deposits and are modified by infrequent sheet flood, channel avulsions and other stream processes. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated zone AO or AH on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on a FEMA flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
    Basement means any area of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Channel means the physical confine of stream or waterway consisting of a bed and stream banks, existing in a variety of geometries. 
    Channelization means the artificial creation, enlargement or realignment of a stream channel. 
    Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) means the codification of the general and permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the executive departments and agencies of the Federal government. It is divided into 50 titles that represent broad areas subject to federal regulation. 
    Community means any political subdivision in the State that has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations through zoning, including, but not limited to, cities, Towns, unincorporated areas in the counties, Indian tribes and drainage and flood control districts. "Community" includes the Town. 
    Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) means FEMA's comment on a proposed project, which does not revise an effective floodplain map, that would, upon construction, affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodplain. 
    Critical facility means a structure or related infrastructure, but not the land on which it is situated, as specified in Section 4.16.070(H), that if flooded may result in significant hazards to public health and safety or interrupt essential services and operations for the community at any time before, during and after a flood. See Section 4.16.070(H). 
    Development means any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    DFIRM Database (usually spreadsheets containing data and analyses that accompany DFIRMs). The FEMA Mapping Specifications and Guidelines outline requirements for the development and maintenance of DFIRM databases. 
    Digital flood insurance rate map (DFIRM); FEMA digital floodplain map. These digital maps serve as regulatory floodplain maps for insurance and floodplain management purposes. 
    Elevated building: 
A.  "Elevated building" means a non-basement building: 
1.  Built, in the case of a building in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water; and 
2.  Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. 
B.  In the case of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Federal Register means the official daily publication for rules, proposed rules, and notices of federal agencies and organizations, as well as executive orders and other presidential documents. 
    FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency of the United States, the agency responsible for administering the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
A.  The overflow of water from channels and reservoir spillways; 
B.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; or 
C.  Mudslides or mudflows that occur from excess surface water that is combined with mud or other debris that is sufficiently fluid so as to flow over the surface of normally dry land areas (such as earth carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current). 
    Flood control structure means a physical structure designed and built expressly or partially for the purpose of reducing, redirecting, or guiding flood flows along a particular waterway. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS) means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains the flood insurance rate map as well as flood profiles for studied flooding sources that can be used to determine base flood elevations for some areas. 
    Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated as the result of a flood, including the area of land over which floodwater would flow from the spillway of a reservoir. 
    Floodplain administrator means the community official designated by title to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain development permit means a permit required before construction or development begins within any special flood hazard area (SFHA). If FEMA has not defined the SFHA within a community, the community shall require permits for all proposed construction or other development in the community, including the placement of manufactured homes, so that it may determine whether such construction or other development is proposed within floodprone areas. Permits are required to ensure that proposed development projects meet the requirements of the NFIP and this chapter. 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such State or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and/or non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway (regulatory floodway) means the channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. The statewide standard for the designated height to be used for all newly studied reaches shall be one-half foot (six inches). Letters of map revision to existing floodway delineations may continue to use the floodway criteria in place at the time of the existing floodway delineation. 
    Freeboard means the vertical distance in feet above a predicted water surface elevation intended to provide a margin of safety to compensate for unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood such as debris blockage of bridge openings and the increased runoff due to urbanization of the watershed. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
A.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
B.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
C.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
D.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
1.  By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
2.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Letter of map revision (LOMR) means FEMA's official revision of an effective flood insurance rate map (FIRM), or flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM), or both. LOMRs are generally based on the implementation of physical measures that affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the effective base flood elevations (BFEs), or the special flood hazard area (SFHA). 
    Letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) means FEMA's modification of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) based on the placement of fill outside the existing regulatory floodway. 
    Levee means a manmade embankment, usually earthen, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. For a levee structure to be reflected on the FEMA FIRMs as providing flood protection, the levee structure must meet the requirements set forth in 44 CFR 65.10. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). Any floor used for living purposes which includes working, storage, sleeping, cooking and eating, or recreation or any combination thereof. This includes any floor that could be converted to such a use as a basement or crawl space. The lowest floor is a determinate for the flood insurance premium for a building, home or business. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term does not include a recreational vehicle. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Material safety data sheet (MSDS) means a form with data regarding the properties of a particular substance. An important component of product stewardship and workplace safety, it is intended to provide workers and emergency personnel with procedures for handling or working with that substance in a safe manner, and includes information such as physical data (melting point, boiling point, flash point, etc.), toxicity, health effects, first aid, reactivity, storage, disposal, protective equipment, and spill-handling procedures. 
    Mean sea level, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map, are referenced. 
    National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) means FEMA's program of flood insurance coverage and floodplain management administered in conjunction with the Robert T. Stafford Relief and Emergency Assistance Act. The NFIP has applicable federal regulations promulgated in 44 CFR. The U.S. Congress established the NFIP in 1968 with the passage of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    No-rise certification means a record of the results of an engineering analysis conducted to determine whether a project will increase flood heights in a floodway. A no-rise certification must be supported by technical data and signed by a registered State Professional Engineer. The supporting technical data should be based on the standard step-backwater computer model used to develop the 100-year floodway shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) or flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM). 
    Physical map revision (PMR) means FEMA's action whereby one or more map panels are physically revised and republished. A PMR is used to change flood risk zones, floodplain and/or floodway delineations, flood elevations, and/or planimetric features. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
A.  Built on a single chassis; 
B.  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
C.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
D.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Special flood hazard area means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year, i.e., the 100-year floodplain. 
    Start of construction means the date the building permit was issued, including substantial improvements, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, which is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure just prior to when the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before start of construction of the improvement. The value of the structure shall be determined by the local jurisdiction having land use authority in the area of interest. This includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
A.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary conditions; or 
B.  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Threshold planning quantity (TPQ) means a quantity designated for each chemical on the list of extremely hazardous substances that triggers notification by facilities to the State that such facilities are subject to emergency planning requirements. 
    Variance means a grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this chapter when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.) 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, § 4.15.040, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.16.050. - General provisions. 
A.  Lands to which this chapter applies. This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas and areas removed from the floodplain by the issuance of a FEMA letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) within the jurisdiction of Town. 
B.  Basis for establishing the special flood hazard area. The special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study for Town of Eagle," dated December 4, 2007, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and/or flood boundary and floodway maps (FIRM and/or FBFM) and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. These special flood hazard areas identified by the FIS and attendant mapping are the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies designated and approved by the Town. The floodplain administrator shall keep a copy of the flood insurance study (FIS), DFIRMs, FIRMs and/or FBFMs on file and available for public inspection. 
C.  Establishment of floodplain development permit. A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed within the special flood hazard area without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Nothing herein shall prevent the Board of Trustees from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. These regulations meet the minimum requirements as set forth by the State Water Conservation Board and the National Flood Insurance Program. 
E.  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
F.  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
1.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
2.  Liberally construed in favor of the Board of Trustees; and 
3.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes. 
G.  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard area or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Town or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
H.  Severability. This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, §§ 4.15.050-4.15.100, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.16.060. - Administration. 
A.  Designation of the floodplain administrator. The Town Engineer is hereby appointed as floodplain administrator to administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
B.  Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter, including the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures and any floodproofing certificate required by Subsection (C) of this section. 
2.  Review, approve, or deny all applications for floodplain development permits required by adoption of this chapter. 
3.  Review floodplain development permit applications to determine whether a proposed building site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
4.  Review permits for proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those Federal, State or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334), from which prior approval is required. 
5.  Inspect all development at appropriate times during the period of construction to ensure compliance with all provisions of this chapter, including proper elevation of the structure. 
6.  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the special flood hazard area (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
7.  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 4.16.050(B), the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a Federal, State, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of Section 4.16.070. 
8.  For waterways with base flood elevations for which a regulatory floodway has not been designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the Town's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one-half foot at any point within the Town. 
9.  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, and AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one-half foot, provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA (conditional letter of map revision), fulfills the requirements for such revisions as established under the provisions of Section 65.12 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations and receives FEMA approval. 
10.  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the State Coordinating Agency, which is the State Water Conservation Board, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to FEMA. 
11.  Ensure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
C.  Permit procedures. 
1.  Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to special flood hazard area. Additionally, the following information is required: 
a.  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
b.  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
c.  A certificate from a registered State Professional Engineer or Architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of Section 4.16.050(B)(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
e.  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with Section 15.10.060(B). 
2.  Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors: 
a.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
b.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
c.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
d.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
e.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
f.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
g.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
h.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
i.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
j.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area. 
D.  Variance procedures. 
1.  The appeal Board, as established by the Board of Trustees, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
2.  The appeal Board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
3.  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal Board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
4.  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
5.  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in Subsection (C) of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
6.  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this chapter, the appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this chapter as stated in Section 4.16.020. 
7.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
8.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
9.  Prerequisites for granting variances. 
a.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
b.  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
i.  Showing a good and sufficient cause; 
ii.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
iii.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
c.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
10.  Variances may be issued by the Town for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: 
a.  The criteria outlined in Subsection (D)(1) through (9) of this section are met; and 
b.  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
E.  Penalties for noncompliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a Class A municipal offense. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined or imprisoned as provided by the laws of Town. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Town from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, §§ 4.15.110-4.15.140, 3-5-1986) 
Section 4.16.070. - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
A.  General standards. In all special flood hazard areas the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
1.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
2.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
3.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
4.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
5.  All manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable State and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces; 
6.  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
7.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and 
8.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
B.  Specific standards. In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in Subsection (G) of this section, Section 4.16.050(B), or Section 4.16.060(B)(7), the following provisions are required: 
1.  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation. Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered State Professional Engineer, Architect, or Land Surveyor. Such certification shall be submitted to the floodplain administrator. 
2.  Nonresidential construction. 
a.  With the exception of critical facilities, outlined in Subsection (H) of this section, new construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that at one foot above the base flood elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
b.  A registered State Professional Engineer or Architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this Subsection (B). Such certification shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator, as provided in Section 4.16.060(C). 
3.  Enclosures. 
a.  New construction and substantial improvements with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. 
b.  Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered State Professional Engineer or Architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
i.  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
ii.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
iii.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
4.  Manufactured homes. 
a.  All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the Town's FIRM on sites: 
i.  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
ii.  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
iii.  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
iv.  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood; 
shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home, electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), are elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
b.  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the Town's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of Subsection (B)(4)(a) of this section shall be elevated so that either: 
a.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home, electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), are one foot above the base flood elevation; or 
b.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
5.  Recreational vehicles. 
a.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM shall either: 
i.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
ii.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
iii.  Meet the permit requirements of Section 4.16.060(C), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Subsection (B)(4) of this section. 
b.  A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
6.  Prior approved activities. Any activity for which a floodplain development permit was issued by the Town or a CLOMR was issued by FEMA prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may be completed according to the standards in place at the time of the permit or CLOMR issuance and will not be considered in violation of this ordinance if it meets such standards. 
C.  Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). Located within the special flood hazard area established in Section 4.16.050(B), are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
1.  Residential construction. All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures must have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least one foot above the depth number specified in feet on the Town's FIRM (at least three feet if no depth number is specified). Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered State Professional Engineer, Architect, or Land Surveyor. Such certification shall be submitted to the floodplain administrator. 
2.  Nonresidential construction. 
a.  With the exception of critical facilities, outlined in Subsection (H) of this section, all new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures must have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least one foot above the depth number specified in feet on the Town's FIRM (at least three feet if no depth number is specified) or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that the structure is watertight to at least one foot above the base flood level with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. A registered State Professional Engineer or Architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as provided in Section 4.16.060(C), are satisfied. 
b.  Within zone AH or AO, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes are required to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
D.  Floodways. Floodways are administrative limits and tools used to regulate existing and future floodplain development. The State has adopted floodway standards that are more stringent than the FEMA minimum standard (see definition of the term "floodway in Section 4.16.040). Located within special flood hazard areas established in Section 4.16.050(B), are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
1.  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed by a licensed State Professional Engineer and in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase (requires a no-rise certification) in flood levels within the Town during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
2.  If Subsection (D)(1) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 4.16.070. Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first applies for a CLOMR and floodway revision through FEMA. 
E.  Alteration of a watercourse. For all proposed developments that alter a watercourse within a special flood hazard area, the following standards apply: 
1.  Channelization and flow diversion projects shall appropriately consider issues of sediment transport, erosion, deposition, and channel migration and properly mitigate potential problems through the project as well as upstream and downstream of any improvement activity. A detailed analysis of sediment transport and overall channel stability should be considered, when appropriate, to assist in determining the most appropriate design. 
2.  Channelization and flow diversion projects shall evaluate the residual 100-year floodplain. 
3.  Any channelization or other stream alteration activity proposed by a project proponent must be evaluated for its impact on the regulatory floodplain and be in compliance with all applicable Federal, State and local floodplain rules, regulations and ordinances. 
4.  Any stream alteration activity shall be designed and sealed by a registered State Professional Engineer or Certified Professional Hydrologist. 
5.  All activities within the regulatory floodplain shall meet all applicable Federal, State and Town floodplain requirements and regulations. 
6.  Within the regulatory floodway, stream alteration activities shall not be constructed unless the project proponent demonstrates through a floodway analysis and report, sealed by a registered State Professional Engineer, that there is not more than a 0.00-foot rise in the proposed conditions compared to existing conditions floodway resulting from the project, otherwise known as a no-rise certification, unless the community first applies for a CLOMR and floodway revision in accordance with Subsection (D) of this section. 
7.  Maintenance shall be required for any altered or relocated portions of watercourses so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
F.  Properties removed from the floodplain by fill. A floodplain development permit shall not be issued for the construction of a new structure or addition to an existing structure on a property removed from the floodplain by the issuance of a FEMA letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F), unless such new structure or addition complies with the following: 
1.  Residential construction. The lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), must be elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation that existed prior to the placement of fill. 
2.  Nonresidential construction. The lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), must be elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation that existed prior to the placement of fill or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that the structure or addition is watertight to at least one foot above the base flood level that existed prior to the placement of fill with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
G.  Standards for subdivision applications. 
1.  All subdivision applications including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be reasonably safe from flooding. If a subdivision or other development application is in a floodprone area, the proposal shall minimize flood damage. 
2.  All applications for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of Section 4.16.050(C); Section 4.16.060(C); and the provisions of this section. 
3.  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision application and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to Section 4.16.050(B) or 4.16.060(D). 
4.  All subdivision applications including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
5.  All subdivision applications including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
H.  Standards for critical facilities. A critical facility is a structure or related infrastructure, but not the land on which it is situated, as specified in Rule 6 of the Rules and Regulations for Regulatory Floodplains in Colorado, that if flooded may result in significant hazards to public health and safety or interrupt essential services and operations for the community at any time before, during and after a flood. 
1.  Classification of critical facilities. It is the responsibility of the Town to identify and confirm that specific structures in their community meet the following criteria: 
a.  Critical facilities are classified under the following categories: 
i.  Essential services; 
ii.  Hazardous materials; 
iii.  At-risk populations; and 
iv.  Vital to restoring normal services. 
b.  Essential services facilities include public safety, emergency response, emergency medical, designated emergency shelters, communications, public utility plant facilities, and transportation lifelines. 
i.  These facilities consist of: 
1.  Public safety (police stations, fire and rescue stations, emergency vehicle and equipment storage, and, emergency operation centers); 
2.  Emergency medical (hospitals, ambulance service centers, urgent care centers having emergency treatment functions, and non-ambulatory surgical structures, but excluding clinics, doctors' offices, and non-urgent care medical structures that do not provide these functions); 
3.  Designated emergency shelters; 
4.  Communications (main hubs for telephone, broadcasting equipment for cable systems, satellite dish systems, cellular systems, television, radio, and other emergency warning systems, but excluding towers, poles, lines, cables, and conduits); 
5.  Public utility plant facilities for generation and distribution (hubs, treatment plants, substations and pumping stations for water, power and gas, but not including towers, poles, power lines, buried pipelines, transmission lines, distribution lines, and service lines); and 
6.  Air transportation lifelines (airports (municipal and larger), helicopter pads and structures serving emergency functions, and associated infrastructure (aviation control towers, air traffic control centers, and emergency equipment aircraft hangars)). 
ii.  Specific exemptions to this category include wastewater treatment plants (WWTP), non-potable water treatment and distribution systems, and hydroelectric power generating plants and related appurtenances. 
iii.  Public utility plant facilities may be exempted if it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Town that the facility is an element of a redundant system for which service will not be interrupted during a flood. At a minimum, it shall be demonstrated that redundant facilities are available (either owned by the same utility or available through an intergovernmental agreement or other contract) and connected, the alternative facilities are either located outside of the 100-year floodplain or are compliant with the provisions of this chapter, and an operations plan is in effect that states how redundant systems will provide service to the affected area in the event of a flood. Evidence of ongoing redundancy shall be provided to the Town on an as-needed basis upon request. 
c.  Hazardous materials facilities include facilities that produce or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials. 
i.  These facilities may include: 
1.  Chemical and pharmaceutical plants (chemical plant, pharmaceutical manufacturing); 
2.  Laboratories containing highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials; 
3.  Refineries; 
4.  Hazardous waste storage and disposal sites; and 
5.  Above ground gasoline or propane storage or sales centers. 
ii.  Facilities shall be determined to be critical facilities if they produce or store materials in excess of threshold limits. If the owner of a facility is required by the occupational safety and health administration (OSHA) to keep a material safety data sheet (MSDS) on file for any chemicals stored or used in the work place, and the chemical(s) is stored in quantities equal to or greater than the threshold planning quantity (TPQ) for that chemical, then that facility shall be considered to be a critical facility. The TPQ for these chemicals is either 500 pounds or the TPQ listed (whichever is lower) for the 356 chemicals listed under 40 CFR 302 (2010), also known as extremely hazardous substances (EHS); or 10,000 pounds for any other chemical. This threshold is consistent with the requirements for reportable chemicals established by the State Department of Public Health and Environment. OSHA requirements for MSDS can be found in 29 CFR 1910 (2010). The environmental protection agency (EPA) regulation "Designation, Reportable Quantities, and Notification," 40 CFR 302 (2010), and OSHA regulation "Occupational Safety and Health Standards," 29 CFR 1910 (2010), are incorporated herein by reference and include the regulations in existence at the time of the promulgation this chapter, but exclude later amendments to or editions of the regulations. 
iii.  Specific exemptions to this category include: 
1.  Finished consumer products within retail centers and households containing hazardous materials intended for household use, and agricultural products intended for agricultural use. 
2.  Buildings and other structures containing hazardous materials for which it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the local authority having jurisdiction by hazard assessment and certification by a qualified professional (as determined by the local jurisdiction having land use authority) that a release of the subject hazardous material does not pose a major threat to the public. 
3.  Pharmaceutical sales, use, storage, and distribution centers that do not manufacture pharmaceutical products. 
These exemptions shall not apply to buildings or other structures that also function as critical facilities under another category outlined in this section. 
d.  At-risk population facilities include medical care, congregate care, and schools. These facilities consist of: 
i.  Elder care (nursing homes); 
ii.  Congregate care serving 12 or more individuals (day care and assisted living); 
iii.  Public and private schools (pre-schools, K-12 schools), before-school and after-school care serving 12 or more children; 
e.  Facilities vital to restoring normal services including government operations. 
i.  These facilities consist of: 
1.  Essential government operations (public records, courts, jails, building permitting and inspection services, Town administration and management, maintenance and equipment centers); 
2.  Essential structures for public colleges and universities (dormitories, offices, and classrooms only). 
ii.  These facilities may be exempted if it is demonstrated to the Town that the facility is an element of a redundant system for which service will not be interrupted during a flood. At a minimum, it shall be demonstrated that redundant facilities are available (either owned by the same entity or available through an intergovernmental agreement or other contract), the alternative facilities are either located outside of the 100-year floodplain or are compliant with this chapter, and an operations plan is in effect that states how redundant facilities will provide service to the affected area in the event of a flood. Evidence of ongoing redundancy shall be provided to the Town on an as-needed basis upon request. 
2.  Protection for critical facilities. All new and substantially improved critical facilities and new additions to critical facilities located within the special flood hazard area shall be regulated to a higher standard than structures not determined to be critical facilities. For the purposes of this chapter, protection shall include one of the following: 
a.  Location outside the special flood hazard area; or 
b.  Elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofing of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, to at least two feet above the base flood elevation. 
3.  Ingress and egress for new critical facilities. New critical facilities shall, when practicable, as determined by the Town, have continuous non-inundated access (ingress and egress for evacuation and emergency services) during a 100-year flood event. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, §§ 4.15.150-4.15.170, 3-5-1986; Amended Ord. No. 19, series 2014) 
CHAPTER 4.17. - VESTED PROPERTY RIGHTS 

Section 4.17.010. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide the procedures necessary to implement the provisions of C.R.S. Title 24, Art. 68, which article establishes a vested property right to undertake and complete development and use of real property under the terms and conditions of a site-specific development plan. 
Section 4.17.020. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Site-specific development plan. 
A.  "Site-specific development plan" means a plan describing with reasonable certainty the type and intensity of use proposed for a specific parcel or parcels of property, which plan shall create a vested property right. 
B.  The following shall be considered site-specific development plans: 
Development Review Procedure Site-Specific Development Plan Special use permit review pursuant to Section 4.05.010 Site plan approved by Town Board Minor development review, pursuant to Section 4.06.060, 
not accompanied by subdivision of land Final development plan approved by 
Planning Commission Major development review, pursuant to Section 4.06.070, 
not accompanied by subdivision of land Final development plan approved by Town Board PUD review, pursuant to Section 4.11.040, not accompanied by 
subdivision of land Final PUD development plan approved by Town Board pursuant to Section 4.11.040(I) PUD review, pursuant to Section 4.11.040, accompanied by 
subdivision of land Final plat approval by Town Board Subdivision review, pursuant to Chapter 4.12, including minor, subdivisions, lot line adjustments, division of property into 
condominium or townhouse units Final plat approved by Town Board  
C.  If not indicated above, "site-specific development plan" shall mean the final approval step, irrespective of the name or designation of such approval, which occurs prior to building permit application. 
D.  The Town Board may by agreement with the applicant designate an approval other than those indicated above, or the final approval step, to serve as the site-specific development plan approval for a specific project. The following are specifically excluded from, and shall not constitute, a site-specific development plan: variances issued by the Planning Commission, business licenses, floodway or floodplain permits, franchises, temporary use permits, any comprehensive master plan element, designation of areas of state interest, creation of improvement districts, zoning in conjunction with annexation to the Town, or any rezoning. 
    Vested property right means the right to undertake and complete the development and use of property under the terms and conditions of a site-specific development plan and shall be deemed established upon approval of such site-specific development plan. 
(Amended 2-13-2000) 
Section 4.17.030. - Alternative creation of vested property rights. 
    If an applicant desires an approval by the Town Board or Planning Commission, as the case may be, other than as defined in Section 4.17.020 to be an approval of a site-specific development plan with the effect of creating vested property rights pursuant to C.R.S. Title 24, Art. 68, the applicant must so request at least 30 days prior to the date of said approval by the Town Board or Planning Commission, as applicable, is to be considered. Failure to so request renders the approval by the Town Board or Planning Commission, as the case may be, not an approval of a site-specific development plan and no vested property rights shall be deemed to have been created by such approval except in the case of an approval as provided for in Section 4.17.020. 
Section 4.17.040. - Notice of hearing. 
    No site-specific development plan shall be approved by the Town Board or Planning Commission, as applicable, until after a public hearing preceded by written public notice of such hearing. Such notice may, at the option of the Town, be combined with the notice for any other hearing to be held in conjunction with the hearing on the site-specific development plan for the subject property. At such hearing, persons with an interest in the subject matter of the hearing shall have an opportunity to present relevant or material evidence as determined by the Town Board or Planning Commission, as applicable. Said notice shall be in a form substantially similar to appendix "K" at the end of this Title. 
Section 4.17.050. - Action for approval of site-specific development plan, conditions. 
A.  The action of the Town Board or Planning Commission, as applicable, for approval of a site-specific development plan shall be in the same form as that required to approve any request being considered for the subject property in conjunction with the hearing on the site-specific development plan, such action being either by ordinance, resolution, or motion, as the case may be. The approval may include such terms and conditions as may be reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and failure to abide by such terms and conditions may, at the option of the Town Board or Planning Commission, as applicable, and after public hearing, result in the forfeiture of vested property rights. This section shall be strictly construed. 
B.  Terms and conditions imposed or agreed upon may include, without limitation: 
1.  Future approvals by the Town not inconsistent with the original approval; 
2.  Approvals by other agencies or governments; 
3.  Satisfactory inspections; 
4.  Completion of all or certain phases of a project by certain dates; 
5.  Waivers of rights; 
6.  Completion and satisfactory review of studies or reports; 
7.  Payment of fees to the Town or other governmental or quasi-governmental agencies as they become due and payable; 
8.  Payment of costs and expenses incurred by the Town relating to the approval; 
9.  Continuing review and supervision of the plan and its implementation and development; 
10.  Obtaining and paying for building permits; 
11.  Compliance with other codes and laws, including the Uniform Building Code, etc.; 
12.  Construction of improvements or facilities for the use of future landowners or the public at large; and 
13.  Dedication of common area or open space, with provision for its maintenance. 
Section 4.17.060. - Vested property rights, duration. 
A.  A property right which has been vested as provided for in this chapter shall remain vested for a period of three years. 
B.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection (A) of this section, the Town Board or Planning Commission, as applicable, is hereby authorized to enter into an agreement with the applicant to provide that property rights shall be vested for a period exceeding three years where warranted in light of all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the size and phasing of the development, economic cycles, and market conditions. 
Section 4.17.070. - Waiver. 
    An applicant may waive a vested property right by separate agreement, which shall be recorded in the office of the County Clerk and Recorder. Unless otherwise agreed to by the Town, any landowners requesting annexation to the Town shall waive in writing any pre-existing vested property rights as a condition of such annexation. 
Section 4.17.080. - Exceptions to vesting of property rights. 
    A vested property right, even though once established as provided in this chapter, precludes any zoning or land use action by the Town or pursuant to an initiated measure which would alter, impair, prevent, diminish, or otherwise delay the development or use of the property as set forth in the site-specific development plan, except: 
A.  With the consent of the affected landowner; or 
B.  Upon the discovery of natural or manmade hazards on or in the immediate vicinity of the subject property, which hazards could not reasonably have been discovered at the time the site-specific development plan was approved, and which hazards, if uncorrected, would pose a serious threat to the public health, safety, and welfare; or 
C.  To the extent the affected landowner receives just compensation for all costs, expenses, and liabilities incurred by the landowner, including, but not limited to, all fees paid in consideration of financing, and all architectural, planning, marketing, legal, and other consultants fees incurred after approval by the Town Board or Planning Commission, as applicable, together with interest thereon at the legal rate until paid. Just compensation shall not include any diminution in the value of the property which is caused by such action. 
D.  The establishment of a vested property right pursuant to law shall not preclude the application of ordinances or regulations which are general in nature and are applicable to all property subject to land use regulation by the Town, including, but not limited to, building, fire, plumbing, electrical, housing, and dangerous building codes. 
Section 4.17.090. - Amendment to site-specific development plan. 
    In the event amendments to a site-specific development plan are approved, the effective date of such amendments, for the purpose of the duration of a vested property right, shall be the date of the approval of the original site-specific development plan, unless the Town Board or Planning Commission, as applicable, specifically finds to the contrary and incorporates such finding in its approval of the amendment. 
Section 4.17.100. - Notice of approval. 
A.  Each map plat, or site plan constituting a site-specific development plan shall contain the following language conspicuously displayed on at least the first page of each document: 
"APPROVAL OF THIS PLAN CREATES A VESTED PROPERTY RIGHT PURSUANT TO C.R.S. § 24-68-103." 
B.  Failure to include this statement shall invalidate the creation of the vested property right. In addition, within 14 days of approval of a site-specific development plan, the Town Clerk shall cause to be published, once in a newspaper of general circulation within the Town, a notice describing the general nature of the development and use approved, describing the property affected, and stating that a vested property right has been created and the duration thereof. Said notice shall be in the form contained in appendix "L" of this Title. 
Section 4.17.110. - Payment of costs. 
    In addition to any and all other fees and charges imposed by this Title, the applicant for approval of a site-specific development plan shall pay all costs occasioned to the Town as a result of the site-specific development plan review, including publication of notices, public hearing, and review costs, when such costs are incurred apart and in addition to costs otherwise incurred by the Town or applicant for a public hearing relative to the subject property. 
Section 4.17.120. - Other provisions unaffected. 
    Approval of a site-specific development plan shall not constitute an exemption from or waiver of any other provisions of this Title pertaining to the development and use of property. 
Section 4.17.130. - Limitations. 
    Nothing in this chapter is intended to create any vested property right, but only to implement C.R.S. Title 24, Art. 68, as amended. In the event of the repeal of said article or judicial determination that said article is invalid or unconstitutional, this chapter shall be deemed to be repealed, and the provisions hereof no longer effective. 
Section 4.17.140. - Applicability. 
    This chapter shall apply only to site-specific development plans approved after January 1, 1988. 
CHAPTER 4.18. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 

Section 4.18.010. - Purpose and description. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to allow the reasonable location of sexually oriented businesses within the Town in a manner which will protect property values, neighborhoods and residents from the potential adverse secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses, while providing to those who desire to patronize sexually oriented businesses such opportunity in appropriate areas within the Town. It is not the intent of this chapter to suppress any speech activities protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution but to impose content neutral regulations which address the adverse secondary effects that sexually oriented businesses may have on adjoining properties. 
B.  It has been determined, and reflected in the land use studies of various U.S. cities, that businesses which have as their primary purpose the selling, renting or showing of sexually explicit materials have negative secondary impacts upon surrounding businesses and residences. The experience in other U.S. cities is that the location of sexually oriented businesses significantly increases the incidence of crimes, especially sex offenses, including sexual assault, indecent exposure, lewd and lascivious behavior, and child molestation. 
C.  It has been determined, and reflected in the land use studies of various U.S. cities, that sexually oriented businesses in business districts which are immediately adjacent to and which serve residential neighborhoods have a deleterious effect on both the business and the residential segments of the neighborhood, causing blight and down-grading of property values. 
D.  It is the intent of these regulations to allow sexually oriented businesses to exist within the Town in various dispersed locations rather than to allow them to concentrate in any one business area. It is further the purpose of these regulations to require separation requirements between sexually oriented businesses and residential uses, churches, parks, and educational institutions in an effort to buffer these uses from the secondary impacts created by sexually oriented business activity. 
Section 4.18.020. - Definitions. 
    Unless otherwise defined in this section, terms used in this chapter pertaining to sexually oriented businesses shall be as defined in Section 5.14.020. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business means and includes a sexually oriented business as defined in Section 5.14.020. 
Section 4.18.030. - Special use permit required. 
    A special use permit is required for the operation of a sexually oriented business in the Industrial Zone District. Additional requirements for the granting of a special use permit are found in Section 4.05.010. 
Section 4.18.040. - Separation requirements. 
    No sexually oriented business shall be located within 1,000 feet of another sexually oriented business, residentially zoned or used property, church, day care center, park or educational institution (whether within or without the Town). A waiver of the foregoing restrictions may be applied for in accordance with Subsection (B) of this section. 
A.  Method of measurement. The 1,000 feet separation measurement shall be made in a straight line without regard to intervening structures or objects from the nearest property line of the proposed sexually oriented business to the nearest property line of another sexually oriented business, residentially zoned or used property, church, park, day care center or educational institution. 

B.  Waiver criteria. In establishing the provisions of this section, the Board of Trustees hereby finds and determines that there may be exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions which are applicable to properties within the Town or to the intended uses of properties within the Town that do not generally apply to the property or class of uses in the same zone district, and such that denial of an application for relief would result in an inability to reasonably utilize property. Therefore, it is necessary to provide for such extraordinary relief in the form of a waiver. In reviewing such applications for waivers, the burden shall be upon the applicant to meet the criteria set forth in this section. 
1.  A waiver to the separation requirements set forth in this section may be granted as a part of the special use review process if the presumptions in Section 4.18.010 are overcome by proof that the establishment of a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of another sexually oriented business establishment or establishment of a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of any residential zone district, residential use, park, church or educational institution, as applicable, will not have a deleterious effect on surrounding residential and business areas by creating blight, down-grading of property values or tending to cause an increase in crime. 
2.  In granting a waiver to the separation requirements, the Planning Commission or Board of Trustees may impose reasonable conditions relating to hours of operation, screening, buffering and signage as long as the conditions imposed are not designed to prohibit the dissemination of protected materials under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. 
Section 4.18.050. - Criteria for permit approval. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or establish any sexually oriented business activity or enterprise until a special use permit for a sexually oriented business has been approved by the Board of Trustees. Such permits shall be approved if the criteria set forth in Section 4.05.010 and the following criteria are met: 
A.  The subject property is zoned (I) Industrial Zone District; 
B.  The subject property meets the 1,000-foot separation requirements as set forth in Section 4.18.040 or a waiver has been granted pursuant to Subsection (B) of the same section; 
C.  The subject property contains off-street parking in accordance with the requirements of Section 4.07.140; and 
D.  The proposed sexually oriented business building has a certificate of occupancy. 
Section 4.18.060. - Review process. 
    Applicants for a special use permit for a sexually oriented business shall submit a completed special use application form which contains the information required by 4.05.010, and, in addition, distances to other sexually oriented businesses, residentially zoned or used property, churches, day care centers, and park or educational institutions. The application shall be reviewed pursuant to the special use permit process as outlined in Section 4.05.010. 
APPENDICES 
APPENDIX "A" - CERTIFICATE OF OWNERSHIP 
(Annexation Plat) 
    We, ___________, the owners of ___ percent of the following described property, excluding any public streets and alleys, to-wit: 
INSERT FULL LEGAL DESCRIPTION 
    have by these presents laid out and platted the same as shown hereon and designate the same as ___________ Annexation to the Town of Eagle, County of Eagle, State of Colorado. 
    EXECUTED this ___________ day of ________, 20___. 
    ___________ 
    Owners 
STATE OF COLORADO ) 
) ss. 
COUNTY OF ) 
    The foregoing certification was acknowledged before me this ___________ day of ________, 20___, by ___________. 
    Witness my hand and official seal ___________ 
    My commission expires: ___________ 
    ___________ 
    Notary Public 
Note- The foregoing certificate should be used on all annexation plats submitted to the Town. The exact language of the certificate shown above may be altered if necessary with the consent of the Town Attorney. For additional requirements concerning annexation plats, see C.R.S. § 31-12-107 and Section 4.14.010(F). 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, app. A, 3-5-1986) 
APPENDIX "B" - BOARD OF TRUSTEES CERTIFICATE 
(Annexation Plat) 
    The Board of Trustees of the Town of Eagle, Colorado, by Resolution Number ___________, duly adopted on the ___________, day of ________, 20___, found and determined that annexation of the property designated herein complies with the requirements contained in Article 12, Title 31, C.R.S., as amended, and that said property is eligible for annexation to the Town of Eagle. 
    The Board of Trustees of the Town of Eagle, Colorado, by Ordinance Number ___________, duly adopted on the ___________ day of ________, 20___, did annex the property herein described to the Town of Eagle, Colorado. 
    ___________ 
    Mayor 
    ATTEST: 
    ___________ 
    Town Clerk 
Note- The above certificate shall appear on all annexation plats submitted to the Town. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, app. B, 3-5-1986) 
APPENDIX "C" - SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE 
(Annexation Plat) 
    I, ___________, a registered land surveyor licensed under the laws of the State of Colorado, do hereby certify that this survey was made under my direct supervision and that the information hereon is correct to the best of my knowledge and belief, and that no less than one-sixth ( 1/6 ) of the perimeter of the area as shown hereon is contiguous with the existing boundaries of the Town of Eagle, Colorado. I further certify that the external boundaries of the property shown on this plat have been monumented on the ground in accordance with Section 4.15.010(G) of the Eagle Municipal Code. 
    EXECUTED this ___________ day of ________, 20___. 
    ___________ 
    Registered Land Surveyor 
Note- The above certificate shall appear on all annexation plats filed with the Town. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, app. C, 3-5-1986) 
APPENDIX "D" - CERTIFICATE OF DEDICATION AND OWNERSHIP 
(Subdivision and Development Plats) 
    We, ___________, the sole owners in fee simple of all that real property described as follows: 
INSERT FULL LEGAL DESCRIPTION 
    have by these presents laid out, platted and subdivided the same into lots and blocks as shown on this plat and designate the same as the ___________ Subdivision in the Town of Eagle, County of Eagle, State of Colorado; and do hereby grant, convey, dedicate and set apart to the Town of Eagle, County of Eagle, Colorado, for public use the streets shown hereon, including avenues, drives, courts, places and alleys, the public lands shown hereon for their indicated public use and the utility and drainage easements shown hereon for utility and drainage purposes only. 
    We hereby accept the responsibility for the completion of all required public improvements for the Subdivision, and further, hereby grant the right to install and maintain all necessary structures to the entity responsible for providing the services for which the easements are established. 
    We further state that this subdivision shall be subject to the protective covenants filed and recorded for this subdivision in the offices of the Clerk and Recorder of Eagle County, Colorado, in Book ___________ at Page ___, as Document No. ___. 
    EXECUTED this ___________ day of ________, 20___. 
    ___________ 
    Owners 
STATE OF COLORADO ) 
) ss. 
COUNTY OF ) 
    The foregoing Certificate of Dedication and Ownership was acknowledged before me this ___________ day of ________, 20___, by ___________. 
    Witness my hand and official seal ___________ 
    My commission expires: ___________ 
    ___________ 
    Notary Public 
Note- The foregoing certificate shall appear on all final subdivision plats and all development plats requiring the dedication of lands or easements for public use. The exact language of the certificate may be altered if necessary with the consent of the Town Attorney. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, app. D, 3-5-1986) 
APPENDIX "E" - SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE 
(Subdivision and Development Plats) 
    I, ___________, do hereby certify that I am a registered land surveyor licensed under the laws of the State of Colorado, that this plat is a true, correct, and complete plat of the ___________, as laid out, platted, dedicated and shown hereon, that such plat was made from an accurate survey of said property by me and under my supervision and correctly shows the location and dimensions of the lots, staked upon the ground in compliance with Title 38, Article 51, C.R.S., as amended, and all other regulations governing the subdivision of land. 
    EXECUTED this ___________ day of ________, 20___. 
    ___________ 
    Registered Land Surveyor 
Note- The foregoing certificate shall appear on all final subdivision plats and development plats filed with the Town. The exact language contained in the certificate may be altered, if necessary, with the consent of the Town Attorney. In addition to the above certificate, all plats shall contain a statement by the land surveyor explaining how bearings, if used, were determined. For additional information concerning the requirements for land survey plats, please see C.R.S. § 38-51-102. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, app. E, 3-5-1986) 
APPENDIX "F" - TITLE CERTIFICATE 
    ___________, does hereby certify that I have examined the title to all lands shown on this plat and that title to such lands is vested in ___________, free and clear of all liens, taxes, and encumbrances, except as follows: 
INSERT EXCEPTIONS IN FULL DETAIL 
    EXECUTED this ___________ day of ________, 20___. 
    ___________ 
    Title Examiner 
Note- The foregoing certificate shall appear on all annexation plats and final subdivision plats. The disclosures contained in the above certificate do not constitute a release of any lien or mortgage which may be required by Town regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, app. F, 3-5-1986) 
APPENDIX "G" - MORTGAGEE OR LIENHOLDERS CERTIFICATE 
    ___________ does hereby certify that it is the holder of DESCRIBE NATURE OF ENCUMBRANCE against the lands shown on this plat and hereby consents to the subdivision of the lands shown hereon. 
    EXECUTED this ___________ day of ________, 20___. 
    ___________ 
    Mortgagee or Lienholder 
Note- The foregoing certificate shall appear on all final subdivision plats and development plats requiring the dedication of lands or easements to the public if liens, mortgages or other encumbrances against the subject property exist. The above certificate does not serve as a release or subordination of the encumbrance which may be required by the Town. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, app. G, 3-5-1986) 
APPENDIX "H" - PLANNING COMMISSION CERTIFICATE 
    This plat approved by the Town of Eagle Planning Commission the ___________ day of ________, 20___. 
    ___________ 
    Chairman 
Note- The foregoing certificate shall appear on all plats requiring Planning Commission review pursuant to Town ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, app. H, 3-5-1986) 
APPENDIX "I" - BOARD OF TRUSTEES CERTIFICATE 
(Subdivision and Development Plats) 
    This plat approved by the Board of Trustees of the Town of Eagle, Colorado, this ___________ day of ________, 20___, for filing with the Clerk and Recorder of Eagle County, Colorado, and for conveyance or dedication to the Town of the public dedications shown hereon; subject to the provisions that approval in no way obligates the Town of Eagle for financing or constructing of improvements on said lands, streets or easements dedicated to the public except as specifically agreed to by the Board of Trustees of the Town of Eagle. Further, said approval in no way obligates the Town of Eagle for maintenance of public improvements until construction of said improvements has been completed in accordance with the Town of Eagle's specifications and the Town of Eagle has agreed to accept said improvements. This approval does not guarantee that the size, soil conditions, sub-surface geology, ground water conditions, or flooding conditions of any lot shown hereon are such that a building permit, development permit, or any other required permit will be issued. This approval is with the understanding that all expenses involving required improvements for all utility services, paving, grading, landscaping, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, road lighting, road signs, flood protection devices, drainage structures, and all other improvements that may be required shall be the responsibility of the owners designated hereon and not the Town of Eagle, unless otherwise specifically agreed to in writing by the Board of Trustees. 
    TOWN OF EAGLE, COLORADO 
    By: ___________ 
    Mayor 
    Witness my hand and seal of the Town of Eagle, Colorado. 
    ATTEST: 
    ___________ 
    Town Clerk 
Note- The foregoing certificate shall appear on all final subdivision plats and development plats. In the event the Town Planning Commission has the power to grant final approval of a plat pursuant to the Town's ordinances, the words "Board of Trustees" may be substituted by the words "Planning Commission." The exact language contained in the above certificate may be altered, if necessary, with the consent of the Town Attorney. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, app. I, 3-5-1986) 
APPENDIX "J" - CLERK AND RECORDER'S CERTIFICATE 
    This plat was filed for record in the office of the Eagle County Clerk and Recorder at o'clock at ___.M., on the ___________ day of ________, 20___, and is duly recorded in Book ___ at Page ___, as Document No. ___. 
    EAGLE COUNTY CLERK & RECORDER 
    By: ___________ 
    Deputy 
    Declarations or Protective Covenants are filed in Book at Page ___, as Document No. ___. 
Note- The foregoing certificate shall appear on all plats submitted to the Town for recording. 
(Ord. No. 1986-03, app. J, 3-5-1986) 
APPENDIX "K" - NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING 
    Notice is hereby given that on the ___________ day of ________, 20___, at ___ o'clock ___.m., at the Eagle Town Hall, 108 West 2nd, Eagle, Colorado, the Board of Trustees will hold a public hearing for the purpose of considering a site-specific development plan for the property and the purpose described below, approval of which plan may create a vested property right pursuant to Colorado law. 
    Legal Description: 
    Type and Intensity of Proposed Use: 
    Any person may appear at such hearing and present evidence upon any matter to be considered by the Board of Trustees. 
    ___________ 
    Town Clerk 
    Published: 
    ___________ 
Note- This notice may be combined with other required notices advertising the public hearing for the approval step which is the triggering event for a vested right. 
(Amended 5-2-1991) 
APPENDIX "L" - NOTICE OF APPROVAL 
    Notice is hereby given that on the ___________ day of ________, 20___, the Board of Trustees of the Town of Eagle, Colorado, approved a site-specific development plan for the property and purpose described below, which approval may have created a vested property right pursuant to Colorado law. Such approval is subject to all rights of referendum and judicial review. 
    Legal Description: 
    Type and Intensity of Proposed Use: 
    ___________ 
    Town Clerk 
    Published: 
    ___________ 
(Amended 5-2-1991) 
APPENDIX "M" - SUMMARY OF REVIEW PROCEDURES 

(Amended 5-22-2007) 
APPENDIX "N" - COLORADO VERNACULAR ARCHITECTURAL STYLE 





(Amended 5-22-2007) 
Title 5 - BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal power to regulate businesses, C.R.S. § 31-15-501. 

CHAPTER 5.02. - GENERAL OCCUPATION TAX 

Section 5.02.010. - Amount of tax. 
    There is hereby levied and assessed for each year, beginning with 1988, an occupation tax upon every business except as otherwise provided herein, in the amount of $50.00 per year. 
(Code 1972, § 5.02.010) 
Section 5.02.020. - Applicability. 
    This tax shall apply to any business, trade, occupation, profession or calling which is engaged in for the purpose of making a profit, whether a profit is actually made on a regular basis within the Town. This tax shall apply to building contractors, plumbing contractors, general contractors and other specialized contractors. It shall not apply to such activity if exempt by virtue of State or Federal law, or if subject to a similar tax under the ordinances of the Town, such as lodging establishments, peddlers and solicitors, or to activity as an employee of a governmental entity, or of another who is subject to the tax. 
(Code 1972, § 5.02.015) 
Section 5.02.030. - Payment. 
    This tax shall be due and payable on January 1 of each year by parties engaged, on that date, in activities which are the subject of this tax. For those who begin such activity after January 1, this tax shall be payable within ten days of beginning such activity. The entire amount of the tax is due regardless of when such activity was begun. 
(Code 1972, § 5.02.020) 
Section 5.02.040. - Receipt. 
    Upon receipt of the tax, it shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to execute and deliver to the operator of the business paying the tax, a revenue receipt, showing the name of the person paying the tax, the date of payment, business paying the tax, the period for which said tax is paid, and the place at which the person conducts his business. This receipt must be posted in some prominent place at the premises of the business. 
(Code 1972, § 5.02.025) 
Section 5.02.050. - Classification. 
    Every party doing business in more than one store, stand or other place of business, shall pay a separate tax for each place of business, unless such places of business are contiguous to each other, communicate directly with and open to each other, and are operated as a unit. The business may be transferred from one location to another without payment of additional tax. 
(Code 1972, § 5.02.030) 
Section 5.02.060. - Unlawful procedure. 
    It shall be unlawful for any party or his agent to engage in or carry on a business in the Town for which an occupational tax is required, without first having paid the tax and obtained and posted a revenue receipt, as herein provided. For the purpose of this section, the opening of a place of business, or offering to sell, followed by a single sale or the doing of any act or thing in the furtherance of the business, shall be construed to be engaging in carrying on such business. 
(Code 1972, § 5.02.040) 
Section 5.02.070. - Legal right of Town. 
    The Town shall have the right to recover all sums due by the terms of this section by judgment and execution thereon in a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction; such remedy shall be cumulative, with all other remedies provided herein for the enforcement of this section. 
(Code 1972, § 5.02.042) 
Section 5.02.080. - Violations. 
    Any person who knowingly violates any provision of this chapter, or who knowingly fails to perform an act required by any provision of this chapter, commits a Class A municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 5.02.044; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 12, 2001) 
CHAPTER 5.03. - GAS COMPANY OCCUPATION TAX 

Section 5.03.010. - Legislative intent. 
    The Board of Trustees hereby finds, determines, and declares: 
A.  That Ordinance No. 123, granting a franchise to the Rocky Mountain Natural Gas Company, Inc., to locate, build, construct, acquire, purchase, extend, maintain, and operate a gas system within the Town expired by its terms on September 6, 1991; and 
B.  That the transportation, distribution, and sale of gas within a Town through pipelines, mains, and other fixed facilities, using easements and rights-of-way granted by the Town, involves the use, availability, and potential use of Town personnel and facilities, and creates the potential for hazards dissimilar to other utility services; and 
C.  That the transportation, distribution, and sale of gas within the Town requires stand-by and active service by police, public works employees, and other local safety agencies, which is a matter of local and municipal concern; and 
D.  That the nature of companies transporting, distributing, and selling gas, and otherwise operating within the Town, including, without limitation, their demands on Town staff, the use of public and private easements, streets and rights-of-way, and the potential and actual hazards from the operation of such companies, has a substantial effect upon the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the Town, and upon the expenditures budgeted by the Town; and 
E.  That, upon review of all matters proper to be considered relating to the operations and hazards of gas companies, the classification of such gas companies as separate businesses and occupations is reasonable, proper, uniform, and non-discriminatory; and the taxable amount hereby levied is reasonable, proper, uniform, non-discriminatory, and necessary for a just and proper distribution of the tax burdens of the Town; and 
F.  That the use by a gas company of the streets, alleys, easements, and public rights-of-way located within the Town is a valuable special privilege not provided to the public generally and for which the Town is entitled to consideration in the form of occupation tax revenues; and 
G.  That the occupation tax herein created is levied on the right of gas companies to do business within the Town as are other occupation taxes imposed within the Town. 
(Code 1972, § 5.03.010) 
Section 5.03.020. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Gas or natural gas refers to such gaseous fuels as natural, artificial, synthetic, liquefied natural, liquefied petroleum, manufactured, or any mixture thereof. 
    Gas company means any person, partnership, business, firm, or corporation that sells, provides, delivers, or distributes gas within the corporate limits of the Town through pipelines, mains, and other related facilities and appurtenances located in whole or in part in easements, streets, and other public places dedicated to or held by the Town for use by the public. 
    Taxable amount refers to the monthly amount of the occupation tax levied upon a gas company by this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 5.03.020) 
Section 5.03.030. - Levy of tax. 
A.  There is hereby levied upon every gas company that sells, provides, supplies, delivers, or distributes gas within the Town a taxable amount for each and every calendar month that any such company sells, provides, supplies, delivers, or distributes gas within the Town. 
B.  The taxable amount shall be $1,500.00 per calendar month 
(Code 1972, § 5.03.030) 
Section 5.03.040. - Time of payment of tax. 
    The tax levied by this chapter shall accrue against each and every gas company on September 25, 1991, and on the first day of each calendar month thereafter. The taxable amount shall be due and payable by any such company no later than the tenth day of each calendar month, except that the taxable amount for September, 1991, shall be due and payable no later than October 10, 1991. Any taxable amount not paid on the tenth day of each calendar month, shall become delinquent. 
(Code 1972, § 5.03.040) 
Section 5.03.050. - Interest on deficiency. 
    Interest on any deficiency in the payment of the tax shall be at the rate imposed under C.R.S. § 39-21-110.5, plus one-half percent per month from the date when due. 
(Code 1972, § 5.03.050) 
Section 5.03.060. - Failure to pay. 
    If any gas company subject to the provisions of this chapter shall fail to pay the taxes as herein provided, the full amount thereof, plus costs of collection, including reasonable Attorney's fees, shall be due and collected form such company, and the same, together with an additional ten percent of the amount of taxes due, shall be and hereby is declared to be a debt due and owing from such company to the Town. The computation of said ten percent shall be in addition to interest on the deficiency as set out in Section 5.03.050. The Town Attorney, upon direction of the Board of Trustees, shall commence and prosecute to final judgment and determination in any court of competent jurisdiction an action at law to collect said debt. 
(Code 1972, § 5.03.060) 
Section 5.03.070. - Inspection of records. 
    The Town, its officers, agents, or representatives, shall have the right at all reasonable hours and times to examine the books, and records of the gas companies which are subject to the provisions of this chapter and to make copies of the entries or contents thereof. 
(Code 1972, § 5.03.070) 
Section 5.03.080. - Administrative hearings. 
    Any gas company subject to the provisions of this chapter may request a hearing on the levy of the occupation tax after receiving a notice of final determination, assessment, demand for payment, or denial of claim for refund. If a gas company disputes the reasonableness or applicability of the tax, it may seek review of the assessment by filing a protest with the Town Manager within 30 days of the mailing of the accounting statement. If such a protest is filed, a hearing shall be held before the Town Manager. Said hearing shall be conducted pursuant to Chapter 2.20. 
(Code 1972, § 5.03.080) 
Section 5.03.090. - Administration of tax. 
    The Town Treasurer shall administer the provisions of this chapter. The Town Manager may promulgate rules or regulations to aid in the enforcement and administration of this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 5.03.090) 
Section 5.03.100. - Local purpose. 
    The tax herein provided is upon occupations and businesses in the performance of local functions and is not a tax upon functions relating to interstate commerce. It is expressly understood that none of the terms of this chapter shall be construed to mean that any gas company subject to this tax is granted a franchise by the Town. 
(Code 1972, § 5.03.100) 
Section 5.03.110. - Reimbursement of costs. 
    Any entity challenging the validity, legality, applicability, or constitutionality of this chapter, or the tax levied, if unsuccessful, shall reimburse the Town for all costs incurred, including Attorney's fees, in such litigation. 
(Code 1972, § 5.03.110) 
CHAPTER 5.04. - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS 

Section 5.04.010. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Peddler means any individual, whether a resident of the Town or not, who engages in the itinerant or transient sale or bartering of any goods, merchandise or services directly to the consuming public, whether or not the goods, merchandise or services are actually delivered at the time of sales. A peddler engages in such activities as selling from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, hawking of items at public events, and selling or canvassing by means of carrying goods or samples around from place to place in order to encounter consumers who will purchase or order the goods. 
    Peddling includes all activities ordinarily performed by a peddler but does not include the following: 
A.  Any sales efforts by telephone, mail, or electronic media where there is no face to face encounter with the purchaser at the time of sale, delivery or provision of goods, merchandise or services; 
B.  Any sales by sales persons selling good or merchandise or providing services exclusively to commercial, industrial or business accounts; 
C.  Newspaper and magazine sales; 
D.  The sale of food by food peddlers or operators of mobile food units including push carts; 
E.  Sales from push carts and similar vending devices located in public rights-of-way; 
F.  Sales from a stationary but temporary source, such as a road side stand, located totally upon private property, to the extent such activities are permitted and regulated under the Town's Land Use and Development Code contained in Title 4; and 
G.  Sales in Town parks to the extent such activities are permitted. 
    Solicitor means any person, whether resident of the Town or not, traveling either by foot or vehicle or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, or from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise or personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery or for services to be performed or furnished in the future, whether or not such person has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sale or not. 
(Code 1972, § 5.04.010) 
Section 5.04.020. - Business license and sales tax license required. 
A.  Any peddler or solicitor working either individually or for a corporation, partnership or other legally recognized organization shall pay the general occupation tax pursuant to Chapter 5.02 and sales tax license if required under Chapter 3.04. 
B.  The following types of organizations and individuals selling goods, merchandise or services on their behalf are not required to obtain a license but shall otherwise comply with the applicable requirements of this chapter: 
1.  State and local governmental departments, agencies and subdivisions, including public schools; 
2.  State accredited private schools and academies; 
3.  Charitable, civic, patriotic, religious, educational, recreational, fraternal or cultural organizations which are tax exempt pursuant to Section 501(C) of the Internal Revenue Code as amended; and 
4.  Person promoting a political candidate, political party, or ballot issue. 
(Code 1972, § 5.04.020) 
Section 5.04.030. - Prohibited activities. 
    It shall be unlawful for any peddler or a solicitor to: 
A.  Make any false statement of misrepresentation of fact, or otherwise engage in fraud, in the course of carrying out the activities permitted under this chapter, or to fail to fulfill the obligations and representations which the peddler or solicitor makes to a consumer; 
B.  In peddling any goods, merchandise or services to be delivered or provided at a future date, refuse or fail to give to a purchaser at the time of sale a written and signed receipt which shall accurately set forth name, address and telephone number of the peddler or solicitor; a brief description of the goods, merchandise or services to be delivered or provided; the anticipated date and manner of delivery or provision of such goods, merchandise or services; the amount paid by the consumer; the balance due on purchases; and the terms or any payment; 
C.  Fail or refuse to leave peacefully private property immediately when told to do so by the land owner, the land owner's agent or representative, or the occupant of the premises, or to attempt to solicit business at any place which maintains a sign or other visible and legible indication that such solicitation of business is not desired or is prohibited, unless the permission of the owner, agent, representative or occupant of the premises has been previously obtained; 
D.  Engage in door-to-door sales at residences from a half hour after sunset until 8:00 a.m. the next day; or 
E.  Obstruct, impede or otherwise interfere with the public's use of public streets, sidewalks, ways or places, other than as authorized by other provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1972, § 5.04.030) 
Section 5.04.040. - Juvenile peddlers and solicitors. 
A.  No person under the age of 18 years of age shall be permitted to engage in peddling or soliciting except as provided in this section. Except as provided in Section 5.04.020, pursuant to Chapter 5.02 the general occupation tax shall be paid by a sponsoring person, company or organization for the conduct of any peddling or soliciting business involving, in whole or in part, a sales force of one or more persons under 18 years of age. Any person 18 years of age or older peddling or soliciting for a sponsor shall obtain an individual business license as provided in Section 5.04.020. The sponsor shall be responsible for supervising and controlling the conduct of all persons, including juveniles, peddling under the sponsor's license. This responsibility shall extend to the prohibited activities set forth in Section 5.04.030. The sponsor shall maintain visual contact with all juveniles at all times sponsored juveniles are peddling or soliciting. 
B.  The sponsor shall be limited to peddling or soliciting, through its sales force, food products, such as candies and snacks, which are pre-packaged by the manufacturer and not requiring refrigeration; inexpensive household and novelty items; items hand crafted or prepared by members or beneficiaries of the sponsor. 
C.  Peddling or soliciting under this section shall be limited to between the hours of 3:00 p.m. and one-half hour after sunset on school days, as scheduled by the school district. During any other time of the year, peddling or soliciting under this section shall be limited to the hours set forth Section 5.04.030. 
D.  No juvenile under the age of 12 shall be permitted to engage in peddling or soliciting unless accompanied by his parent or guardian. 
(Code 1972, § 5.04.040) 
Section 5.04.050. - Enforcement and penalties. 
    Any person, firm, association or corporation knowingly violating any of the provisions of this chapter commits a Class A municipal offense. Such person, firm, association or corporation shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which a violation of this chapter is committed or continued. 
(Code 1972, § 5.04.050; Repealed and Reenacted; Ord. No. 06-2015, § 1, 2015) 
CHAPTER 5.05. - LODGING OCCUPATION TAX 

Section 5.05.010. - Purpose. 
    The Board of Trustees hereby finds, determines and declares: 
A.  For the purposes of this chapter, every person that furnishes a lodging room or accommodation for consideration in the Town is exercising a taxable privilege. The purpose of this chapter is to impose a tax that will be paid by every vendor providing such lodging room or accommodation in the Town, which tax will provide revenues for the preservation of agricultural lands and for the acquisition, maintenance and management of land and easements in and around the Town for open space buffer zones, trails within open space areas, wildlife habitats and wetland preservation, as well as for the general marketing and promotion of the Town and the marketing and promotion of Eagle events for the purpose of generating additional revenue for existing and future lodging and other Town businesses; and 
B.  The Town desires to maintain a small Town, not a resort, atmosphere, desires to preserve open space and provide access to public lands, desires to protect wildlife habitat and corridors, and desires to protect riparian corridors, all of which serves to attract tourists, the traveling public and others to the Eagle Area, who use lodging rooms and accommodations; and 
C.  The Eagle Area Community Plan (2010) endorses the following economic actions by the Town: use environmentally appropriate strategies to promote organized and disbursed recreation tourism in the area, pursue opportunities provided through the operation of facilities for organized sports and events, promote businesses and activities that benefit from Eagle's proximity to the I-70 corridor, generate new sales tax dollars, encourage diversification of the local economy, and optimize commercial development to create more jobs and provide additional outlets for goods and services within the five existing commercial centers; and 
D.  The provision of lodging rooms and accommodations to the traveling public results in the increased use of Town streets and rights-of-way, increased traffic, increased demands upon municipal services such as police protection and has a substantial effect upon the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Town and upon the expenditures budgeted by the Town which is a matter of local concern; and 
E.  The classification of the provision of lodging as separate businesses and occupations is reasonable, proper, uniform and non-discriminatory; and the taxable amount hereby levied is reasonable, proper, uniform, non-discriminatory, and necessary. 
(Code 1972, § 5.05.010; Ord. No. 9-1996, § 1(part), 1996; Amended Ord. No. 19-2011, § 1, 2011) 
Section 5.05.020. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Lodging means hotel rooms, motel rooms, lodging rooms, motor hotel rooms, guesthouse rooms, or other similar accommodations that are rented to persons for a period of less than one month or 30 consecutive days, but shall not include rentals under a written agreement for occupancy for a period of at least one month or 30 days. 
    Monetary consideration means the transfer of funds from a person to a vendor, directly or indirectly, by whatever means, including the payment of cash, issuance of a check or similar negotiable instrument, or through a credit card service in exchange for the provision of a lodging accommodation. 
    Person means an individual, partnership, firm, joint enterprise, limited liability company, corporation, estate or trust, or any group or combination acting as a unit, but shall not include the United States of America, the State and any political subdivision thereof. 
    Sale means the furnishing for monetary consideration by any person of lodging within the Town. 
    Tax means the tax payable by the vendor or the aggregate amount of taxes due from the vendor during the period for which the vendor is required to pay the occupation tax on the provision of lodging for monetary consideration under this chapter. 
    Taxpayer means the vendor obligated to pay the tax under the terms of this chapter. 
    Vendor means a person furnishing lodging for monetary consideration within the Town. 
(Code 1972, § 5.05.020; Ord. No. 9-1996, § 1(part), 1996; Amended Ord. No. 07-2015, § 1, 2015; Amended Ord. No. 14-2015, § 1, 2015) 
Section 5.05.030. - Levy of tax. 
    Effective January 1, 2012, there is hereby levied by the Town an occupation tax on the provision of lodging upon every person or business that furnishes any hotel room, motel room, lodging room, motor hotel room, guesthouse room or other similar accommodation for monetary consideration for less than one month or 30 consecutive days within the Town in the amount of $4.00 per day, per occupied lodging room or accommodation. 
(Code 1972, § 5.05.030; Ord. No. 9-1996, § 1(part), 1996; Amended Ord. No. 19-2011, § 2, 2011; Amended Ord. No. 14-2015, § 2, 2015) 
Section 5.05.040. - Exemptions. 
    The following transactions shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this chapter: 
A.  Accommodations provided by the United States, the State, its departments and institutions, and the political subdivisions of the State in their governmental capacities only; 
B.  Accommodations provided by those charitable, religious and eleemosynary organizations that have received from the Internal Revenue Service status under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code as a tax exempt organization, while in the conduct of their regular charitable, religious or eleemosynary functions and activities; and 
C.  Accommodations provided to a person who is a permanent resident of a hotel, motel, apartment hotel, lodginghouse, motor hotel, guesthouse, or other similar business pursuant to a written agreement for a period of at least one month or 30 consecutive days; and 
D.  Accommodations provided to a person without monetary consideration being paid to the vendor for such accommodations. 
(Code 1972, § 5.05.040; Ord. No. 9-1996, § 1(part), 1996; Amended Ord. No. 07-2015, § 2, 2015; Amended Ord. No. 14-2015, § 3, 2015) 
Section 5.05.050. - Exemption from general occupation tax. 
    Any taxpayer who pays taxes imposed by this chapter in the amount of $50.00 or more in any calendar year shall be exempt from payment of the general occupation tax set forth in Chapter 5.02. 
(Code 1972, § 5.05.050; Ord. No. 9-1996, § 1(part), 1996) 
Section 5.05.060. - Collection of tax. 
A.  Every vendor providing lodging taxable under this chapter shall remit such tax on or before the tenth day of each month on account of lodging provided in the preceding month. Said payment shall be accompanied by a return which shall contain such information and be in such form as the Town Clerk may prescribe. 
B.  The burden of providing that any transaction is exempt from the tax shall be upon the vendor. 
C.  If the accounting methods regularly employed by the vendor in the transaction of business, or other conditions, are such that the returns aforesaid made on a calendar month basis will impose unnecessary hardship, the Town Clerk may, upon request of the vendor, accept returns at such intervals as will, in the Town Clerk's opinion, better suit the convenience of the vendor and will not jeopardize the collection of the tax; provided, however, the Town Clerk may, by rule, permit a vendor whose monthly tax obligation is less than $60.00 to make returns and pay taxes at intervals not greater than three months. 
D.  It shall be the duty of every vendor to maintain, keep and preserve suitable records of all sales made by the vendor and such other books or accounts as may be required by the Town Clerk in order to determine the amount of the tax of which the vendor is liable under the chapter. It shall be the duty of every such vendor to keep and preserve for a period of three years all such books, invoices and other records and the same shall be open for examination by the Town Clerk or his designee. 
(Code 1972, § 5.05.060; Ord. No. 9-1996, § 1(part), 1996; Amended Ord. No. 19-2011, § 3, 2011; Ord. No. 1-2015, § 1, 2015) 
Section 5.05.070. - Audit of records. 
A.  For the purpose of ascertaining the correct amount of the occupation tax on the provision of lodging due from any person engaged in such business in the Town under this chapter, the Town Clerk or an authorized agent, may conduct an audit by examining any relevant books, accounts and records of such person. 
B.  All books, invoices, accounts and other records shall be made available within the Town limits and be open at any time during regular business hours for examination by the Town Clerk or an authorized agent. If any taxpayer refuses to voluntarily furnish any of the foregoing information when requested, the Town Clerk may issue a subpoena to require that the taxpayer or its representative attend a hearing or produce any such books, accounts and records for examination. 
C.  Any exempt organization claiming exemption under the provisions of this chapter is subject to audit in the same manner as any other person engaged in the lodging business in the Town. 
(Code 1972, § 5.05.070; Ord. No. 9-1996, § 1(part), 1996) 
Section 5.05.080. - Tax overpayments and deficiencies. 
    An application for refund of tax monies paid in error or by mistake shall be made within three years after the date of payment for which the refund is claimed. If the Town Clerk determines that within three years of the due date, a vendor overpaid the occupation tax on the provision of lodging, he shall process a refund or allow a credit against a future remittance from the same taxpayer. If at any time the Town Clerk determines the amount paid is less than the amount due under this chapter, the difference, together with the interest, shall be paid by the vendor within ten days after receiving written notice and demand from the Town Clerk. The Town Clerk may extend that time for good cause. 
(Code 1972, § 5.05.080; Ord. No. 9-1996, § 1(part), 1996) 
Section 5.05.090. - Tax information confidential. 
A.  All specific information gained under the provisions of this chapter which is used to determine the tax due from a taxpayer, whether furnished by the taxpayer or obtained through audit, shall be treated by the Town and its officers, employees or legal representatives as confidential. Except as directed by judicial order or as provided in this chapter, no Town officer, employee, or legal representative shall divulge any confidential information. If directed by judicial order, the officials charged with the custody of such confidential information shall be required to provide only such information as is directly involved in the action or proceeding. Any Town officer or employee who shall knowingly divulge any information classified herein as confidential, in any manner, except in accordance with proper judicial order, or as otherwise provided in this chapter or by law, shall be guilty of a violation hereof. 
B.  The Town Clerk may furnish to officials of any other governmental entity who may be owed sales tax any confidential information, provided that said jurisdiction enters into an agreement with the Town to grant reciprocal privileges to the Town. 
C.  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit the delivery to a taxpayer or their duly authorized representative a copy of such confidential information relating to such taxpayer, the publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular taxpayers, or the inspection of such confidential information by an officer, employee, or legal representative of the Town. 
(Code 1972, § 5.05.090; Ord. No. 9-1996, § 1(part), 1996) 
Section 5.05.100. - Forms and regulations. 
    The Town Clerk is hereby authorized to prescribe forms and promulgate rules and regulations to aid in the making of returns, the ascertainment, assessment and collection of said occupation tax on the provision of lodging and in particular and without limiting the general language of this chapter, to provide for: 
A.  A form of report on the provision of lodging to be supplied to all vendors; 
B.  The records which vendors providing lodging are to keep concerning the tax imposed by this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 5.05.100; Ord. No. 9-1996, § 1(part), 1996) 
Section 5.05.110. - Enforcement and penalties. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly fail to pay the tax imposed by this chapter, or to make any false or fraudulent return, or for any person to otherwise violate any provisions of this chapter. Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a Class A municipal offense. Each day, or portion thereof, that any violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
B.  A penalty in the amount of ten percent of the tax due or the sum of $10.00, whichever is greater, shall be imposed upon the vendor and become due in the event the tax is not remitted by the tenth day of the month as required by this chapter, or such other date as prescribed by the Town Clerk, and 11/2 percent interest shall accrue each month on the unpaid balance. The Town Clerk is hereby authorized to waive, for good cause shown, any penalty assessed. 
C.  If any part of a deficiency is due to negligence or intentional disregard of regulations, but without intent to defraud, there shall be added ten percent of the total amount of the deficiency, and interest, from the vendor required to file a return. If any part of the deficiency is due to fraud with the intent to evade the tax, then there shall be added 50 percent of the total amount of the deficiency, together with interest, and in such case, the whole amount of the unpaid tax, including the additions, shall become due and payable ten days after written note and demand by the Town Clerk. 
D.  If any vendor fails to make a return and pay the tax imposed by this chapter, the Town may make an estimate, based upon available information of the amount of tax due, and add the penalty and interest provided above. The Town shall mail notice of such estimate, by certified mail, to the vendor at his address as indicated in the Town records. Such estimate shall thereupon become an assessment, and such assessment shall be final and due and payable from the taxpayer to the Town Clerk ten days from the date of service of the notice or the date of mailing by certified mail; provided, however, that within the ten-day period such delinquent taxpayer may petition the Town Clerk for a revision or modification of such assessment and shall, within such ten-day period, furnish the Town Clerk the documents, facts and figure showing the correct amount of such taxes due and owing. 
E.  Such petition shall be in writing and the facts and figures submitted shall be submitted either in writing or orally, and shall be given by the taxpayer under penalty of perjury. Thereupon, the Town Clerk may modify such assessment in accordance with the facts submitted in order to effectuate the provisions of this chapter. Such assessment shall be considered the final order of the Town Clerk, and may be reviewed under Rule 106(a)(4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure, provided that the taxpayer gives written notice to the Town Clerk of such intention within ten days after of the final order of assessment. 
(Code 1972, § 5.05.110; Ord. No. 9-1996, § 1(part), 1996; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 14, 2001; Amended Ord. No. 19-2011, § 4, 2011) 
Section 5.05.120. - Tax lien. 
A.  The tax imposed by this chapter, together with the interest and penalties herein provided and the costs of collection which may be incurred, shall be and, until paid, remain a first and prior lien superior to all other liens on all the tangible personal property of a taxpayer within the Town and may be foreclosed by seizing under distraint warrant and selling so much thereof as may be necessary to discharge the lien. Such distrain warrant may be issued by the Town Clerk whenever the taxpayer is in default in the payment of the tax, interest, penalty or costs. Such warrant may be served and the goods subject to such lien seized by any Town police officer, the County Sheriff or any duly authorized employee of the Town. The property so seized may be sold by the agency seizing the same or by the Town Clerk at public auction after ten days have passed following an advertised notice in a newspaper published in the Town, in the same manner as is prescribed by law in respect to executions against property upon judgment of a Court of Record, and the remedies of garnishment shall apply. 
B.  The tax imposed by this chapter shall be, and remain, a first and prior lien superior to all other liens on the real property and appurtenant premises at which the taxable transactions occurred. 
(Code 1972, § 5.05.120; Ord. No. 9-1996, § 1(part), 1996) 
Section 5.05.130. - Recovery of unpaid tax. 
A.  The Town Clerk may also treat any such taxes, penalties, costs or interest due and unpaid as a debt due the Town from the taxpayer. 
B.  In case of failure to pay the taxes, or any portion thereof, or any penalty, costs or interest thereon, when due, the Town Clerk may recover at law the amount of such taxes, penalties, costs, the reasonable value of any Attorney's time or the reasonable Attorney's fees charged, plus interest, in any County or District Court of the county wherein the taxpayer resides or had a principal place of business (at the time the tax became due) having jurisdiction of the amount sought to be collected. 
C.  The return of the taxpayer or the assessment made by the Town Clerk shall be prima facie proof of the amount due. 
D.  Such actions may be actions in attachment, and writs of attachment may be issued to the Eagle Police or County Sheriff as the case may be, and in any such proceeding no bond shall be required of the Town Clerk, nor shall any police officer or sheriff require of the Town Clerk an indemnifying bond for executing the writ of attachment or writ of execution upon any judgment entered in such proceedings. The Town Clerk may prosecute appeals in such cases without the necessity of providing bond therefor. 
E.  It shall be the duty of the Town Attorney, when requested by the Town Clerk, to commence action for the recovery of taxes due under this chapter and this remedy shall be in addition to all other existing remedies, or remedies provided in this chapter. 
F.  The Town may certify the amount of any delinquent tax, plus interest, penalties and the costs of collection, as a charge against the property at which the taxable transaction occurred to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as delinquent ad valorem taxes. 
(Code 1972, § 5.05.130; Ord. No. 9-1996, § 1(part), 1996) 
Section 5.05.140. - Status of unpaid tax in bankruptcy and receivership. 
    Whenever the business or property of a taxpayer subject to this chapter shall be placed in receivership, bankruptcy or assignment for the benefit of creditors, or seized under distraint for taxes, all taxes, penalties and interest imposed by this chapter and for which the taxpayer is in any way liable under the terms of this chapter shall be a prior and preferred lien against all the property of the taxpayer, except as to other tax liens which have attached prior to the filing of the notice, and no sheriff, receiver, assignee or other officer shall sell the property of any person subject to this chapter under process or order of any court, without first ascertaining from the Town Clerk the amount of any taxes due and payable under this chapter, and if there is any such taxes due, owing and unpaid, it shall be the duty of such officer to first pay the amount of the taxes out of the proceeds of such sale before making payment of any monies to any judgment creditor or other claimants of whatsoever kind or nature, except the costs of the proceedings and other pre-existing tax liens as above provided. 
(Code 1972, § 5.05.140; Ord. No. 9-1996, § 1(part), 1996) 
Section 5.05.150. - Hearings, subpoenas and witness fees. 
A.  Hearings before the Town Clerk pursuant to provisions in this chapter shall be held pursuant to Chapter 2.20, Procedures for Hearings. Any subpoena issued pursuant to this chapter may be enforced by the Eagle Municipal Judge pursuant to C.R.S. § 13-10-112(2). The fees of witnesses for attendance at hearings shall be the same as the fees of witnesses before the District Court, such fees to be paid when the witness is excused from further attendance. When the witness is subpoenaed at the instance of the Town Clerk, such fees shall be paid in the same manner as other expenses under the terms of this chapter, and when a witness is subpoenaed at the instance of any party to any such proceeding, the Town Clerk may require that the cost of service of the subpoena and the fee of the witness be borne by the party at whose instance the witness is summoned. In such case, the Town Clerk, at his discretion, may require a deposit to cover the cost of such service and witness fees. A subpoena issued as aforesaid shall be served in the same manner as a subpoena issued out of a Court of Record. 
B.  The Eagle Municipal Judge, upon the application of the Town Clerk, may compel the attendance of witnesses, the production of books, papers, records or memoranda, and the giving of testimony before the Town Clerk or any duly authorized Hearing Officers, by an action for contempt, or otherwise, in the same manner as production of evidence may be compelled before the Court. 
(Code 1972, § 5.05.150; Ord. No. 9-1996, § 1(part), 1996) 
Section 5.05.160. - Depositions. 
    The Town Clerk or any party in an investigation or hearing before the Town Clerk may cause the deposition of witnesses residing within or without the State to be taken in the manner prescribed by law for like depositions in civil actions in courts of this State and to that end compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers, records or memoranda. 
(Code 1972, § 5.05.160; Ord. No. 9-1996, § 1(part), 1996) 
Section 5.05.170. - Statute of limitation. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, the taxes for any period, together with interest thereon and penalties with respect thereto, imposed by this chapter shall not be assessed, nor shall notice of lien be filed, or distraint warrant be issued, or suit for collection be instituted, or any other action to collect the same be commenced, more than three years after the date on which the tax was or is payable. Nor shall any lien continue after such period, except for taxes assessed before the expiration of such three-year period, notice of lien with respect to which has been filed prior to the expiration of such period. 
B.  In case of a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade taxation, the tax, together with interest and penalties thereon, may be assessed, or proceedings for the collection of such taxes may be commenced at any time. 
C.  Before the expiration of such period of limitation, the taxpayer and the Town Clerk may agree in writing to an extension thereof, and the period so agreed on may be extended by subsequent agreements in writing. 
(Code 1972, § 5.05.170; Ord. No. 9-1996, § 1(part), 1996) 
Section 5.05.180. - Fund created. 
A.  There is hereby created a fund to be known as the "open space preservation fund." One-half of the revenues derived from the occupation tax on the provision of lodging imposed by this chapter shall be placed in such open space preservation fund. All expenditures from such fund shall be used exclusively for: 
1.  The preservation of agricultural lands; 
2.  The acquisition, maintenance and management of lands and easements in and around the Town for open space buffer zones, trails within open space areas, and wildlife habitats; 
3.  Wetland preservation; 
4.  Construction and maintenance of soft path recreation trails connecting to the existing Eagle Area Trails System; and 
5.  The construction of facilities which will serve open space users such as restrooms, parking areas, and other physical improvements which will improve the quality of the user's experience when utilizing Town open space and adjacent lands. 
B.  There is hereby created a fund to be known as the "Town marketing and events fund account." One-half of the revenues derived from the occupation tax on the provision of lodging imposed by this chapter shall be placed in the Town marketing and events fund account. All expenditures from such fund shall be used exclusively for the general marketing and promotion of the Town and the marketing and promotion of Eagle events for the purpose of generating additional revenue for existing and future lodging and other Town businesses. 
C.  The Board of Trustees may, by a resolution of the Board, adopt rules and procedures for the expenditure of funds for the Town marketing and events fund account, including, but not limited to, the following: establishment of an advisory committee, the role and conduct of the advisory committee, the expenditure of funds and any other rules and regulations it deems necessary for the effective use and disposition of the funds. 
(Code 1972, § 5.05.180; Ord. No. 9-1996, § 1(part), 1996; Amended Ord. No. 19-2011, § 5, 2011; Amended Ord. No. 12-2014, § 1, 2014) 
Section 5.05.190. - Exemption from revenue limitation. 
    The occupation tax on the provision of lodging imposed by this chapter and the use of revenues derived from said tax for open space preservation and marketing and promotion of the Town and the marketing and promotion of Eagle events as set out herein was approved by the electors of the Town on April 2, 1996, and November 1, 2011. As a part of said approvals, the revenues are to be collected and spent as a voter-approved revenue change, notwithstanding any revenue or expenditure limitations contained in Article X, Section 20, of the State Constitution. 
(Code 1972, § 5.05.190; Ord. No. 9-1996, § 1(part), 1996; Amended Ord. No. 19-2011, § 6, 2011) 
CHAPTER 5.06. - SALES WITHIN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND ON OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY 

Section 5.06.010. - Purpose. 
    A purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the public by regulating certain business activities within the Town's public rights-of-way and on certain other public property and to enhance the environment within such public rights-of-way and public property. It is also a purpose of this chapter to provide for the reasonable usage of the public rights-of-way and applicable public property for business sales activities subject to appropriate restrictions. It is not a purpose of this chapter to regulate or restrict political speech and activities protected by the State and Federal Constitutions. 
(Code 1972, § 5.06.010; Ord. No. 45-2003, § 1, 2003) 
Section 5.06.020. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Public property means all parks, open space, recreation areas, and unimproved real property dedicated or conveyed to the Town or dedicated to the public within the Town; provided, however, the term shall not apply to visitor or tourist information centers, the Town hall, golf courses, or the Town's pool and ice facility. 
    Public right-of-way means any real property or easement dedicated or conveyed to the Town or to the public within the Town; and any real property or easement dedicated to the county or the State within the Town, for vehicular and/or pedestrian travel, including sidewalks and pedestrian paths. 
    Sales activity means selling or offering for sale to consumers, any goods, wares, food or merchandise while parked in any vehicle or other form of conveyance, or while situated in a stand or any other like structure of a temporary nature, or while traveling on foot. 
(Code 1972, § 5.06.020; Ord. No. 45-2003, § 1, 2003) 
Section 5.06.030. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or conduct sales activity within a public right-of-way or on public property, as defined herein, without having first obtained a license therefor from the Town pursuant to this chapter; provided, however, the Board of Trustees may waive the requirements of this chapter for street fairs, festivals, business promotions and similar special events approved by the Town. 
(Code 1972, § 5.06.030; Ord. No. 45-2003, § 1, 2003) 
Section 5.06.040. - Application for license. 
A.  Applications for a license to engage in or conduct sales activity within a public right-of-way or on applicable public property shall be submitted to the Town Manager on a form provided by the Town Clerk and shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Name and address of the applicant; and the names of all beneficial owners of the applicant if the applicant is other than a natural person or sole proprietorship; 
2.  If the applicant is acting as an employee of a business entity, the name, address and phone number of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship between employer and employee; 
3.  A brief description of the nature of the sales activity and the goods, wares, food or merchandise to be offered for sale; 
4.  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of any crime or municipal offense, other than minor traffic violations or infractions of six points or less, and if the applicant has been so convicted, a statement as to the nature of the offense and conviction; 
5.  The length of time for which the applicant desires to engage in sales activity; 
6.  The location for which the license is requested; 
7.  The description of the stand, temporary structure and/or other implements to be used in connection with the sales activity if the license is granted; 
8.  A signed statement that the applicant shall hold harmless and indemnify the Town, its officers and employees, for any claims for damage to property or injury to persons which may be occasioned by any activity carried on under the terms of the license within the public right-of-way or other applicable public property, including reasonable Attorney's fees; and 
9.  Proof of a current business license issued pursuant to Chapter 5.02, and proof of a sales tax license if required under Chapter 3.04 or applicable State law. 
B.  At the time of the filing of the application, a fee of $25.00 shall be paid to the Town Clerk to cover the cost of processing the application. 
(Code 1972, § 5.06.040; Ord. No. 45-2003, § 1, 2003) 
Section 5.06.050. - Issuance of license. 
    Upon receipt of an application described in Section 5.06.040, an investigation shall be conducted at the direction of the Town Manager to determine the applicant's business character and responsibility; the impacts of the proposed sales activity on the safety of inhabitants in the area and the free flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic; the impacts on the public right-of-way, or other applicable public property, where the applicant desires to engage in or conduct sales activity; and impacts on the adjoining land uses and established businesses in the neighborhood. Based upon such investigation, the Town Manager shall grant or deny the application for a license to engage in or conduct sales activity within a public right-of-way, or on applicable public property, within 30 days following receipt of the application. 
A.  If the application for a license is granted, the Town Manager shall issue a license to the applicant which shall contain the signature of the issuing officer, the type of license issued, and the kind of goods, wares, food or merchandise to be sold thereunder, the date of issuance, the expiration date thereof, and any restrictions or conditions of the license. 
B.  The Town Manager, in the exercise of his reasonable discretion, may adopt a policy providing that no applications for a license will be accepted, and no licenses issued, for certain defined locations and time periods when the Town Manager determines that any sale activity within a public right-of-way or applicable public property will result in a danger to inhabitants in the area; or negative impacts to the free flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic; or negative impacts on adjoining land uses and established businesses in the neighborhood; or negative impacts on the public right-of-way, or other applicable public property. 
(Code 1972, § 5.06.050; Ord. No. 45-2003, § 1, 2003) 
Section 5.06.060. - License conditions and restrictions. 
    Any license issued by the Town Manager under this chapter may include the following conditions or restrictions: 
A.  Requirement for the provision of a fidelity bond in a reasonable amount to the Town to guarantee the payment of applicable sales taxes; 
B.  Requirement that the licensee maintain such public liability, food products liability and other insurance that will protect the licensee and the Town from all claims for damage to the property or bodily injury of others, including illness or death, which may arise from sales activities under the license or in connection therewith. Such insurance shall be in such amounts as reasonably determined by the Town Manager. Such insurance shall be deemed primary insurance and not contributory insurance to any insurance policies maintained by the Town, and shall name the Town and its officers and employees as additional insureds, and shall further provide that the policy shall not terminate or be cancelled prior to expiration of the license and without 30 days advance written notice to the Town. If such insurance is required, the licensee shall provide proof thereof to the Town Manager; 
C.  If the licensee intends to utilize a motor vehicle or other form of conveyance to be parked upon or located on any public right-of-way, or other applicable public property, or intends to operate from a stand or any other like structure of a temporary nature, the Town Manager may restrict the location of such parking or structure to certain limited areas within the Town to promote and facilitate the safety of inhabitants in the area and the free flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, and lessen the impacts on adjoining land uses or on established businesses in the neighborhood; and 
D.  Any other conditions or restrictions reasonably necessary to promote the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Code 1972, § 5.06.060; Ord. No. 45-2003, § 1, 2003) 
Section 5.06.070. - License-Fees. 
    Prior to the issuance of a license granted pursuant to this chapter, the licensee shall pay to the Town Clerk a license fee established by resolution of the Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1972, § 5.06.070; Ord. No. 01-2017, § 2, 1-10-2017) 
Section 5.06.080. - Same-Display required. 
    Upon request by any person, a licensee shall exhibit its license issued pursuant to this chapter to such person, including police officers and other Town officials. 
(Code 1972, § 5.06.080) 
Section 5.06.090. - Same-Revocation. 
A.  Licenses issued under this chapter may be revoked by the Town Manager, after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes: 
1.  Fraud, misrepresentation or a false statement contained in the application for the license; 
2.  Fraud, misrepresentation or a false statement made in the course of engaging in or conducting sales activity within a public right-of-way, or other applicable public property; 
3.  Any violation of the conditions or restrictions of the license issued or any violation of this Code; 
4.  Conviction of any crime or municipal offense involving moral turpitude; or 
5.  Conducting sales activity in an unlawful manner or in such a manner so as to constitute a breach of the peace, or constitute a danger to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
B.  Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds for revocation and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at its address shown on the application, at least five days prior to the date of the hearing. Such hearing shall be held no later than 30 days following issuance of the notice and shall be conducted in accordance with Chapter 2.20. 
(Code 1972, § 5.06.090; Ord. No. 45-2003, § 1, 2003) 
Section 5.06.100. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by the action of the Town Manager in the denial of a license or the revocation of the same shall have the right of appeal to the Board of Trustees. Such appeal shall be filed within 14 days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such person's last known address, by means of a notice of appeal setting forth the grounds for the appeal. The Board shall set a time and place for the hearing within 30 days following receipt of the notice of appeal, and shall give notice to the appellant at its address as set forth in the application, at least five days prior to the date set for the 
hearing. Such hearing shall be held within 30 days following receipt of the notice of appeal and shall be conducted in accordance with Chapter 2.20. The Board of Trustees may affirm the decision of the Town Manager, reverse the decision of the Town Manager, or approve a license subject to reasonable conditions and restrictions. The decision of the Board shall be final, subject to an appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to State law. 
(Code 1972, § 5.06.100; Ord. No. 45-2003, § 1, 2003) 
Section 5.06.110. - Violations. 
    Any person who knowingly violates any of the provisions of this chapter commits a Class A municipal offense. Such person shall be guilty of a separate municipal offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this chapter is committed or continued. 
(Code 1972, § 5.06.110; Ord. No. 45-2003, § 1, 2003) 
CHAPTER 5.10. - LICENSED LIQUOR ESTABLISHMENTS - REQUIREMENTS 

Section 5.10.010. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Terms shall have the same meaning as defined in C.R.S. § 44-3-103. 
    Manager means any person who manages, directs, supervises, oversees or administers an establishment and its employees preparing, selling, serving or otherwise providing alcohol beverages for consumption on the premises pursuant to a tavern license or hotel restaurant license issued therefor. 
    Offense or violation means any violation by the licensee or by any of the agents, servants, or employees of such licensee of the provisions of C.R.S. Title 44, Articles 3 and 4, or any of the rules and regulations authorized pursuant to said articles, or of any terms, conditions, or provisions of the license issued by the Local Licensing Authority, as determined by a court of competent jurisdiction, or as determined by the State licensing authority or the Local Licensing Authority, following an opportunity for a hearing as provided by law. 
    Server means any person who is employed by a licensee to prepare, serve, sell or otherwise provide alcohol beverages pursuant to a tavern license or hotel restaurant license. 
    Tastings mean the sampling of malt, vinous or spirituous liquors that may occur on the premises of a retail liquor store licensed or liquor-licensed drugstore licensee by adult patrons of the licensee pursuant to the provisions of C.R.S. § 44-3-301(10) and Section 5.10.070. 
(Code 1972, § 5.10.010; Amended Ord. No. 30-2003, § 1(part), 2003; Amended Ord. No. 35-2003, § 1(part), 2003; Ord. No. 31-2005, § 1(part), 2005; Ord. No. 36-2018 , § 2, 11-27-2018) 
Section 5.10.020. - Education requirements. 
A.  All managers or owners/operators of tavern or hotel and restaurant licensed establishments, registered with the State and the Local Licensing Authority, shall have a valid certificate evidencing successful completion of an educational liquor seminar approved by the local liquor licensing authority. The certificate received by persons who successfully complete a liquor education and training seminar shall be valid for a period of three years. 
B.  All existing managers or owners/operators of establishments holding a tavern license or hotel and restaurant license must have completed a liquor education and training seminar approved by the local liquor licensing authority and received a certificate of completion. Persons who become new managers or owners/operators of establishments holding a tavern license or hotel and restaurant license within the Town shall successfully complete a liquor seminar approved by the Local Licensing Authority within one month of registration as a manager or owner/operator and obtain a certificate of completion. 
C.  Every licensee of an establishment holding a tavern license or hotel and restaurant license shall ensure that all servers currently employed by it have successfully completed a liquor education and training seminar approved by the local liquor licensing authority, and that all new servers successfully complete a liquor education and training seminar within three months from the date of commencement of employment. The certificate received by servers who successfully complete the liquor education and training seminar shall be valid for a period of three years. 
D.  Every person or agency offering a course of instruction approved by the Local Licensing Authority shall issue a certificate to those who successfully complete the liquor education and training seminar. The certificate shall indicate the date of completion of the training and the date of the certificate expiration and shall evidence at a minimum that the person has been in actual attendance for the required minimum number of hours at the course and has achieved a reasonable mastery of the subject matter presented. No person or agency approved by the Town to provide educational training shall issue a certificate unless the person taking the course has actually attended the course and achieved a reasonable mastery of the materials. 
E.  The Local Licensing Authority shall establish by resolution the general criteria for courses and qualifications of instructors which shall satisfy the liquor education and training requirements of this section. These requirements shall be available in the office of the Town Clerk. Any qualified person or entity may submit to the Local Licensing Authority a request that a particular seminar be deemed to meet the educational requirements. The licensing authority or its designee may make such determination. A file of all course requirements shall be available in the office of the Town Clerk. 
F.  At the time a licensee or applicant files an application to renew or transfer a tavern or hotel and restaurant license, or to change the location of the licensed premises, or to change the corporate structure, the licensee or applicant shall submit to the Town Clerk sufficient information to establish that all managers, owners/operators, and servers required to be certified under this chapter have such certificates; and shall exhibit copies of said certificates, as well as employment records for servers showing the date of hire, when requested to do so by the Town Clerk, members of the Eagle Police Department, or other appropriate officials of the Town. Failure to comply with the educational, certification, and disclosure requirements established under this chapter shall be considered a violation of the conditions of the issuance of a license, and may result in suspension or revocation of the tavern license or hotel and restaurant license. In addition, failure to comply with the educational, certification and disclosure requirements provided by this chapter may result in the denial of an application to renew a tavern or hotel and restaurant liquor license. 
G.  Any person who knowingly violates any provision of this chapter, or who knowingly fails to perform an act required by any provision of this chapter, commits a Class A municipal offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be deemed to have been committed for each day which any violation of this chapter shall continue. 
(Code 1972, § 5.10.020; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 15, 2001) 
Section 5.10.030. - Delegation of authority to Town Clerk. 
A.  As set forth below, the Town Clerk is authorized to administratively review and approve: liquor license renewals; transfers of ownership, including corporate and trade name changes and reports of changes for corporations; limited liability companies and partnerships; changes of a manager; and special event permits. 
1.  Renewals. The Town Clerk may administratively approve an application for the renewal of any existing license, where, after reasonable investigation and consultation with the Eagle Police Department and other appropriate agencies, all of the following circumstances are found to exist: 
a.  The applicant has timely submitted a complete application and paid all fees in accordance with this chapter and C.R.S. Title 44; 
b.  The applicant's license is in good standing with the Town and the State, and no violation of law has occurred on the licensed premises during the previous year; 
c.  To the knowledge of the Town Clerk, there is no pending or proposed criminal or legal investigation or charges against the applicant or the licensed premises; and 
d.  There is no other information known by the Town Clerk that could support denial of the application under applicable law. 
2.  Changes of manager. The Town Clerk may administratively approve an application for a change of a manager for a licensed establishment where, after reasonable investigation and consultation with the Eagle Police Department and other appropriate agencies, all the following circumstances are found to exist: 
a.  The applicant has timely submitted a complete application and paid all required fees in accordance with this chapter and C.R.S. Title 44; 
b.  The new manager has applied to the Police Department for fingerprinting and a background investigation; and 
c.  There is no information known by the Town Clerk that could support denial of the application under applicable law. 
3.  Temporary permits. The Town Clerk may administratively approve an application for a temporary permit where, after reasonable investigation and consultation with the Eagle Police Department and other appropriate agencies, all the following circumstances are found to exist: 
a.  The applicant has timely submitted a complete application and paid all fees in accordance with this chapter and C.R.S. § 44-3-303; 
b.  There is an application pending for the transfer of the license; 
c.  The premises subject to the proposed temporary permit is currently subject to a license; and 
d.  There is no information known by the Town Clerk that could support denial of the application under applicable law. 
4.  Special event permits. The Town Clerk may administratively approve an application for a special event permit where, after reasonable investigation and consultation with the Eagle Police Department and other appropriate agencies, all the following circumstances are found to exist: 
a.  The applicant has timely submitted a complete application and paid all fees in accordance with this chapter and C.R.S. Title 44, Article 5; 
b.  There has been a timely and proper posting of conspicuous public notice of the proposed permit and protest procedures at the locations sought to be licensed; 
c.  The application and the applicant satisfy the eligibility criteria set forth in C.R.S. §§ 12-28-102 and 12-28-103, as amended; and 
d.  There is no information known by the Town Clerk that could support denial of the application under applicable law. 
B.  The Town Clerk shall not approve an application if the Eagle Police Department has timely submitted written objections to the Town Clerk concerning such action. If such objections are received, the Town Clerk shall set the application for a hearing before the Local Licensing Authority. 
C.  Notwithstanding any authority delegated to the Town Clerk under this section, the Town Clerk may, in his or her discretion, refer any licensing or permitting decision to the Board of Trustees if, in the Town Clerk's opinion, the matter should be presented to the Local Licensing Authority. The hearing before the Local Licensing Authority shall be noticed as required by law. 
D.  Any applicant or party in interest, as defined in C.R.S. § 44-3-311, who is dissatisfied with a decision of the Town Clerk under this section may appeal the same to the Local Licensing Authority by filing a written protest with the Town Clerk not more than ten days after the date of the decision. The Town Clerk shall promptly set the appeal for a hearing before the Local Licensing Authority, which hearing shall be noticed as required by law. 
E.  The Town Clerk shall report to the authority in a timely manner all actions taken by the Town Clerk under this section. 
(Code 1972, § 5.10.025; Ord. No. 15, § 1, 2013; Ord. No. 36-2018 , § 3, 11-27-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 36-2018 , § 3, adopted Nov. 27, 2018, amended § 5.10.030 and in so doing changed the title of said section from "Delegation of authority to Town Clerk to issue licenses and permits" to "Delegation of authority to Town Clerk," as set out herein. 
Section 5.10.040. - Distance limitations in the Central Business District. 
    Pursuant to C.R.S. § 44-3-313(1)(d)(III), there is no required minimum distance between a building in which malt, vinous or spirituous liquor is sold pursuant to the issuance of any license under C.R.S. Title 44, Articles 3 or 4 within the Central Business District (CBD) Zone District and any public or parochial school or the campus of any college, university, or seminary. 
(Ord. No. 36-2018 , § 4, 11-27-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 36-2018 , § 4, adopted Nov. 27, 2018, repealed § 5.10.040 and enacted a new § 5.10.040, as set out herein. The former § 5.10.040 pertained to distance between schools and licensed liquor establishments in the Central Business District and derived from Code 1972, § 5.10.035; Amended Ord. No. 5-2004, § 1, 2004. 
Section 5.10.050. - Special event permits. 
A.  Pursuant to C.R.S. § 44-5-107(5)(a), the Board of Trustees, acting as the Local Licensing Authority, elects not to obtain the State licensing authority's approval or disapproval of applications for special events permits pursuant to C.R.S. Title 44, Article 5. The Board of Trustees hereby authorizes the issuance of special event permits for the sale, by the drink only, of alcohol beverages by the Town, organizations, and political candidates in accordance with this chapter and C.R.S. Title 44, Article 5. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold at any special event until a special event permit is obtained from the Town. The standards in this chapter shall be in addition to all other applicable requirements of the Colorado Liquor Code, C.R.S. § 44-3-101, et seq. 
B.  Any organization or political candidate desiring to sell alcohol beverages at a special event shall obtain a permit from the Local Licensing Authority by first completing an application and paying the fee established by resolution of the Board of Trustees. An application shall be filed at least 30 days prior to the event, unless waived by the Town Clerk for good cause shown. 
C.  Upon receipt of an application for a special event permit, the Town Clerk, acting on behalf of the Local Licensing Authority, shall, as required by C.R.S. § 44-5-107(5)(c), access information made available on the State licensing authority's website to determine the statewide permitting activity of the organization applying for the permit. Before approving an application, the Town Clerk shall consider compliance with C.R.S. § 44-5-105(3), which restricts the number of permits issued to an organization in a calendar year. 
D.  The Town Clerk or the Local Licensing Authority may deny issuance of a special event permit if it determines that the issuance would be injurious to the public welfare, because of the nature of the special event, or the applicant's ability to conduct the event in compliance with applicable laws and regulations. Special event permits shall not be transferable. 
E.  As required by C.R.S. § 44-5-107(5)(a), the Town Clerk, acting on behalf of the Local Licensing Authority, shall report to the State Liquor Enforcement Division within ten days after the issuance of a permit, the name of the organization to which a permit was issued, the address of the permitted location, and the permitted dates of alcohol beverage service. 
F.  Pursuant to C.R.S. § 44-5-105, a special event permit shall not be issued to any organization for more than 15 days in any one calendar year. 
(Code 1972, § 5.10.037; Ord. No. 15, § 2, 2013; Ord. No. 36-2018 , § 5, 11-27-2018) 
Section 5.10.060. - Optional premises licenses and hotel/restaurant licenses with optional premises. 
A.  The following standards for the issuance of optional premises licenses or for optional premises for hotel and restaurant licenses are adopted pursuant to the provisions of C.R.S. Title 44, Article 3, and shall be in addition to all other applicable standards in the Colorado Liquor Code. 
B.  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Optional premises means the same as that defined in the Colorado Liquor Code. The two types of licenses authorized in this section, "optional premises" and "hotel and restaurant with optional premises," will collectively be referred to as "optional premises" in this section unless otherwise stated. 
    Outdoor sports and recreational facility means the same as that defined in the Colorado Liquor Code. 
C.  Application for an optional premises license shall be made to the Town Clerk on forms which shall contain the following information, in addition to any information required by the State licensing authority: 
1.  A map or other drawing illustrating the outdoor sports or recreational facility boundaries and the approximate location of the proposed optional premises license requested. 
2.  Proposed locations for the permanent, temporary, or moveable structures or vehicles which are proposed to be used for the sale or service of alcoholic beverages. 
3.  A description of the method which shall be used to identify the boundaries of the optional premises license when it is in use and how the licensee will ensure alcoholic beverages are not removed from such premises. Golf courses, however, do not require fencing around the perimeter of the optional premises area. 
4.  Proof of the applicant's right to possession of the optional premises, including a legal description and supporting documentation. 
5.  A description of the provisions which have been made for storing alcoholic beverages in a secure area on or off the optional premises for future use on the optional premises. 
6.  A description of the location of seating areas, if any. 
7.  A description of the location of restroom facilities, if any. 
8.  Access restrictions to the optional premises, if any. 
9.  A description of the provisions which shall be implemented to control the dispensing of alcoholic beverages to underage persons or visibly intoxicated persons. 
10.  Such other information as may be reasonably required to satisfy the Local Licensing Authority that the control of the optional premises will be insured and that the health, safety and welfare of the surrounding neighborhood will not be adversely affected should the optional premises be licensed. 
D.  There shall be no restrictions on the minimum size of the outdoor sports and recreational facility which may be eligible for approval. There are no restrictions on the number of optional premises which any one licensee may have for a facility. However: 
1.  The Local Licensing Authority may consider the size of the particular outdoor sports or recreational facility in relationship to the number of optional premises licenses requested for the facility; and 
2.  Any applicant requesting approval of more than one optional premises shall demonstrate the need for each optional premise in relation to the outdoor sports or recreational facility and its guests. 
E.  Nothing contained in this section shall preclude the Local Licensing Authority, in its discretion, from imposing other conditions, restrictions or limitations on any optional premises license in order to serve the public health, safety and welfare. Any such conditions may be imposed when the license is initially issued or issued for any specific event or use of the optional premises. The Local Licensing Authority shall have complete discretion to deny any request for such a license or to suspend or revoke the optional premises license in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Colorado Liquor Code and any applicable Town ordinances. 
F.  It shall be unlawful for alcoholic beverages to be served on the optional premises until the optional premises licensee has fully complied with this section and has filed written notice with the State and the Local Licensing Authority stating the specific days and hours during which the optional premises will be used. Such notice must be recorded at least 48 hours prior to serving alcoholic beverages on the optional premises. Any violation of this section shall be deemed to be one of strict liability and shall constitute a Class A municipal offense. Each day, or part thereof, during which such a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1972, § 5.10.040; Ord. No. 11-2001, § 1, 2001; Ord. No. 36-2018 , § 6, 11-27-2018) 
Section 5.10.070. - Alcoholic beverage tastings. 
A.  In accordance with C.R.S. § 44-3-301(10)(a), retail liquor store licensees and liquor-licensed drugstore licensees may conduct alcohol beverage tastings subject to the limitations contained in C.R.S. § 44-3-301(10), and subject to approval by the Board of Trustees, acting as the Local Licensing Authority, of an alcoholic beverage tastings permit and payment of all requisite fees. 
B.  A retail liquor store licensee or a liquor-licensed drugstore licensee who desires to conduct tastings may submit an application to the Board of Trustees, acting as the Local Licensing Authority. The Board of Trustees may reject the application if the applicant fails to establish that it is able to conduct tastings in compliance with C.R.S. § 44-3-301(10) or without creating a safety risk to the neighborhood. An approved alcohol beverage tastings permit shall have an expiration date concurrent with the establishment's existing retail liquor store license or liquor-licensed drugstore license and shall be subject to annual renewals accordingly. 
C.  The applicant for an alcoholic beverage tastings permit shall certify on the application that all persons serving alcoholic beverages at tastings have completed a server training program that meets the standards established by the liquor enforcement division of the State Department of Revenue. The applicant shall also state on the application the days and times that tastings will occur. The licensee shall give at least 24 hours prior notice to the Eagle Police Department of any deviations in the tastings schedule as set forth in the application. 
D.  Every application for an alcoholic beverage tastings permit or renewal thereof shall be accompanied by an application fee in an amount set forth by resolution of the Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1972, § 5.10.045; Ord. No. 31-2005, § 2(part), 2005; Ord. No. 01-2017, § 3, 1-10-2017; Ord. No. 36-2018 , § 7, 11-27-2018) 
Section 5.10.080. - General penalty guidelines for violations. 
    The presumptive penalties for violations of certain provisions of the Colorado Beer Code and the Colorado Liquor Code shall be subject to the following presumptive penalties; provided that such presumptive penalties shall not restrict the Local Licensing Authority's discretion to impose a greater or lesser penalty. 
A.  Presumptive penalties. 
Code Violation Penalty 1. Sale to underage persons, C.R.S. § 44-3-901 First offense 15 days total suspension, 5 days actually served and 10 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license Second offense within two years of first violation 30 days total suspension, 10 days actually served and 20 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license Third offense within two years of first violation 45 days total suspension, 15 days actually served and 30 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license Fourth and subsequent offenses within two years of first violation 60 days suspension to be served by actual closure; no days held in abeyance; or revocation 2. Sale to or loitering of visibly intoxicated patron or habitual drunkard, C.R.S. § 44-3-901, Regulation 47-900 First offense 15 days total suspension, 5 days actually served and 10 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of the hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license Second offense within two years of first violation 30 days total suspension, 10 days actually served and 20 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license Third offense within two years of first violation 45 days total suspension, 15 days actually served and 30 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license Fourth and subsequent offenses within two years of first violation 60 days suspension to be served by actual closure; no days held in abeyance; or revocation 3. Purchase of alcoholic beverages from someone other than a licensed wholesaler, C.R.S. § 44-3-901 First offense 10 days total suspension, 3 days actually served and 7 held in abeyance for a period of one year from date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license Second and subsequent offenses within one year of first violation 10 days total suspension, 5 days actually served and 5 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license 4. Failure to meet food requirements, C.R.S. § 44-3-413 (Hotel and Restaurant Licenses), C.R.S. § 44-3-414 (Tavern Licenses) First offense 15 days total suspension, 5 days actually served and 10 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations, of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license, with 30 days to come into compliance Second and subsequent offenses within two years of first violation 15 days total suspension, 5 days actually served and 10 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations, of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license with 30 days to come into compliance 5. Permitting use of gambling machines and devices, C.R.S. § 44-3-901, Regulation 47-922 First offense 45 days total suspension, 15 days actually served and 30 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license Second offense within one year of first violation 45 days suspension to be served by actual closure, no days held in abeyance Third and subsequent offenses within one year of first violation Revocation 6. Permitting illegal gambling, C.R.S. § 44-3-901, Regulation 47-922 First offense 10 days total suspension, 3 days actually served and 7 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license Second and subsequent offenses within one year of first violation 45 days total suspension, 15 days actually served and 30 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license; or revocation 7. Failure to maintain adequate books and records, C.R.S. § 44-3-701 First offense 15 days total suspension, 5 days actually served and 10 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license Second and subsequent offenses within one year of first violation 30 days total suspension, 10 days actually served and 20 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license; or revocation 8. Sale or consumption of alcohol beverages after legal hours, C.R.S. § 44-3-901, Regulation 47-910 First offense 10 days total suspension, 3 days actually served and 7 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license Second and subsequent offenses within one year of first violation 30 days total suspension for each offense, 10 days actually served and 20 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license; or revocation 9. Permitting improper conduct within establishment, other than serving or loitering of visibly intoxicated persons or habitual drunkard, Regulation 47-900 First offense 30 days total suspension, 10 days actually served and 20 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license Second offense within two years of first violation 45 days total suspension, 15 days actually served and 30 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license Third and subsequent offenses within two years of first violation 45 days suspension, to be served by actual closure, no days held in abeyance; or revocation 10. Failure to report manager, corporate or financial change, C.R.S. § 44-3-301, Regulation 47-304 First offense 5 days total suspension, all 5 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license Second and subsequent offenses within one year of first violation Ten days total suspension, three days actually served, and seven days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license 11. Underage employee selling or serving alcoholic beverages, C.R.S. § 44-3-901(6)(a), Regulation 47-913 First offense 7 days total suspension, 2 days actually served and 5 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license Second offense within one year of first violation 14 days total suspension, 4 days actually served, and 10 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license Third and subsequent offenses within one year of first violation 30 days total suspension, 10 days actually served, and 20 days held in abeyance for a period of one year from the date of hearing, pending no further violations of state codes, regulations or local ordinances regarding subject matter of respondent's license  
B.  Aggravating and mitigating circumstances. In considering whether to deviate from the presumptive penalty guidelines set forth above, the Local Licensing Authority may consider mitigating and aggravating factors when considering the imposition of the penalty. Such factors may include: 
1.  Corrective action(s) taken by the licensee to prevent further violations, i.e., training of servers. 
2.  Licensee's past history. 
3.  Prior violations, prior warnings, prior corrective action(s) and its effectiveness. 
4.  Willfulness or deliberateness of the violation. 
5.  Likelihood of recurrence of the violation. 
6.  Seriousness of violation. 
7.  Licensee or the manager is the violator or has directed an employee or other individual to violate the law. 
C.  General provisions concerning imposition of penalty. 
1.  In the event a second or subsequent action is brought before the Local Licensing Authority for a violation of the Colorado Beer Code, Colorado Liquor Code, or regulations promulgated thereunder, and licensee is found to have committed such violation, days suspended but held in abeyance in a previous action shall automatically be imposed, plus any additional suspension for the new violation as determined by the Local Licensing Authority. 
2.  Any period of actual closure imposed as part of a suspension by the Local Licensing Authority must run consecutive to any previously imposed period of closure. 
3.  In the event a license for the retail sale of malt, vinous or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption is suspended, and an actual closure is ordered, there shall be a mandatory closure of at least one day commencing at 12:01 a.m. or 2:01 a.m. on a Saturday and ending at 12:00 midnight the same day. In the event a license for the retail sale of malt, vinous or spirituous liquor for off-premises consumption is suspended, suspension days shall not include Sundays. 
4.  Notwithstanding the presumptive penalties set forth above, the Town Attorney reserves the right to request revocation of a license for any violation. 
5.  The Local Licensing Authority shall have the power to impose on a licensee as a condition of a period of suspension to be held in abeyance, or as a condition of renewal of a license, any condition(s) reasonably related to the offenses leading to the suspension or the conduct of the business whose license is to be renewed. 
(Code 1972, § 5.10.050; Ord. No. 30-2003, § 2(part), 2003; Amended Ord. No. 35-2003, § 2(part), 2003; Ord. No. 36-2018 , § 8, 11-27-2018) 
Section 5.10.090. - Penalty guidelines for violations involving compliance check. 
    When the Local Licensing Authority finds that a licensee has sold alcohol beverages to a person under the legal age limit and that said violation was investigated or detected by using a person under 21 years of age to purchase alcohol beverages from the licensee, the Local Licensing Authority may consider the following penalties to be imposed for the violation. 
A.  First offense (within one year): 
1.  A written warning up to a 15-day suspension. The Local Licensing Authority may hold a portion of the suspension time in abeyance for a period of time. 
2.  As an inducement for licensees to provide training for servers, because server training has proven to be an aid in the reduction of violations, it is recommended that, where there are no aggravating circumstances, a licensee who has provided training to its staff members be issued only a warning on the first violation. 
B.  Second offense (within one year): A five day to 30-day suspension. If no suspension was served at the time of the first offense, it is within the discretion of the licensing authority to hold a portion of the suspension time in abeyance for a period of time. 
C.  Third offense (within one year): A 20- to 45-day suspension shall be imposed. 
D.  The fourth offense (within two years): A minimum 45-day suspension up to and including revocation shall be imposed. 
E.  Aggravating and mitigating circumstances. The Local Licensing Authority may also consider aggravating and mitigating factors when considering the imposition of the penalty for violations involving compliance checks. These factors may include: 
1.  Action taken by the licensee to prevent violations, i.e., training of servers. 
2.  Licensee's past history of success or failure with compliance checks. 
3.  Corrective action(s) taken by the licensee. 
4.  Prior violations/prior corrective action(s) and its effectiveness. 
5.  Willfulness or deliberateness of the violation. 
6.  Likelihood of recurrence of the violation. 
7.  Factors which might make the situation unique, such as: 
a.  Prior notification letter to the licensee that a compliance check would be forthcoming. 
b.  The dress or appearance of the underage operative, i.e., the operative was wearing a high school letter jacket. 
8.  Licensee or the manager is the violator or has directed an employee or other individual to violate the law. 
F.  General provisions concerning imposition of penalty. 
1.  In the event a second or subsequent action is brought before the Local Licensing Authority for a violation of the Colorado Beer Code or Colorado Liquor Code involving a compliance check, and the licensee is found to have committed such violation, days suspended but held in abeyance in a previous action shall automatically be imposed, plus any additional suspension for the new violation as determined by the Local Licensing Authority. 
2.  Any period of actual closure imposed as part of a suspension by the Local Licensing Authority must run consecutive to any previously imposed period of closure. 
3.  In the event a license for the retail sale of malt, vinous or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption is suspended, and an actual closure is ordered, there shall be a mandatory closure of at least one day commencing at 12:01 a.m. or 2:01 a.m. on a Saturday and ending at 12:00 midnight the same day. In the event a license for the retail sale of malt, vinous or spirituous liquor for off-premises consumption is suspended, suspension days shall not include Sundays. 
4.  Notwithstanding the presumptive penalties set forth above, the Town Attorney reserves the right to request revocation of a license for any violation. 
5.  The Local Licensing Authority shall have the power to impose on a licensee as a condition of a period of suspension held in abeyance, or as a condition of renewal of a license, any condition(s) reasonably related to the offenses leading to the suspension or the conduct of the business whose license is to be renewed. 
(Code 1972, § 5.10.060; Ord. No. 30-2003, § 2(part), 2003; Amended Ord. No. 35-2003, § 3(part), 2003) 
Section 5.10.100. - Unlawful acts. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person licensed to sell alcohol pursuant to the Colorado Beer Code, C.R.S. Title 44, Article 4, or the Colorado Liquor Code, C.R.S. Title 44, Article 3: 
1.  To sell an alcohol beverage to any person under the age of 21 years, to a habitual drunkard, or to a visibly intoxicated person. If a person who is not 21 years of age exhibits a fraudulent proof of age, any action relying on such fraudulent proof of age shall not constitute grounds for the revocation or suspension of any license issued under C.R.S. Title 44, Article 3 or 4. 
2.  With knowledge, to permit or fail to prevent the use of his identification, including a driver's license, by a person who is under 21 years of age, for the unlawful purchase of any alcohol beverage. 
3.  To fail to conduct the licensed premises in a decent, orderly and respectable manner; to knowingly permit on the licensed premises the loitering of a visibly intoxicated person or habitual drunkard; or to knowingly permit any activity or acts of disorderly conduct as defined by and provided for in C.R.S. § 18-9-106; or to permit rowdiness, undue noise, or other disturbance or activity offensive to the senses of the average citizen or to the residents of the neighborhood in which the licensed establishment is located. 
4.  To fail to immediately contact the Eagle Police Department or other law enforcement agency upon the happening of any act within the licensed establishment apparently constituting harassment, as defined in Section 9.12.050; disorderly conduct, as defined in Section 9.12.060; assault and battery, as defined in Section 9.12.070; or criminal trespass, as defined in Section 9.14.070. The mere number of calls made by a licensed establishment to the Eagle Police Department or other law enforcement agency for such purposes shall not be used against a licensee at a suspension, revocation or license renewal hearing. 
B.  The above offenses, unless otherwise indicated, shall constitute strict liability offenses. 
(Code 1972, § 5.10.070; Ord. No. 30-2003, § 3(part), 2003; Amended Ord. No. 35-2003, § 4(part), 2003; Ord. No. 36-2018 , § 9, 11-27-2018) 
Section 5.10.110. - Entertainment districts. 
A.  Purpose. The Town is exercising its local option to allow common consumption areas in the Town by establishing entertainment districts pursuant to the Colorado Liquor Code. The regulations in this section are in addition to all other applicable regulations in the Colorado Liquor Code, Colorado Beer Code and this Code. 
B.  Authority. 
1.  The Local Licensing Authority, acting through the Board of Trustees, is authorized to certify and decertify promotional associations; designate the location, size, security, and hours of operation of common consumption areas; and allow attachment of licensed premises to common consumption areas consistent with this section. 
2.  The Local Licensing Authority may impose reasonable conditions on the licensing of common consumption areas, the certification of promotional associations, and the attachment of licensed premises to common consumption areas. 
C.  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the following meanings: 
    Common consumption area means an area designed as a common area located within a designated entertainment district and approved by the Local Licensing Authority that uses physical barriers to close the area to motor vehicle traffic and limit pedestrian access. 
    Entertainment district is defined as set forth in C.R.S. § 44-3-103, as amended. 
    Local Licensing Authority means the Town Board of Trustees. 
    Promotional association means an association that is incorporated in Colorado that organizes and promotes entertainment activities within a common consumption area and is organized or authorized by two or more people who own or lease property within an entertainment district. 
D.  Creation. Entertainment districts shall be approved by resolution of the Board of Trustees. Upon approval of an entertainment district, the Liquor Licensing Authority may certify promotional associations to operate common consumption areas within the entertainment district in which alcohol beverages may be sold, served and consumed subject to the requirements of this Code, the Colorado Liquor Code and the Colorado Beer Code, and conditions set forth in the resolution approving the entertainment district. 
E.  Certification of a promotional association. 
1.  An application to certify a promotional association shall include the following minimum information: 
a.  A copy of the articles of incorporation and bylaws and a list of all directors and officers of the promotional association. A member of each licensed premises shall serve as one of the directors on the board of the promotional association which shall have at least two licensed premises attached to the common consumption area; 
b.  A detailed map of the proposed common consumption area, including without limitation: the location of physical barriers, entrances and exits, the location of attached licensed premises, and identification of licensed premises that are adjacent, but not to be attached to the common consumption area; 
c.  A security plan, including evidence of training and approval of personnel, a detailed description of security arrangements and the approximate location of security personnel within the common consumption area during operating hours; 
d.  A list of dates and proposed hours of operation of the common consumption area; 
e.  Documentation showing possession of the common consumption area by the promotional association; 
f.  A list of the attached licensees, of which there will be a minimum of two, listing the following information: liquor license number, a list of any past liquor violations, and a copy of any operational agreements; 
g.  An insurance certificate of general liability and liquor liability insurance naming the Town as an additional insured in a minimum amount of $2,000,000.00; 
h.  Documentation of the reasonable requirements of the neighborhood and the desires of the adult inhabitants for a common consumption area, as evidenced by petitions, written testimony or otherwise; and 
i.  The application fee as set by resolution of the Board of Trustees. 
2.  Upon certification of a promotional association, the terms and conditions of the approval shall remain effective until and unless a revised or amended application is submitted and approved using the same procedures under which the original application was approved. 
3.  A certified promotional association shall file an application for recertification by January 31 of each year, which shall include the following: all of the information in the original application, plus a copy of any changes to the articles of incorporation, bylaws or the directors and officers of the promotional association. Failure to submit a complete application shall be grounds for the denial of the recertification. 
4.  Any application by a liquor licensee to attach to an existing common consumption area of a certified promotional association shall include without limitation: 
a.  Authorization for attachment from the certified promotional association; 
b.  The name of the licensee's designee to sit on the board of directors of the certified promotional association; 
c.  Detailed map of the common consumption area showing the addition of the new licensee including location of physical barriers, entrances and exits, location of attached licensed premises, identification of licensed premises that are adjacent but not to be attached to the common consumption area, approximate location of security personnel; and 
d.  An application fee as set by resolution of the Board of Trustees. 
F.  Review of applications for certification, recertification, decertification of, and attachment to a promotional association. 
1.  Upon receipt of an application for certification or recertification of a promotional association, or attachment of a liquor licensee to an existing common consumption area, the Local Licensing Authority shall review the application for compliance with this Code, the Colorado Liquor Code, and the Colorado Beer Code, and may either approve the application, with or without conditions, or may deny the application. 
2.  The Local Licensing Authority has the power to decertify a promotional association as authorized by C.R.S. § 44-3-301(11)(c)(III), as amended. 
G.  Operational requirements of promotional associations and common consumption areas. 
1.  The size of the common consumption area shall not exceed the area approved as the entertainment district within which the common consumption area is located but may, with approval of the Local Licensing Authority, be a smaller area within the entertainment district, provided that the common consumption area is clearly delineated using physical barriers to close the area to motor vehicle traffic and to limit pedestrian access. 
2.  The promotional association shall provide an appropriate amount of security, as determined by the Local Licensing Authority, to ensure compliance with the Colorado Liquor Code, the Colorado Beer Code, and to prevent a safety risk to the neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 11-2019 , § 1, 5-14-2019) 
CHAPTER 5.13. - BUSINESS MARKETING FEE 

Section 5.13.010. - Amount of fee. 
    There is hereby levied and assessed for each calendar year, beginning with 2010, a business marketing fee upon every business, except as otherwise provided herein, in an amount established by resolution of the Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1972, § 5.13.010; Ord. No. 2010-1, § 2, 1-12-2010; Ord. No. 01-2017, § 4, 1-10-2017) 
Section 5.13.020. - Applicability. 
    The fee imposed by this chapter shall apply to any business, trade, occupation, profession or calling which is engaged in for the purpose of making a profit, whether or not a profit is actually made on a regular basis, within the Town; provided, however, this fee shall not apply to contractors engaged in the building trades. In addition, the fee shall not apply to such business activity if exempt by virtue of State or Federal law or to activity as an employee of a governmental entity. 
(Code 1972, § 5.13.020; Ord. No. 2010-1, § 2, 1-12-2010) 
Section 5.13.030. - Classification. 
    Every party doing business in more than one store, stand or other place of business, shall pay a separate fee for each place of business, unless such places of business are contiguous to each other, communicate directly with and open to each other, and are operated as a unit. The business may be transferred from one location to another without payment of an additional fee. 
(Code 1972, § 5.13.030; Ord. No. 2010-1, § 2, 1-12-2010) 
Section 5.13.040. - Payment. 
    The fee imposed by this chapter shall be due and payable on January 31 in the year 2010 and shall be due and payable January 1 of each year thereafter by parties engaged, on that date, in business activities which are subject to this fee. For those who begin such activity after January 1, this fee shall be payable within ten days of beginning such activity. The entire amount of the fee shall be due regardless of when such business activity was begun. The fee imposed by this chapter shall be billed and collected in connection with the collection of the Town's general occupation tax set forth in Chapter 5.02. 
(Code 1972, § 5.13.040; Ord. No. 2010-1, § 2, 1-12-2010) 
Section 5.13.050. - Separate fund created. 
    There is hereby created a separate Town account to be known as the Town marketing fund. All proceeds from the collection of fees imposed by this chapter shall be deposited in such fund which shall be appropriated by the Board of Trustees in its discretion for the sole purpose of developing and implementing a marketing program to promote the Town and its businesses to the general public and targeted groups for the benefit of the Town's businesses and the Town's economy. 
(Code 1972, § 5.13.050; Ord. No. 2010-1, § 2, 1-12-2010) 
Section 5.13.060. - Unlawful acts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or entity or its agent to engage in or carry on a business within the Town for which a business marketing fee is required, without first having paid such fee as herein provided. For the purposes of this section, the opening of a place of business, or offering to sell, followed by a single sale or the doing of any act or thing in the furtherance of the business, shall be construed to be engaging in and carrying on such business. 
(Code 1972, § 5.13.060; Ord. No. 2010-1, § 2, 1-12-2010) 
Section 5.13.070. - Enforcement. 
A.  The fee imposed by this chapter shall be a lien upon the goods and business fixtures of the applicable business and upon the real property and appurtenant premises at which the business is conducted. The Town may foreclose upon such lien in accordance with law and record notices of such lien in the records of the County Clerk and Recorder's office. 
B.  The Town may also certify the amount of any delinquent fee as a delinquent charge upon the property at which the business is located to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as delinquent general ad valorem taxes are collected pursuant to C.R.S. § 31-20-105. 
C.  The Town shall further have the right to recover all sums due by the terms of this chapter by judgment and execution thereon in a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction; such remedies shall be cumulative with all other remedies provided herein for the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 5.13.070; Ord. No. 2010-1, § 2, 1-12-2010) 
Section 5.13.080. - Criminal violations. 
    Any person or entity who knowingly violates any provision of this chapter or knowingly fails to perform an act required by any provision of this chapter commits a Class A municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 5.13.080; Ord. No. 1, § 2, 2010; Ord. No. 2010-1, § 2, 1-12-2010) 
CHAPTER 5.14. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 

Section 5.14.010. - Purpose and description. 
    The purpose of these regulations is to provide for the regulation and licensing of sexually oriented businesses within the Town in a manner which will protect the property values, neighborhoods and residents from the potential adverse secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses while providing to those who desire to patronize sexually oriented businesses the opportunity to do so. It is not the intent of this chapter to suppress any speech activities protected by the First and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States Constitution or Article II, Section 10 of the State Constitution, but to impose content-neutral regulations which address the adverse secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses. Nothing in this chapter is intended to authorize or license anything otherwise prohibited by law. Sexually oriented businesses are frequently used for unlawful sexual activities, including prostitution. The concern over sexually transmitted diseases is a legitimate health concern of the Town which demands reasonable regulation of sexually oriented businesses to protect the health and well-being of the citizens, including the patrons of sexually oriented businesses. Licensing of sexually oriented businesses is a legitimate and reasonable means of ensuring that operators of sexually oriented businesses comply with reasonable regulations and that operators do not knowingly allow their businesses to be used as places of illegal sexual activity or solicitation. There is convincing documented evidence that sexually oriented businesses, because of their nature, have a deleterious effect on both the existing businesses around them and surrounding residential areas causing increased crime and down-grading of property values. The purpose of this chapter is to control adverse effects from sexually oriented businesses and thereby protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens; protect the citizens from increased crime; preserve the quality of life; preserve the property values and character of the surrounding neighborhoods; and deter the spread of urban blight. 
(Code 1972, § 5.14.010) 
Section 5.14.020. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult bookstore or adult video store means a business having as a substantial and significant portion of its stock and trade, revenues, space or advertising expenditures, resulting from the sale, renting or viewing of one or more of the following: 
A.  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video reproductions, laser disks, slides or other visual representations which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
B.  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for specified sexual activities. 
    Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar business which offers private rooms to the public and provides patrons live performances or closed-circuit television transmissions, not including pay per view satellite transmissions, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult motion picture theater means a business where films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar business which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. 
    Cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar business which regularly features: 
A.  Persons who appear in a state of nudity; 
B.  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure to specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or 
C.  Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Employee includes any person who is paid directly or indirectly by the licensee for services performed on the premises whether such person would otherwise as a matter of law be classified as an employee, agent, manager, entertainer or independent contractor. 
    Licensing Officer means the Town Clerk unless another official has been designated by the Town Manager or Board of Trustees as the Licensing Officer. 
    Manager means any person other than a licensee who is employed by a sexually oriented business to act as a manager or supervisor of the employees, finances or patrons of the business or is otherwise responsible for operation of the business. 
    Peep booth means a viewing room, other than a private room, of less than 150 square feet of floor space upon the premises of a sexually oriented business where there is exhibited photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, or other video reproductions, slides or other visual representations which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity. 
    Private room means a room in an adult motel that is not a peep booth, has a bed in the room, has a bath in the room or adjacent to the room, and is used primarily for lodging. 
    Sexual encounter establishment means a business or commercial establishment which, as one of its primary business purposes, offers, for any form of consideration, a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate or consort for the purpose of specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas, when one or more of the persons exposes any specified anatomical area. 
    Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, sexual encounter establishment or other similar business and includes: 
A.  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
B.  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to a sexually oriented business; 
C.  The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; 
D.  The relocation of any sexually oriented business; or 
E.  The continuation of a sexually oriented business in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
    Specified anatomical areas are defined as: 
A.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks and female breast below a point above the top of the areola. 
B.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means acts, simulated acts, exhibitions, representations, depictions or descriptions of: 
A.  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
B.  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast. 
C.  Intrusion, however slight, of any object, any part of an animal's body, or any part of a person's body into the genital or anal openings of any person's body or into the body of an animal. 
D.  Cunnilingus, fellatio, anilingus, masturbation, bestiality, lewd exhibition of genitals or excretory function. 
E.  Flagellation, mutilation or torture for purposes of sexual arousal, gratification, or abuse. 
    Stage means a raised floor or platform at least three feet above the surrounding floor measured perpendicularly from the edge of the stage to the surrounding floor and at least 36 square feet in area. 
(Code 1972, § 5.14.020) 
Section 5.14.030. - License required. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a license issued by the Licensing Officer under the provisions of this chapter. 
1.  An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the Town. 
2.  The application must be accompanied by a diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business, and designating the use of each room or other area of the premises. 
3.  The diagram shall designate those rooms or other areas of the premises where patrons are not permitted. 
4.  The diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. 
5.  The diagram shall designate the place at which the license will be conspicuously posted. 
6.  No alteration in the configuration of the premises or any change in use of any room or area as shown on the diagram may be made without the prior written approval of the Town. 
7.  The Licensing Officer may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared and that the use of any area or room in the premises has not changed. 
B.  The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter and the premises must be inspected by the Fire Department, Building Official of the Building Department and the Licensing Officer and found to be in compliance with the law. 
C.  Contemporaneously with the submission of an application for a license, the applicant shall submit the special use permit from the Town Planning Department indicating that the requirements of Chapter 4.05 are met, unless the applicant's sexually oriented business is an existing nonconforming use under the provisions of Chapter 4.04. In the event that such permit is subject to appeal, no further action shall be taken upon such application until such appeal is finally adjudicated. 
(Code 1972, § 5.14.030) 
Section 5.14.040. - Issuance of a sexually oriented business license. 
A.  The sexually oriented business shall be issued a license within 30 days after receipt of an application if the requirements set forth in Section 5.14.030 are met, unless the Licensing Officer finds one or more of the following: 
1.  An applicant is overdue in payment to the Town of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against the applicant or imposed upon the applicant in relation to a sexually oriented business. 
2.  An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
3.  The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not been approved by the Fire District, the Building Official and the Licensing Officer as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. 
4.  The applicant has not been issued a permit by the Town Planning Department indicating the requirements of Title 4 are met and that such permit, if issued, is not subject to appeal or the applicant's sexually oriented business is an existing nonconforming use under Title 4. 
B.  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. 
C.  The Fire District and Building Official shall complete their certification that the premises are in compliance or not in compliance within 20 days of receipt of the application by the Licensing Officer. Their certifications shall be promptly presented to the Licensing Officer. The Licensing Officer's inspection shall be completed within 30 days after the receipt of the application. 
D.  1.  If the Licensing Officer denies such application he shall notify the applicant of the denial by serving upon the applicant personally a copy of such denial and the reasons supporting such denial or by mailing the same to him by registered or certified mail at the business address shown on the application. 
2.  Any applicant aggrieved by any final order of the Licensing Officer after the denial of such application shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Trustees by filing a written appeal, stating the grounds thereof, with the Licensing Officer within ten days following the date of denial of said application. 
3.  In the event an appeal is timely filed, it shall be heard at the net regular Board of Trustees' meeting occurring at least ten days after said filing with the Licensing Officer. Review by the Board shall be a de novo hearing. 
(Code 1972, § 5.14.040) 
Section 5.14.050. - Manager's registration. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to work as a manager of a sexually oriented business without first registering with the Licensing Officer. 
B.  The registration of a manager with the Licensing Officer is in lieu of the issuance of a license to a manager. 
C.  The Licensing Officer shall register a manager if all of the requirements for a license as set forth under Chapter 5.02 and Section 5.14.040 are met. 
D.  The manager's registration shall be issued or denied in accordance with the criteria for issuance or denial of a license as set forth in Chapter 5.02. 
E.  The registration may be suspended or revoked for any grounds for the suspension or revocation of a license as set forth in Section 5.14.090. 
(Code 1972, § 5.14.050) 
Section 5.14.060. - Employee registration. 
    Each licensee will provide to the Licensing Officer the full name, aliases if any, address, telephone number and date of birth of any employee within five days of employment. 
(Code 1972, § 5.14.060) 
Section 5.14.070. - Inspection. 
A.  The licensee or the licensee's employees shall permit representatives of the Police Department, Health Department, Building Official of the Building Department, the Fire District, Planning Department, Licensing Officer or other Town departments or agencies to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law as provided for in this section. 
B.  Town departments and agencies shall conduct such inspections in a reasonable manner and only as frequently as may be reasonably necessary. 
C.  Inspections shall take place during the regular business hours of the sexually oriented business or when any person is on the premises. 
D.  It shall be unlawful for the licensee or any employee to refuse to permit such lawful inspection of the premises as provided in this section. 
(Code 1972, § 5.14.070) 
Section 5.14.080. - Expiration of license. 
    Each license shall expire annually and may be renewed only by making application as provided in Section 5.14.030. 
(Code 1972, § 5.14.080) 
Section 5.14.090. - License suspension or revocation. 
A.  In addition to the grounds set forth for suspension or revocation of a license in Section 5.04.080, the Licensing Officer shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed six months and may revoke a license if the Licensing Officer determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has: 
1.  Violated or is not in compliance with any chapter of this Title. 
2.  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this chapter. 
3.  Knowingly permitted any unlawful act upon the premises. 
B.  In determining the action to be taken as provided in this section, the Licensing Officer shall consider the following aggravating and mitigating circumstances: 
1.  Whether the licensee has been previously suspended or revoked. 
2.  Whether the licensee was warned that the conduct involved could lead to a suspension or revocation. 
3.  Whether the cause for suspension or revocation involves one or several violations. 
4.  Whether the violation(s) are technical or substantive in nature. 
5.  The extent to which the licensee, licensee's agents and employees, as opposed to patrons, were involved in the violation(s). 
6.  The extent to which the licensee or licensee's employees had knowledge of the violation(s). 
7.  Any corrective or remedial action the licensee has taken to prevent similar violation(s) in the future. 
8.  Whether the violation(s) involved the commission of a crime, and, if so, the degree of felony or misdemeanor involved. 
9.  The extent to which the violation(s) caused personal injuries or property damages. 
10.  Whether the licensee has paid damages or made restitution to any person or entity damaged by the violation(s). 
11.  The extent to which the violations posed a significant risk to the health, safety and welfare of persons on or off of the licensed premises. 
12.  The length of time over which the violation(s) extended. 
13.  The extent to which the licensee or licensee's employees realized a financial gain from the violation(s). 
14.  The number of employees, patrons, or both involved in the violation(s). 
15.  The nature and extent of enforcement action taken by the Town or any law enforcement to detect the violation(s). 
16.  The involvement of any persons under 21 years of age in the violation(s). 
17.  The extent to which the licensee or licensee's employees have attempted to cover up the violation(s), destroy evidence or otherwise hinder the investigation and detection of the violation(s). 
18.  The extent to which the licensee and licensee's employees have acted in good faith. 
(Code 1972, § 5.14.090) 
Section 5.14.100. - Mandatory license revocation. 
A.  The Licensing Officer shall revoke a license if the Licensing Officer determines that: 
1.  A license has previously been suspended within the preceding 12 months; 
2.  A licensee gave false information in the material submitted to the Licensing Officer; 
3.  A licensee or employee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substance, as defined in C.R.S. § 18-18-102(5), on the premises; 
4.  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; 
5.  A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the license was suspended; 
6.  Excluding conduct within a private room of an adult motel, a licensee or employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or other sexual conduct to occur on the premises. 
B.  When the Licensing Officer revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented license for one year from the date revocation became effective. 
(Code 1972, § 5.14.100) 
Section 5.14.110. - Hours of operation. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for a sexually oriented business to be open for business or for the licensee or any employee of a licensee to allow patrons upon the licensed premises on: 
1.  Any Tuesday through Saturday from 2:00 a.m. until 7:00 a.m.; 
2.  Any Monday other than a Monday which falls on January 1, from 12:00 midnight until 7:00 a.m.; 
3.  Any Sunday from 2:00 a.m. until 8:00 a.m.; 
4.  Any Monday which falls on January 1, from 2:00 a.m. until 7:00 a.m. 
B.  This section shall not apply to those areas of an adult motel which are private rooms. 
(Code 1972, § 5.14.110) 
Section 5.14.120. - Peep booth regulations. 
A.  A licensee who has peep booths upon the premises shall comply with all of the following requirements: 
1.  The diagram accompanying an application for a license shall specify the location of one or more manager's stations. 
2.  It is the duty of the licensee to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
3.  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain film or video reproduction equipment or equipment for showing slides or photographs. If the premises has two or more manager's stations, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
4.  It shall be the duty of the licensee and employees present on the premises to ensure that the view area specified in Subsection (A)(3) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated in the application as an area to which patrons will not be permitted. 
5.  It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that all walls shall be maintained without holes or damage. 
6.  No peep booth may be occupied by more than one person at any time. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person having a duty under Subsections (A)(l) through (5) of this section to knowingly fail to fulfill that duty. 
(Code 1972, § 5.14.120) 
Section 5.14.130. - Lighting regulations. 
A.  Excluding a private room of an adult motel, the interior portion of the premises to which patrons are permitted access shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place at an illumination of not less than two footcandle as measured at the floor level. 
B.  It shall be the duty of the licensee and employees present on the premises to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present on the premises. 
(Code 1972, § 5.14.130) 
Section 5.14.140. - Additional regulations, adult theaters, and adult cabarets. 
A.  Any adult cabaret or adult theater shall have one or more separate areas designated in the diagram submitted as part of the application as a stage for the licensee or employees to perform as entertainers. Entertainers shall perform only upon the stage. The stage shall be fixed and immovable. No seating for the audience shall be permitted within three feet of the edge of the stage. No members of the audience shall be permitted upon the stage or within three feet of the edge of the stage. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for the licensee or for any employee to violate any of the requirements of this section or to knowingly permit any patron to violate the requirements of this section. 
C.  In any adult theater or adult cabaret that features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities, the licensee and all employees present on the premises and all patrons shall be at least 21 years of age. 
(Code 1972, § 5.14.140) 
Section 5.14.150. - Conduct for sexually oriented businesses. 
A.  No licensee or employee mingling with the patrons, or serving food or drinks, shall be unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, so as to expose to view any specified anatomical area. 
B.  No licensee or employee shall encourage or knowingly permit any person upon the premises to touch, caress or fondle the breasts, anus or specified anatomical areas of any person. 
C.  No licensee or employee shall violate the requirements of Section 5.14.100(A)(2) through (5). 
D.  It shall be unlawful for any licensee or employee to knowingly permit a patron to violate any of the requirements of this section. 
(Code 1972, § 5.14.150) 
Section 5.14.160. - Sexually oriented businesses, employee tips. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any employee of a sexually oriented business to receive tips from patrons except as set forth in Subsection (C) of this section. 
B.  A licensee that desires to provide for tips from its patrons shall establish one or more boxes or other containers to receive tips. All tips for such employees shall be placed by the patron of the sexually oriented business into the tip box. 
C.  A sexually oriented business that provides tip boxes for its patrons as provided in this section shall post one or more signs to be conspicuously visible to the patrons on the premises in letters at least one inch high to read as follows: 
"All tips are to be placed in tip box and not handed directly to the entertainer. Any physical contact between the patron and the entertainer is strictly prohibited." 
(Code 1972, § 5.14.160) 
Section 5.14.170. - Adult motel regulations. 
    An adult motel that, in addition to the renting of private rooms, operates a sexually oriented business as otherwise defined in this chapter shall comply with all of the requirements set forth in this chapter pertaining to that business. 
(Code 1972, § 5.14.170) 
Section 5.14.180. - Injunction. 
    Any person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a license is subject to suit for injunction as well as criminal prosecution. 
(Code 1972, § 5.14.180) 
Section 5.14.190. - Prohibited acts, penalty. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or who fails to perform an act required by any provision of this chapter, commits a Class A municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 5.14.185) 
Section 5.14.200. - Fees. 
    A business license fee of $100.00 and a manager's registration fee of $100.00 shall be paid upon submission of an application and annually thereafter upon renewal of the sexually oriented business. 
(Code 1972, § 5.14.190; Ord. No. 8-2007, § 15, 2007; Amended Ord. No. 18-2008, § 1§ 2, 2008) 
CHAPTER 5.15. - LICENSING AND REGULATION OF MEDICAL MARIJUANA BUSINESSES 

Section 5.15.010. - Legislative intent and purpose. 
A.  Legislative intent. The Town intends to regulate the use, acquisition, cultivation, production, and distribution of medical marijuana in a manner consistent with Article XVIII, Section 14 of the Colorado Constitution. 
1.  The Medical Marijuana Amendment to the State Constitution does not provide a legal manner for patients to obtain medical marijuana unless the patient grows the marijuana or the marijuana is grown by the patient's primary caregiver. 
2.  The Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, C.R.S. § 44-11-101, et seq., imposes statewide regulations pertaining to the use, acquisition, cultivation, production, sale and distribution of medical marijuana and medical marijuana-infused products the State. 
3.  Nothing within this chapter is intended to promote or condone the production, cultivation, use, sale or distribution of medical marijuana other than in compliance with applicable State law. 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to implement the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code in a manner to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the residents and patients of the Town by prescribing the manner in which medical marijuana businesses can be conducted [within] the Town. 
1.  Provide for the safe sale and distribution of medical marijuana to patients who qualify to obtain, possess and use marijuana for medical purposes under the Medical Marijuana Amendment. 
2.  Protect public health and safety through reasonable limitations on business operations as they relate to noise, air and water quality, neighborhood and patient safety, security for businesses and their personnel, and other health and safety concerns. 
3.  Limit the number of medical marijuana businesses that can be established within the Town based on the Town's population, the needs of the community and the desires of the inhabitants. 
4.  Impose fees to cover the costs incurred by the Town for licensing and regulating medical marijuana businesses. 
5.  Adopt a mechanism for monitoring compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
6.  Create regulations that address the particular needs of the patients and residents of the Town and coordinate with laws enacted by the State that pertain to such matters. 
7.  Facilitate the implementation of the Medical Marijuana Amendment without exceeding the authority granted to the Town by such amendment. 
(Code 1972, § 5.15.010; Ord. No. 36-2018 , § 10, 11-27-2018) 
Section 5.15.020. - Definitions. 
A.  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adjacent grounds means all areas that the licensee has a right to possess by virtue of his ownership or lease, which are outside the enclosed licensed premises, but adjacent and contiguous to the licensed premises, including, but not limited to, porches, patios, decks, entryways, lawns, parking lots, and similar areas and all fixed and portable things in such areas, including, but not limited to, lights, signs and security devices. 
    Business manager means the individual designated by the owner of a medical marijuana business and registered with the Town as the person responsible for all operations of the business during the owner's absence from the business premises. 
    Character and record includes all aspects of a person's character and record, including, but not limited to, moral character; criminal record, including serious traffic offenses; record of previous sanctions against liquor licenses, gambling licenses, or medical marijuana licenses, which the person owns, in whole or in part, in which the person serves as a principal, manager, or employee; education, training, experience; civil judgments entered against the person; truthfulness, honesty; and financial responsibility. The conviction of any person for an offense shall not, in itself, be grounds for a finding of a bad character and record if such person demonstrates that he has been rehabilitated in accordance with C.R.S. § 24-5-101. In the event the Local Licensing Authority considers information concerning the criminal history of a person, the Local Licensing Authority shall also consider any information provided by an applicant regarding such criminal history records, including, but not limited to, evidence of rehabilitation, character references and educational achievements, especially those items pertaining to the period of time between the last criminal conviction and the time of consideration of a license application. 
    Good cause shall have the same meaning as in C.R.S. § 44-11-104(2). 
    Laws of the State means and includes Section 14 of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution; the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, C.R.S. § 44-11-101, et seq.; other State statutes, including without limitation C.R.S. §§ 18-18-406(3) and 44-11-101, et seq.; and applicable regulations promulgated by the State. 
    Licensed premises means the premises specified in an application for a license under this chapter which are owned or in possession of the licensee, and within which the licensee is authorized to cultivate, manufacture, distribute or sell medical marijuana in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the laws of the State. 
    Licensee shall have the same meaning as in C.R.S. § 44-11-104(7). 
    Local Licensing Authority means the Board of Trustees of the Town. 
    Medical marijuana shall have the same meaning as in C.R.S. § 44-11-104(11). 
    Medical marijuana business means a person holding a medical marijuana center license, as defined in C.R.S. § 44-11-102; a medical marijuana-infused products manufacturer license, as defined in C.R.S. § 44-11-404; or an optional premises cultivation operation license, as defined in C.R.S. § 44-11-403. For the purposes of this chapter, a patient that cultivates, produces, possesses or transports medical marijuana or a primary caregiver that cultivates, produces, sells, distributes, possesses, transports, or makes available marijuana in any form to one or more patients, shall not be deemed a medical marijuana business. 
    Medical marijuana center shall have the same meaning as in C.R.S. § 44-11-104(13). 
    Medical marijuana-infused products manufacturer shall have the same meaning as in C.R.S. § 44-11-104(16). 
    Medical use shall have the same meaning as is set forth in Article XVIII, Section 14(1)(b) of the State Constitution, or as may be fully defined in any applicable State law or regulation. 
    Optional premises cultivation operation shall have the same meaning as in C.R.S. § 44-11-104(19). 
    Patient shall have the same meaning as is set forth in Article XVIII, Section 14(1)(d) of the State Constitution, or as may be more fully defined in any applicable State law or regulation. 
    Person means a natural person, partnership, association, company, corporation, limited liability company or organization, or a manager, agent, owner, director, servant, officer, or employee thereof. 
    Premises means a distinct definite location which may include a building, a part of a building, a room, or any other definite contiguous area. 
    Primary caregiver shall have the same meaning as is set forth in Article XVIII, Section 14(1)(f) of the State Constitution, or as may be more fully defined in any applicable State law or regulation. 
    Principal means: 
1.  In the case of any business entity, including any general or limited partnership, corporation, limited liability company or other entity, any person who has any interest in the ownership of the entity and any person who has the day to day authority to or actually does manage the entity's financial affairs. 
2.  In the case of a corporation, the persons described for any entity described in Subsection (1) of this definition and the president, vice-president, secretary, chief executive officer, chief financial officer, and any person who holds any of the capital stock of the corporation. 
3.  In the case of a limited liability company, the persons described for any such entity in Subsection (1) of this definition and any member of the limited liability company. 
4.  In the case of a sole proprietorship, the individual owner. 
    Serious traffic offense means any driving offense carrying eight points or greater under C.R.S. § 42-2-127 or the substantial equivalent of such events in any other state. 
    State licensing authority means the authority created by C.R.S. § 44-11-201 for the purpose of regulating and controlling the licensing of the cultivation, manufacturing, distribution and sale of medical marijuana in this State. 
B.  Unless defined in this chapter or the context clearly indicates otherwise, any word or term used in this chapter that is defined in Article XVIII, Section 14(1) of the State Constitution or in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code shall have the same meaning that is ascribed to such word or term in the State Constitution or in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code. 
(Code 1972, § 5.15.020; Ord. No. 36-2018 , § 11, 11-27-2018) 
Section 5.15.030. - License required. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a medical marijuana business without first having obtained a license to operate pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, having paid the fees therefor, as well as having obtained a license to operate from the State licensing authority. The licensing requirements apply to all medical marijuana businesses that exist on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and any medical marijuana businesses established after such effective date. 
B.  Any person violating this section commits a Class A municipal offense. A person committing a violation shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day or part thereof during which the offense is committed or continued to be permitted by such person and shall be punished accordingly. 
C.  Any medical marijuana business holding a valid business license, that commenced operations prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, which is in a location where the business has a special use permit in the zone district in which it is located, and which has obtained a valid sales tax license from the Town, may continue to operate pending final action on an application for a license pursuant to Section 5.15.070, which application must be filed with the Town no later than October 31, 2012. 
D.  Pursuant to C.R.S. Title 44, Art. 11, medical marijuana businesses shall be licensed by the Town in one of the following categories: 
1.  Medical marijuana center, as defined in C.R.S. § 44-11-104(13). Such center shall meet all criteria and requirements of C.R.S. § 44-11-402, as well as all other regulatory requirements applicable to medical marijuana centers set forth within this chapter, and within C.R.S. Title 44, Article 11. 
2.  Medical marijuana-infused products manufacturer, as defined in C.R.S. § 44-11-104(16). Such business shall meet all requirements of C.R.S. § 44-11-404, as well as all other requirements applicable to medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing set forth in this chapter and state law. 
3.  Optional premises cultivation operation license, as defined in C.R.S. § 44-11-104(19). Such operation shall meet all requirements of C.R.S. § 44-11-404, as well as all other requirements applicable to optional premises cultivation operations set forth in this chapter and state law. 
E.  The licensing requirements set forth in this chapter shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other licensing and permitting requirements imposed by any Federal law, the laws of the State, or local laws, including, but not by way of limitation, a business license, retail sales tax license, retail food establishment license, or any applicable zoning permits or building permits. 
F.  No license for a medical marijuana business shall be issued by the Town until a license for such use, at the location designated in the application, has been issued by the State licensing authority. 
G.  The issuance of a license pursuant to this chapter does not create a defense, exception or provide immunity to any person in regard to any potential federal criminal liability the person may have for the production, distribution or possession of marijuana. 
H.  Every license issued under this chapter confers only a limited and conditional privilege subject to the requirements, conditions, and limitations of this chapter and state law. The license does not confer a property right of any kind. The license and the privilege created by the license may be further regulated, limited, or completely extinguished at the end of the license term at the discretion of the Town, without any compensation to a licensee. Every license issued under this chapter shall be subject to the future exercise of the reserved rights of referendum and initiative, exercise of the local option described in C.R.S. § 44-11-106, and any other future ordinances adopted by the Town. Nothing in this chapter grants any vested right to continue operating under this chapter, and every license shall be subject to any ordinance or prohibition adopted after any license was approved or issued. 
I.  A separate license shall be required for each location from which a medical marijuana business is operated. 
J.  All medical marijuana business licenses issued by the Town shall be valid for a period of one year from the date such license is issued. Renewal applications shall be filed at least 45 days prior to the expiration date of the existing license. 
K.  Licensees shall report each transfer or change of ownership interest, change in manager, or change in principals on forms provided by the Town Clerk. An application for a change of manager shall be submitted to the Town Clerk at least 30 days prior to any such change to provide necessary time for the background check and processing of the application pursuant to Section 5.15.160. 
(Code 1972, § 5.15.030; Ord. No. 36-2018 , § 12, 11-27-2018) 
Section 5.15.040. - Local Licensing Authority. 
A.  For the purpose of regulating and controlling the licensing of the cultivation, manufacture, distribution and sale of medical marijuana within the Town, there is hereby created the medical marijuana Local Licensing Authority of the Town. The Board of Trustees of the Town shall serve as the Local Licensing Authority. 
B.  The Local Licensing Authority shall have such powers and duties as are provided for in this chapter and the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code. 
C.  The Local Licensing Authority shall be assisted by the Town Attorney, the Chief of Police, the Town Clerk and such other personnel as may be designated by the Town Manager in the performance of the powers and duties of the Local Licensing Authority. 
(Code 1972, § 5.15.040) 
Section 5.15.050. - General licensing procedure and regulations. 
    The Town Clerk shall have authority to promulgate and employ reasonable regulations associated with the making and processing of applications for medical marijuana business licenses. The Town Clerk also may promulgate regulations concerning the processes and procedures associated with the issuance, renewal, denial, suspension and/or revocation of such licenses that supplement and are not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. Such regulations shall be written and shall become effective when copies of the same have been provided to the Board of Trustees and made available to the public, or upon a later effective date set forth in the regulations. 
(Code 1972, § 5.15.050) 
Section 5.15.060. - Application and license fees. 
A.  Application and license fees for medical marijuana businesses shall be as set forth by resolution of the Board of Trustees. 
B.  The primary purpose of the fees established in this section is to defray the costs of the particular municipal services provided and not to defray the costs of general services provided by the Town or to raise general revenues. The fees provided in this section are reasonably related and proportional to the costs of the services provided and do not generate additional net revenue. 
C.  If any license or application is denied, approved but not issued, lapsed, abandoned, or withdrawn, only the license fee shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(Code 1972, § 5.15.060; Ord. No. 01-2017, §§ 5, 6, 1-10-2017) 
Section 5.15.070. - License applications. 
A.  Application for a medical marijuana business license shall be made to the Town Clerk upon forms provided by the Town Clerk for that purpose. A complete application must contain all information that is required by the laws of the State with respect to any license that may be issued pursuant to the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code and such additional information as may be requested by the Town Clerk in writing. At a minimum, the application shall require the following information: 
1.  The name, address and date of birth of the owner or owners of the proposed medical marijuana business in whose name the license is proposed to be issued. If the owner is a corporation, partnership, limited liability company or similar business entity, the application shall include the name and address of all principals. If the owner is not a natural person, the organization documents for all business entities identified in the application and the contact information for the person that is authorized to represent the entity shall be provided. 
2.  The name, address and date of birth of the business manager of the medical marijuana business, if the manager is proposed to be someone other than the owner, or if the owner is an entity other than a natural person. 
3.  The name, address and date of birth of all persons holding any financial interest in the medical marijuana business, other than commercial lenders regulated by the Federal government or the State. 
4.  The name, address and date of birth of all employees of the medical marijuana business. 
5.  A statement of whether any of the named owners, principals, managers, parties with a financial interest, employees or persons named on the application have been: 
a.  Denied an application for a medical marijuana business license by any other jurisdiction, including the State, or has had such license suspended or revoked. 
b.  Denied an application for a liquor license pursuant to C.R.S. Title 44, Article 3 or 4, or has had any such license suspended or revoked. 
c.  Convicted, entered a plea of no contest, or entered a plea of guilty in conjunction with a deferred judgment and sentence pertaining to any charge related to the possession, use, or possession with intent to distribute narcotics, drugs or other controlled substances. 
d.  Convicted, entered a plea of no contest or entered a plea of guilty in conjunction with a deferred judgment and sentence pertaining to any serious traffic offense. 
6.  Proof of ownership or legal possession of the proposed licensed premises for the term of the proposed license shall be presented to the Town Clerk before any medical marijuana business license permitted by this chapter may be issued. If the licensed premises will be leased rather than owned by the applicant, a written consent by the owner of the property to licensing of the premises as a medical marijuana business must be submitted by the applicant to the Town Clerk as part of a complete application. A fully executed lease may satisfy this requirement if it clearly indicates that the owner knows the leased premises will be used as a licensed medical marijuana business. If the building in which the licensed premises will be located is regulated by a declaration of covenants, such declaration, covenants or restrictions shall be submitted by the applicant to the Town Clerk as part of its complete application to establish that a medical marijuana business is not prohibited by such declaration, covenants or restrictions. 
7.  An operating plan for the proposed medical marijuana business including the following information: 
a.  A description of the products and services to be provided by the medical marijuana business, including an indication of whether or not the facility proposes to engage in the retail sale of medical marijuana-infused products for human consumption. 
b.  A floor plan showing all interior dimensions of the licensed premises and the layout of the medical marijuana business. Such floor plan shall also show the principal uses of the floor area depicted therein, including a depiction of where any services other than the dispensing of medical marijuana are proposed to occur on the licensed premises. If the building or proposed licensed premises is not yet in existence, the applicant shall file a plot plan and a detailed sketch for the interior and submit an architect's drawing of any building to be constructed. 
c.  A security plan containing all information required by the State licensing authority's regulations. 
d.  A lighting plan, including security lighting, for the licensed premises and adjacent grounds. 
e.  Any information and/or documentation not included in the foregoing subsections that is or will be required in an application to be filed with the State licensing authority for the State license that may be issued in accordance with the provisions of the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code. 
f.  A statement to be initialed by the applicant that it is not an owner, part owner, shareholder, member of a business entity or financially interested, directly or indirectly, in any other medical marijuana business in the State. 
g.  Any additional document(s) or information reasonably requested by the Town Clerk. 
A licensee shall notify the State licensing authority and Local Licensing Authority in writing of the name, address and date of birth of any proposed new owners, principal, business manager, person holding a financial interest in the business or employee before the new owner, principal, business manager, or employee becomes associated with the business. The new owner, principal, business manager or employee shall pass a fingerprint-based criminal history record check as required by the State licensing authority and obtain the required identification prior to being associated with, managing, owning or working at the medical marijuana business. 
B.  Any application for a medical marijuana business license shall be accompanied by the application fee, criminal background check fee, and an annual fee as required by Section 5.15.060 or in any resolution adopted pursuant thereto. No application shall be deemed complete or be processed in the absence of the payment of such fees. 
C.  Upon receipt of an application for a medical marijuana business license, the Town Clerk shall circulate the application to the Town Planner, Building Official and the Police Department to determine whether the proposed facility is or will be in full compliance with any and all laws, rules and regulations administered by said departments. 
D.  Unless an application is under concurrent review by the State licensing authority and the Local Licensing Authority, the Police Department shall perform a criminal background investigation for the proposed licensee, business manager, if any, the principals of the entity, if applicable, persons holding a financial interest in the proposed business, employees and any other persons subject to a criminal background check under the provisions of the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code in connection with any license application permitted thereunder. The applicant shall pay all costs of such background checks. The Police Chief or his designee shall provide the Board of Trustees with a written report concerning the character and record of the proposed licensee, the business manager, if any, the principals of any business entity that would constitute the licensee, persons holding a financial interest in the proposed business, and employees. 
E.  The Town Manager and the Chief of Police, or their designees, shall perform a physical inspection of the proposed licensed premises to determine compliance with any applicable requirement of this chapter. 
F.  The Town Clerk shall not proceed to process any application for a license that is not complete or otherwise in full compliance with this chapter, any other applicable Town ordinance or regulation, or any applicable laws of the State. The Town Clerk also shall refuse to further process any application that contains any false or incomplete information, but shall allow an applicant reasonable opportunity to correct deficiencies in applications that fail to include complete information before denying such application. 
(Code 1972, § 5.15.070; Ord. No. 36-2018 , § 13, 11-27-2018) 
Section 5.15.080. - Procedures for approval or denial of license application. 
A.  Within 30 days following the date the Town Clerk certifies that a license application is complete, the Local Licensing Authority shall consider the license application at a public meeting. The Local Licensing Authority may approve the license application, deny the license application, or approve the application with conditions. No public hearing shall be required. However, the Local Licensing Authority shall notify the applicant of the date and time the application will be considered. The applicant shall appear at such meeting and the applicant shall be permitted to address the Local Licensing Authority in support of the application. No application for a license authorized under this chapter shall be approved unless: 
1.  All applicable requirements of this chapter have been satisfied; 
2.  All applicable requirements of the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code have been satisfied; 
3.  All required licensee fees and associated costs have been paid by the applicant; 
4.  Applicant has received a special use permit to operate the proposed medical marijuana business in accordance with the Town's Land Use and Development Code contained in Title 4; 
5.  All other applicable requirements of this Code have been met; 
6.  The applicant has obtained a State sales tax license, Town sales tax license, if required, and paid the general occupation tax pursuant to Chapter 5.02; 
7.  The applicant is not in arrears in regard to any administrative fines, Court fines, assessments, sales tax reporting and/or payment obligations, or fees owed to the Town; and 
8.  No fraudulent, misrepresented or false statement of material or relevant fact is contained within the application or was made to the Local Licensing Authority. 
B.  The Local Licensing Authority shall issue its determination and findings within 30 days following the meeting at which the application was considered. The Local Licensing Authority shall notify the applicant in writing of its determination and findings by first class U.S. mail addressed to the applicant at the address shown on the application. No license shall actually be issued by the Local Licensing Authority until the applicant has obtained the requisite license from the State licensing authority. 
(Code 1972, § 5.15.080) 
Section 5.15.090. - Conditions on licenses. 
    At the time that a new license is first approved, or when an existing license is renewed, or at any time that a sanction other than revocation is imposed, or at any time the Local Licensing Authority approves a major change to a license, the Local Licensing Authority may impose on the license any conditions related to the license, licensed premises, or adjacent grounds, that is reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare, including, but not limited to, the following: 
A.  Additional security requirements; 
B.  Additional record keeping requirements; 
C.  Limits and requirements on parking and traffic flows; 
D.  Requirements for walls, doors, windows, locks and fences on the licensed premises and adjacent grounds; 
E.  Limits on the number of patients who may patronize the establishment at one time; 
F.  Limits on medical marijuana-infused products that may be sold; 
G.  Requirements and limits on ventilation and lighting; 
H.  Limits on the products other than medical marijuana and medical marijuana-infused products that can be sold on the licensed premises; 
I.  Limits on noise inside the licensed premises or on the adjacent grounds; 
J.  Prohibitions on certain conduct in the licensed premises; 
K.  Limits on hours of operation that are more restrictive than prescribed by Section 5.15.110(L); 
L.  A requirement that the licensee temporarily close the licensed premises to the public until certain changes, inspections or approvals are made; and 
M.  A limitation on the square footage of the licensed premises. 
(Code 1972, § 5.15.090) 
Section 5.15.100. - Personal requirements for the licensee, principals, business manager, persons holding a financial interest and employees. 
A.  The applicant, principals, business manager, persons holding a financial interest in the business and employees shall meet all requirements for the issuance of a license by the State licensing authority. 
B.  The applicant, principals, business manager and employees shall all be over the age of 21 years. 
C.  The applicant, principals, business manager, persons holding a financial interest in the business and employees have not been determined by any medical marijuana licensing authority, any other licensing Board within the State, or the State licensing authority to not be persons of good character and record within the preceding three years. 
D.  The applicant, principals, business manager, persons holding a financial interest in the medical marijuana business and employees are persons of good character and record. 
E.  The applicant, principals, business manager, persons holding a financial interest in the medical marijuana business and employees have not discharged a sentence for any felony in the five years immediately preceding the filing of a license application. 
F.  The applicant, principals, business manager, persons holding a financial interest in the medical marijuana business and employees have never been convicted of a felony or received a deferred judgment and sentence pursuant to State or Federal law regarding the possession, distribution, or use of a controlled substance. 
G.  The applicant, principals, business manager, persons holding a financial interest in the medical marijuana business and employees have not held an interest in any liquor license, medical marijuana license or other license issued by any municipality, county, or the State that has been revoked, suspended, or fined within the preceding two years. 
H.  The applicant, principals, business manager, persons holding any financial interest in the medical marijuana business and employees have not had their authority, if any, to act as a primary caregiver revoked by the State within the preceding two years. 
I.  The applicant, principals, and business manager are not in default on any municipal, county, state, or Federal taxes, fees, fines or charges, do not have any outstanding warrants for their arrest, and do not have any outstanding liens or judgments payable to the Town. 
J.  The applicant and principals are not in default on any student loan. 
K.  The applicant and principals do not have any orders or judgments against them for child support in default or in arrears. 
L.  The applicant and principals are not peace officers or prosecuting Attorneys. 
M.  The applicant and principals are not licensed physicians who recommend medical marijuana to patients. 
(Code 1972, § 5.15.100) 
Section 5.15.110. - Special restrictions and requirements. 
A.  Limitation on the number of licenses that may be issued within the Town. The number of medical marijuana businesses permitted within the Town is based on population. A maximum of one medical marijuana center, one medical marijuana-infused products manufacturer and one optional premises cultivation operation shall be permitted for every 5,000 people or a fraction thereof. Population shall be based on the most recent data available from the U.S. Census Bureau and the State demographer's office. If more than one license application for a medical marijuana business of the same classification is submitted to the local license authority within a period of 30 days, the applications that comply with all requirements of this chapter and the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, but the Local Licensing Authority is not permitted to approve all of the applications reviewed because of the limitations set forth in this subsection, the Local Licensing Authority shall approve the application that the Local Licensing Authority finds and determines will best promote the intent and purposes of this chapter and the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code. An application for renewal of an existing medical marijuana business license shall receive a preference over an application for a new medical marijuana business license if the existing business has substantially met all of the requirements of this chapter and the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code during the previous license term and is in good standing. 
B.  Permitted locations. All medical marijuana business licenses shall be issued for a specific location which shall be designated as the licensed premises. Except as permitted by law, all sales, deliveries and other transfers of medical marijuana products by a licensee shall be made at the licensed premises. Medical marijuana businesses are not permitted in any residential zone district. Medical marijuana businesses shall only be located in the Commercial General (CG) and Industrial (I) Zone Districts east of Nogal Gulch pursuant to a special use permit issued in accordance with the requirements contained in the Town's Land Use and Development Code. 
C.  Distance from schools. Medical marijuana businesses shall be located a minimum of 1,000 feet from schools, as defined in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code. 
D.  Distance from licensed child care facilities. Medical marijuana businesses shall be located a minimum of 1,000 feet from licensed child care facilities, as defined in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code. 
E.  Distance from alcohol or drug treatment facilities. Medical marijuana businesses shall be located a minimum of 1,000 feet from alcohol or drug treatment facilities, as defined in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code. 
F.  Distance from college campuses. Medical marijuana businesses shall be located a minimum of 1,000 feet from the campus of a college, as defined in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code. 
G.  Distance from residential zone district. Medical marijuana businesses shall be located a minimum of 1,000 feet from any residential zone district. 
H.  Distance from other medical marijuana businesses. There shall be no distance requirement between medical marijuana businesses. 
I.  No mobile facilities. No medical marijuana business shall be located in a movable or mobile vehicle or structure and no medical marijuana products shall be delivered in the Town unless such delivery is specifically permitted by the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code. 
J.  No products to be visible from public. Marijuana plants, products, accessories, and associated paraphernalia contained in a medical marijuana business shall not be visible from a public sidewalk, public street or right-of-way, or any other public place. 
K.  No beer or alcohol on premises. No fermented malt beverages and no alcohol beverages, as defined in the Colorado Beer Code and the Colorado Liquor Code, respectively, shall be kept, served or consumed on the premises of a medical marijuana business. 
L.  Hours of operation. Medical marijuana businesses shall limit their hours of operation to between 11:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
M.  Restrictions regarding signage. Signs shall not be permitted on the exterior of optional premises cultivation operation facilities and medical marijuana infused products manufacturing facilities. All signage associated with a medical marijuana center shall meet the standards established in this Code and the Eagle Land Use and Development Code. In addition, no sign associated with a medical marijuana center shall use the word "marijuana," "cannabis," or any other word or phrase commonly understood to refer to marijuana unless such word or phrase is immediately preceded by the word "medical" or the message of such sign includes the words "for medical use" or "for medicinal purposes" in letters that are no smaller than the largest letter on the sign. No depiction of marijuana plants or leaves shall appear on any exterior sign of a medical marijuana center. 
N.  Storage of products. All products and accessories shall be stored completely indoors and on-site. 
O.  Consumption of marijuana prohibited. No consumption of any medical marijuana product shall be allowed or permitted on the licensed premises or adjacent grounds. 
P.  Storage of currency. All currency over $1,000.00 shall be stored within a separate vault or safe (no marijuana in safe), securely fastened to a wall or floor, as approved by the Police Department. 
Q.  Prevention of emissions. Sufficient measures and means of preventing smoke, odors, debris, dust, fluids and other substances from exiting the licensed premises shall be provided at all times. In the event that any debris, dust, fluids or other substances shall exit the licensed premises, the landowner and licensee shall be jointly and severally responsible for the full cleanup immediately. The medical marijuana business shall properly dispose of all materials and other substances in a safe and sanitary manner in accordance with State regulations and county landfill regulations. 
R.  Compliance with other codes. The licensed premises and adjacent grounds of a medical marijuana business shall comply with all zoning, health, building, fire, and other codes and ordinances of the Town as shown by completed inspections and approvals by the Town Planner, Building Department, Greater Eagle Fire Protection District, and the County Health Department, if applicable. 
S.  No harm to public health, safety and welfare. The licensed premises and adjacent grounds of a medical marijuana business shall be operated in a manner that does not cause any substantial harm to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Code 1972, § 5.15.110; Amended Ord. No. 33, § 1, 2013) 
Section 5.15.120. - Specific requirements for a medical marijuana center. 
A.  The applicant shall cultivate at least 70 percent of the marijuana sold or exchanged on the licensed premises. 
B.  Small samples of medical marijuana products offered for sale may be displayed on shelves, counters and display cases. All bulk marijuana products shall be locked within a separate vault or safe (no other items in this safe), securely fastened to a wall or floor, as approved by the Police Department. 
C.  A medical marijuana center may sell "drug paraphernalia," as that term is defined in Chapter 9.15, to patients only and shall be exempt from the prohibitions contained in said chapter; provided, however, a medical marijuana center shall not display drug paraphernalia for sale on the licensed premises and such drug paraphernalia shall only be shown to patients upon request. 
(Code 1972, § 5.15.120) 
Section 5.15.130. - Specific requirements for optional premises cultivation operation license. 
A.  The applicant shall also hold a medical marijuana center license or a medical marijuana-infused products manufacturer's license. 
B.  The area of the proposed licensed premises utilized for cultivation shall be equipped with a ventilation system with carbon filters sufficient in type and capacity to eliminate marijuana odors emanating from the interior to the exterior discernible by reasonable persons. The ventilation system must be inspected and approved by the Building Official. 
C.  The area of the proposed licensed premises utilized for cultivation shall be physically separated from the area of the premises open to the public or to patients. 
D.  If carbon dioxide will be used in the cultivation area in the proposed licensed premises, sufficient physical barriers or a negative air pressure system shall be in place to prevent carbon dioxide from moving into the ambient air in to any adjacent building in a concentration that would be harmful to any person, including persons with respiratory disease, and shall be inspected and approved by the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District and Building Official. 
E.  Walls, barriers, locks, signage and other means shall be employed to prevent the public or patients from entering the area of the licensed premises utilized for cultivation of marijuana. 
F.  Disposal of unwanted marijuana byproducts shall be done in accordance with procedures approved by the Police Department. 
(Code 1972, § 5.15.130) 
Section 5.15.140. - Specific requirements for a medical marijuana-infused products manufacturer's license. 
A.  The applicant has a contract with a medical marijuana center, stating the type and quantity of medical marijuana-infused products that the medical marijuana center will buy from the licensee. 
B.  The applicant shall have a written agreement or contract with a medical marijuana center licensee which shall, at a minimum, set forth the total amount of medical marijuana obtained from such medical marijuana center to be used in the manufacturing process, and the total amount of medical marijuana-infused products to be manufactured from the medical marijuana obtained from that medical marijuana center. 
C.  The applicant shall use medical marijuana from no more than five medical marijuana providers, including its own optional premises cultivation operation, if applicable, to manufacture one medical marijuana-infused product. 
D.  The applicant may sell products to any licensed medical marijuana center. 
E.  The applicant shall meet all of the standards set forth in C.R.S. § 44-11-404. 
(Code 1972, § 5.15.140; Ord. No. 36-2018 , § 14, 11-27-2018) 
Section 5.15.150. - Renewal of medical marijuana business license. 
A.  A licensee may renew its medical marijuana business license by submitting an application to the Town Clerk at least 45 days before and not more than 90 days before the expiration of the license. If a licensee fails to file an application for renewal of its license at least 45 days before expiration of the license, the license shall expire. 
B.  A licensee may renew a license that has expired if: 
1.  The license has expired for less than 90 days; and 
2.  The licensee pays the regular renewal fee and an additional late renewal fee as set forth by resolution of the Board of Trustees. 
C.  In the event an application for renewal has been filed at least 45 days before the expiration of the previous license, but the Local Licensing Authority does not rule on the application for renewal before the expiration of the previous license, the previous license shall be deemed extended until the Local Licensing Authority issues a decision on the application for renewal, but in no event may the license be extended for more than 90 days. 
D.  The Local Licensing Authority may renew a license without a public hearing. However, if the Local Licensing Authority believes there may be good cause to deny the application for renewal, the Local Licensing Authority shall hold a public hearing on the application. The licensee shall have an opportunity to be heard and shall be given at least 15 days written notice of the date and time of the public hearing on the application for renewal. 
(Code 1972, § 5.15.150; Ord. No. 01-2017, § 7, 1-10-2017) 
Section 5.15.160. - Major changes to medical marijuana business license or licensed premises requiring approval of the Local Licensing Authority. 
A.  A licensee shall not make any of the following changes without first obtaining written approval of the Local Licensing Authority: 
1.  Any transfer of the license or any ownership interest in the licensee's business entity or license; 
2.  Any change in the location of the licensed premises; 
3.  Any change in the licensee's principals; 
4.  The hiring, substitution, resignation, replacement or termination of the business manager; 
5.  Any change in the ownership of any of the stock of licensee's corporation; 
6.  Any change in the structure, ventilation system, plumbing system, electrical supply system, floor plan, safe or vault, locks, surveillance system, or security system at the licensed premises; 
7.  Any material change to the adjacent grounds, including, but not limited to, lighting, parking, or fences; and 
8.  Any material change in the operation from the operational plan submitted at the time the license was approved. 
B.  The Local Licensing Authority may summarily approve any of the above changes or hold a public hearing on the same, in the Local Licensing Authority's discretion. 
C.  The transfer of a license to a new owner does not constitute a new license. The transferring of a license or ownership interest in a license takes the transfer of such license or interest subject to the conditions, history, record, and sanctions imposed on that license under the previous ownership of the license. 
(Code 1972, § 5.15.160) 
Section 5.15.170. - Reports of minor changes. 
    Every licensee shall report the following to the Local Licensing Authority in writing within ten days of such event: 
A.  Any change in a person's financial interest in the licensee's business, the licensed premises, or adjacent grounds; 
B.  Any change in the licensee's employees; 
C.  Any charges filed against or any conviction of any principal, business manager, or employees for any felony, misdemeanor, or serious traffic offense, including, but not limited to, any deferred judgment and sentence ordered or supervised by a Court of Law; and 
D.  Any change to any sign on the licensed premises or adjacent grounds. 
(Code 1972, § 5.15.170) 
Section 5.15.180. - Books and records. 
A.  Every licensee shall maintain on the licensed premises at any time that any person is present on the licensed premises accurate and up to date books and records of the business operations of the licensee or an authentic copy of the same, including, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  All books and records required to be maintained by the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code and the regulations promulgated thereunder; 
2.  Lists, manifests, orders, invoices, and receipts for all marijuana, marijuana plants, and medical marijuana-infused products cultivated, harvested, processed, delivered, purchased, stored, sold, and exchanged during the preceding two years by each transaction or event, including the date, source, strain, type, quantity, weight, and purchaser; 
3.  An inventory of all marijuana and medical marijuana-infused products presently on the licensed premises; 
4.  Sales taxes collected and paid; 
5.  The name, address, and a copy of each purchaser's medical marijuana registry card for every patient who has registered the medical marijuana center as his primary center or who has purchased medical marijuana, marijuana plants or medical marijuana-infused products at the licensed premises; 
6.  The written recommendation of any physician who has recommended that a patent registered with the medical marijuana center needs more than two ounces of medical marijuana and six marijuana plants to address the patient's debilitating medical condition; 
7.  The name, address and a copy of the medical marijuana license of any other medical marijuana facility licensee with whom the licensee has transacted any business, including, but not limited to, any purchase, sale, or exchange of marijuana plants, harvested marijuana or medical marijuana-infused products; and 
8.  Copies of the medical marijuana registry card of a homebound patient and the waiver from the State authorizing a primary caregiver to purchase medical marijuana for the homebound medical marijuana patient and transport the same to the homebound patient. 
B.  The licensee shall separate or redact any information showing a patient's debilitating medical condition from the above records. 
(Code 1972, § 5.15.180) 
Section 5.15.190. - Inspection of books and records; audits. 
A.  Any law enforcement officer, the Town Manager, or his designee, may, without a warrant and without reasonable suspicion, inspect the books and records described in Section 5.15.180 at any time that anyone is present inside the licensed premises, but shall not inspect confidential patient medical information describing a patient's debilitating medical condition, unless a warrant specifically authorizing inspection of such records is issued or there are legal grounds that would excuse the requirement of a warrant. 
B.  Upon five days written notice, a licensee shall provide all of the books and records of the licensee for auditing by the Town, but shall not be required to provide any confidential patient medical information. In the event confidential patient medical information is interspersed with other records or are contained on the same sheet of paper or electronic record, the licensee shall copy the record and redact the confidential patient medical information and provide a redacted copy to the Town or law enforcement officers. 
(Code 1972, § 5.15.190) 
Section 5.15.200. - Inspection of licensed premises and adjacent grounds. 
A.  Every licensed premises and adjacent grounds shall be open to inspection by police officers, Building Officials, Fire Department officials, zoning officials, and Health Department officials at any time that anyone is present in the licensed premises, without obtaining a search warrant, and without reasonable suspicion to believe that any violation or criminal offense has occurred. 
B.  The licensee, principals, business manager, and employees shall have no reasonable expectation of privacy as to the buildings, rooms, areas, furniture, safes, lockers, or containers on the licensed premises and adjacent grounds, except as provided in this section. 
C.  Licensees, principals, business managers, employees, patients, primary caregivers, and other persons on the licensed premises and adjacent grounds shall retain a reasonable expectation of privacy as to their medical condition, their persons, the personal effects in their immediate possession, and their motor vehicles on the licensed premises and adjacent grounds, to the extent provided by law. 
(Code 1972, § 5.15.200) 
Section 5.15.210. - Suspension and revocation of license. 
A.  In accordance with C.R.S. § 44-11-601, as contained in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, the Local Licensing Authority shall have the power, on its own motion or on complaint, after investigation and opportunity for a public hearing at which the licensee shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard, to suspend or revoke a medical marijuana business license issued by the Local Licensing Authority. The Local Licensing Authority shall have the power to administer oaths, and issue subpoenas to require the presence of persons and the production of papers, books, and records necessary to the determination of the hearing. The procedure for imposing such disciplinary actions shall be in accordance with C.R.S. § 44-11-601. 
B.  The Local Licensing Authority may suspend or revoke a medical marijuana business license for a violation by the licensee or by any of the agents or employees of the licensee of the following: 
1.  Any of the provisions of the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code or the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder; 
2.  Good cause as defined in C.R.S. § 44-11-104(2) of the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code; 
3.  Violation of any of the provisions set forth in Sections 5.15.100 through 5.15.130 and 5.15.160; 
4.  The licensee has failed to pay the annual medical marijuana license and application fees, annual business license fee or sales taxes due and owing; 
5.  The licensee has made any false statement in the application for a license as to any of the facts required to be stated in such application; 
6.  The licensee has failed either to file the required reports or to furnish such information and records as required by this chapter; 
7.  Violation of any condition imposed by the Local Licensing Authority on the issuance of the license; 
8.  Any facts or condition exist which, if it had existed or had been known to exist at the time of the application for such license, would have warranted the Local Licensing Authority in refusing originally to issue such license; 
9.  The licensee has failed to maintain the licensed premises in compliance with the requirements of the Eagle Land Use and Development Code or any building code provision applicable to the licensed premises; or 
10.  The licensee, or any of the agents or employees of the licensee, have violated any ordinance of the Town or any state law on the licensed premises or have permitted such a violation on the licensed premises by any other person. 
C.  Except in the case of an emergency suspension, a suspension of a license shall not be for a period longer than six months. 
D.  Any final decision of the Local Licensing Authority suspending or revoking a medical marijuana business license, following a hearing as permitted in this section, may be appealed to the County District Court within 30 days following the date of such decision pursuant to the provisions of Rule 106(a)(4), Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(Code 1972, § 5.15.210; Ord. No. 13, § 1, 2012; Ord. No. 36-2018 , § 15, 11-27-2018) 
Title 6 - PUBLIC PARKS, RECREATION AREAS AND OPEN SPACE AREAS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Town authority to acquire and maintain parks, C.R.S. § 31-25-301 et seq. 

CHAPTER 6.02. - PUBLIC PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS 

Section 6.02.010. - Definitions, applicability and scope. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any park or recreation area owned, leased or operated, or hereafter owned, leased or operated, by the Town, whether within or without the Town limits. This chapter applies to all persons entering, using, or visiting any such park, or recreation area. 
B.  The term "camping equipment," as the same appears in this chapter, includes not only a tent or vehicle used to accommodate the camper, but also the vehicles used for transport, and any associated camping paraphernalia. 
(Code 1972, § 6.02.010) 
Section 6.02.020. - Sanitation. 
A.  The following acts are prohibited in any park or recreation area: 
1.  Failing to dispose of all garbage, including paper, cans, bottles, waste materials and rubbish, by removal from the site or area, or disposal at places provided by the Town for rubbish removal; 
2.  Draining or dumping refuse or waste from any trailer or other vehicle except in places or receptacles provided for such uses; 
3.  Cleaning fish or food, or washing clothes or articles of household use at any water faucets, restrooms or water hydrants; 
4.  Polluting or contaminating water supplies or water used for human consumption, or any creeks or rivers; 
5.  Depositing, except into receptacles provided for that purpose, any body waste in or on any portion of any restroom facility or any other public structure, or depositing any bottles, cans, cloths, rags, metal, wood, stone, or any other damaging substance in any of the fixtures in such stations or structures; and 
6.  Using refuse containers or other refuse facilities for dumping household or commercial garbage or trash brought as such from private property. 
B.  Any person who knowingly violates Subsections (A)(1) through (3), (5) and (6) of this section commits a non-criminal municipal offense. Any person who knowingly violates Subsection (A)(4) of this section commits a Class A municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 6.02.020) 
Section 6.02.030. - Public behavior and preservation of public property and resources. 
A.  The following acts are prohibited within any park or recreation area: 
1.  Any act forbidden by any section of Title 9; 
2.  Inciting or participating in riots, or indulging in boisterous or abusive, threatening, or indecent conduct; 
3.  Destroying, defacing, or removing any natural feature or plant; 
4.  Destroying, injuring, defacing, removing, or disturbing in any manner any public building, sign, equipment, marker, or other structure or property; 
5.  Selling or offering for sale any merchandise without the prior written consent of the Town Manager or his delegate; 
6.  Distributing any handbills or circulars or posting, placing or erecting any bills, notices, paper, or advertising devices or matter of any kind without the prior written permission of the Town Manager or his delegate; 
7.  Discharging firearms, firecrackers, rockets, or any other fireworks; 
8.  Operating or using any audio devices, including radios, televisions or musical instruments, or any other noise-producing devices, such as an electrical generating plant, in such a manner and at such times so as to disturb other persons using the recreation area or park; 
9.  Operating or using public address systems, whether fixed or portable, except with the prior written permission of the Town Manager or his delegate; and 
10.  Installing aerial or special radio or telephone or television equipment unless previously approved by the Town Manager or his delegate in writing. 
B.  Any person who knowingly violates Subsections (A)(5), (6) and (8) through (10) of this section commits a non-criminal municipal offense. Any person who knowingly violates Subsections (A)(2) and (3) of this section commits a Class B municipal offense. Any person who knowingly violates Subsections (A)(4) and (7) of this section commits a Class A municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 6.02.030) 
Section 6.02.040. - Occupancy of parks and recreation areas. 
A.  The following acts are prohibited within any park or recreation area: 
1.  Occupying a recreation site for other than primarily recreational purposes; 
2.  Entering or using a recreation site or recreation area, or a portion of a recreation site or recreation area, which is closed to public use, as established by notices which shall be posted in such locations as will reasonably bring them to the attention of the public; 
3.  Occupying a site with camping equipment which is prohibited by the Town Manager or his delegate. Notices establishing a limitation on the kind or type of camping equipment shall be posted in such locations as will reasonably bring them to the attention of the public; 
4.  Building a fire outside of stoves, grills, fireplaces, or outside of fire rings provided for such purposes, or leaving unattended any fire, or failing to extinguish a fire when leaving the park; 
5.  Camping overnight in places restricted to day use only; 
6.  Failing to remove camping equipment, or to clean rubbish and trash before departure; 
7.  Pitching tents or parking trailers or other camping equipment except in places specifically provided for such purposes; 
8.  Camping overnight within a campground for a longer period than 14 days in any 30 day period; 
9.  Leaving a camping unit unoccupied during the first night after camping equipment has been set up, or leaving unattended camping equipment for more than 24 hours, without written permission of the Town Manager. Unattended camping equipment which is not removed within the prescribed time limit is subject to impoundment and removal by Town authorities; 
10.  Failing to maintain quiet in campgrounds between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.; and 
11.  Entering or remaining in campgrounds during darkness, except for those persons who occupy the campground for camping purposes or other person visiting those campers. 
B.  Any person who knowingly violates Subsections (A)(1) through (3) and (5) through (11) of this section commits a non-criminal municipal offense. Any person who knowingly violates Subsection (A)(4) of this section commits a Class B municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 6.02.040) 
Section 6.02.050. - Regulation of vehicles. 
A.  The provisions of the Model Traffic Code, as adopted by reference by the Town, shall apply within the limits of any park or recreation area. In addition, the following acts shall be prohibited within any park or recreation area: 
1.  Driving motor vehicles in excess of 20 miles per hour; 
2.  Driving or parking any vehicle or trailer except in places developed for that purpose; 
3.  Operating motor vehicles, bicycles, motor bikes, motorcycles, or other off-highway vehicles (OHV) off of established roadways or onto trails, unless such trails have been specifically marked for off-road vehicle use; 
4.  Operating any motor vehicle or snowmobile in such a manner as will annoy or disturb other users of the park or recreation area; 
5.  Operating any motor vehicle, bicycle, motor bike, motorcycle, snowmobile or other off-highway vehicle (OHV) in any park or recreation area when the same has been closed to traffic. The Town Manager or Police Chief shall have the authority to close any park or recreation area for health or safety reasons or for the protection of wildlife at any time, and such closing shall become effective when signs giving notice thereof are erected at prominent locations within the park or recreation area. 
B.  Any person who knowingly violates Subsections (A)(1), (2) and (4) of this section commits a non-criminal municipal offense. Any person who knowingly commits the first violation of Subsections (A)(3) and (5) of this section within 12 consecutive months commits a non-criminal municipal offense. The second or subsequent violation of Subsections (A)(3) and (5) of this section within 12 consecutive months shall constitute a Class A municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 6.02.050) 
Section 6.02.060. - Fees and charges. 
    The Town may assess fees or user charges for the use of any Town owned or operated public recreation facility. The amount of such fees shall be proposed by the Town Manager and submitted to the Board of Trustees. The fees shall become effective when approved by resolution of the Board. All fees and charges imposed by the authority granted within this section shall be paid to the Town Treasurer, in such manner as the Town Treasurer shall prescribe. 
(Code 1972, § 6.02.060) 
CHAPTER 6.03. - OPEN SPACE AREAS 

Section 6.03.010. - Applicability and scope. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any open space area owned, leased or operated or hereafter owned, leased or operated by the Town or any interests in land which the Town determines is necessary, suitable or proper for the preservation or conservation of sites, scenes, open space and vistas for recreational, wildlife, historic, aesthetic, or similar public purposes. The term "interest in land" means all rights and interests in land less than the full fee interest, including, but not limited to, future interests, easements, covenants, and contractual rights. 
(Code 1972, § 6.03.010) 
Section 6.03.020. - Use of open space areas, general. 
A.  Access for approved motor vehicles and bicycles shall be restricted to designated roads and trails. See the map contained in Section 6.03.130. 
B.  Signs indicating designated trails and travel routes shall be posted by the Town at the start of the route and along the route in Town open space areas. 
C.  Generally, pedestrian and equestrian users shall not be restricted to designated trails, but the Town may request that users use designated trails in open space areas. 
D.  The Spud Cellar property located behind the pool/ice-rink complex has a specific restriction that all users must stay on the designated trail. 
E.  Designated access points for bicycle riders, equestrians and pedestrians shall be (see map contained in Section 6.03.130): 
1.  Horton Street Trail, off Horton Street. 
2.  Abrams Creek Trail, off Silver Spur. 
3.  The Arroyo Drive parking area shall provide access to the Third Gulch, Second Gulch, Turniphead and the Bailey Trails. 
4.  East Haystacker Drive (just southeast of the intersection with Harvester Court) shall provide access for the Mayer Gulch Trail and the Turniphead Trail. 
5.  East Haystacker Drive (just east of Clover Lane) shall provide access to the Mayer Gulch Trail. 
6.  Pool/ice-rink complex (behind the northwest corner of the swimming pool) shall provide access to the Spud Cellar Trail. 
7.  Kill Bill Trail, located off the asphalt path to the northwest of West Dewey Park cul-de-sac. 
8.  South end of Eagle Ranch Road - trail head that accesses two short bicycle/pedestrian trails that access Filing No. 25 of the Eagle Ranch PUD. The north trail is referred to as the Wall Trail and the southerly trail is referred to as the Avalanche Trail. 
9.  Riddle Trail, which accesses off of Avalanche Trail, just northeast of the cul-de-sac on Avalanche Peak Way. 
10.  East Haystacker Drive, at the locked green gate on the Town's water tank access road, shall provide access to the Riddle Trail. 
F.  If resource damage is detected on Town open space lands, or adjoining BLM land, that was or is being caused by off-route use, the Town may take any or all of the following actions: 
1.  Close the damaged area; 
2.  Close the damaged area to specific user groups; 
3.  Close the general area to specific user groups; 
4.  Close access to the offending user groups; or 
5.  Close access to all user groups. 
The Town also reserves the right to close any areas showing signs of resource damage whether caused by a particular user group or not. 
G.  Pedestrian, equestrian or bicycle use in or around the Town's water tanks shall be prohibited. 
H.  Government agencies, conducting bona fide administrative duties, are permitted access to any open space area and the use of appropriate motor vehicles shall be permitted with the approval of the Town Manager. 
I.  All persons using open space areas in any manner whatsoever use such open space areas at their own risk. In accordance with C.R.S. § 33-41-101 et seq., the Town does not extend any assurance that any open space area is safe for any purpose, does not confer upon any open space user the legal status of invitee or licensee to whom a duty of care is owed, and does not assume responsibility or incur liability for any injury to person, or property or for the death of any person caused by an act or omission of a person using open space areas. 
(Code 1972, § 6.03.020) 
Section 6.03.030. - Motorized use in open space areas. 
A.  Operation of motor vehicles, motor bikes, motorcycles, snowmobiles or off-highway vehicles (OHV) which are less than 50 inches in width shall be allowed access to the Hardscrabble Road via the trail going up Second Gulch. Access to such trail is obtained by following the Second Gulch Trail signs from the parking area located at the bottom of Arroyo Drive. See map contained in Section 6.03.130. The operation of any motor vehicle, motor bike, motorcycle, snowmobile or other off-highway vehicle (OHV) in any other open space area is prohibited. 
B.  Operators of motor vehicles, motor bikes, motorcycles, snowmobiles, or other off-highway vehicles (OHV) shall stay on designated routes and not travel off them, or create any new or additional roads or trails. See map contained in Section 6.03.130. 
C.  Operators of any motor vehicles, motor bikes, motorcycles, snowmobiles, or other off-highway vehicles (OHV) shall yield to pedestrians, equestrians, and bicyclists. 
D.  Any person who knowingly violates this section commits a non-criminal municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 6.03.030) 
Section 6.03.040. - Mountain bike use in open space areas. 
A.  Bicycle users shall stay on designated routes, trails, roads and/or paths, and not travel off of them or create any new or additional roads or trails. See map contained in Section 6.03.130. 
B.  Bicyclists shall yield to pedestrians and equestrian users. 
C.  Any person who knowingly violates this section commits a non-criminal municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 6.03.040) 
Section 6.03.050. - Equestrian use in open space areas. 
A.  A large parking area with room for horse trailers is located at the bottom of Arroyo Drive that accesses the following trails: Third Gulch Trail, Second Gulch Trail, Turniphead Trail and Bailey Trail. 
B.  The use of horses is prohibited on the crusher fine trail that parallels Brush Creek from Sylvan Lake Road southeast to the end of Eagle Ranch Road due to the damage the horses' hoofs create in the crusher fine surface. Any person who knowingly violates this subsection commits a non-criminal municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 6.03.050) 
Section 6.03.060. - Pedestrian use in open space areas. 
    Pedestrians and hikers in open space areas shall yield to equestrian users. Any person who knowingly violates this section commits a non-criminal municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 6.03.060) 
Section 6.03.070. - Hernage Gulch recreational use. 
    Pedestrian or foot travel is the only allowable public use in Hernage Gulch (including on the existing Hernage Creek Trail), with the exception of the trail connecting Third Gulch to Abrams Gulch which is open to pedestrian and bicycle use. No motor vehicle, motor bikes, motorcycles, snowmobiles, or other off-highway vehicles (OHV) or equestrian use is permitted in Hernage Gulch, with the exception of governmental agencies conducting bona fide administrative duties. Any person who knowingly violates this section commits a non-criminal municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 6.03.070; Ord. No. 14-2017, § 1, 5-9-2017) 
Section 6.03.080. - Emergency access in open space areas. 
    Emergency access by motor vehicles is permitted by emergency response authorities, including, but not limited to, the Eagle Police Department, the Eagle County Sheriff, and the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District. The existing two track roads accessing Third Gulch will remain and may be used for emergency access purposes only. 
(Code 1972, § 6.03.080) 
Section 6.03.090. - Seasonal use restrictions in open space areas. 
A.  1.  In accordance with the Eagle Ranch Annexation and Development Agreement between the Town and West Eagle Ranch LLC (January 12, 1999) and the Eagle Ranch PUD Wildlife Mitigation and Enhancement Plan (January 8, 1999) which was incorporated into the agreement and the PUD zoning for Eagle Ranch, open space parcels OS1 and OS2 shall have a seasonal use restriction in place from December 15 to April 15 of each year. These parcels are shown on the Eagle Ranch PUD Development Plan Map dated December 18, 1998 (reception number 692229), contained in Section 6.03.140. These parcels encompass the Horton Street Trail, Kill Bill Trail, Abrams Trail, and Hernage Creek Trail. Recreational and general maintenance activities parcels OS1 and OS2 which contain native habitats will be prohibited during the winter closure in order to protect wintering wildlife and to avoid damage to roads or trails caused by use in wet conditions. Governmental agencies conducting bona fide duties shall be allowed access during such periods with the approval of the Town Manager. 
2.  Trails located on other open space parcels, including parcels OS3, OS4, OS-A, OS-B, OS-C, OS-D, OS-E, and OS-F, are not subject to the restrictions defined in the Eagle Ranch Annexation and Development Agreement (January 12, 1999). These parcels are shown on the Eagle Ranch PUD Development Plan Map dated February 10, 2003 (reception number 832911) contained in Section 6.03.150 and the PUD zoning of Eagle Ranch. These parcels encompass the Third Gulch Trail, Bailey Trail, Second Gulch Trail, Mayer Gulch Trail, Riddle Trail, Wall Trail, and Turniphead Trail. Seasonal use restrictions on these parcels and trails shall be determined by the Town Board of Trustees. Any changes in seasonal use restrictions shall be amended by resolution following a public hearing. 
3.  The Pool and Ice Rink Trail and trail on the Spud Cellar Parcel are not part of the Eagle Ranch development. Seasonal use restrictions on these parcels and trails shall also be determined by the Town Board of Trustees. Any changes in seasonal use restrictions shall be amended by resolution following a public hearing. 
B.  The Town Manager, after consulting with the State Parks and Wildlife Division, may open the critical wildlife areas described in Subsection (A) of this section earlier if the areas have dried out and the majority of the deer and elk population have moved to higher elevations. Physical damage to roads or trails caused by use in wet conditions shall be given consideration by the Town Manager when contemplating an early opening of restricted areas. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter an area closed because of a seasonal use restriction on foot, on horseback, in any motor vehicle, on a bicycle, motorbike, motorcycle, snowmobile or other off-highway vehicle (OHV) when the same has been closed to traffic. Any person who knowingly violates this subsection for the first time within 12 consecutive months commits a non-criminal municipal offense. The second or subsequent violation of this subsection within 12 consecutive months shall constitute a Class A municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 6.03.090) 
Section 6.03.100. - Closure of Abrams Creek Road pedestrian easement. 
    The 15-foot-wide non-motorized, pedestrian easement located at the end of Abrams Creek Road shall be closed to all public use until such time that a legal access is obtained to travel on the private land such easement accesses. 
(Code 1972, § 6.03.100) 
Section 6.03.110. - Prohibited acts in open space areas. 
A.  The following acts are prohibited in any Town open space area: 
1.  Failing to dispose of all garbage, including paper, cans, bottles, waste materials and rubbish by removal from the open space area, or disposal at places provided by the Town for rubbish disposal; 
2.  Polluting or contaminating any creeks or rivers; 
3.  Any act forbidden by Title 9; 
4.  Inciting or indulging in boisterous or abusive, threatening or indecent conduct; 
5.  Destroying, defacing or removing any natural feature or plant; 
6.  Destroying, injuring, defacing, removing, or disturbing in any manner any public sign or marker; 
7.  Selling or offering for sale any merchandise without the prior written consent of the Town Manager; 
8.  Distributing any handbills or circulars or posting, placing or erecting any bills, notices, paper or advertising devices of any kind without the prior written permission of the Town Manager; 
9.  Discharging firearms, firecrackers, rockets or any other fireworks or building a fire; 
10.  Operating or using any audio devices or musical instruments in such a manner and at such times so as to disturb other persons using the open space area; 
11.  Entering or using an open space area, or a portion thereof, which is closed to public use, as established by notices which shall be posted in such locations as will reasonably bring them to the attention of the public; 
12.  Camping overnight or pitching tents or parking trailers or other camping equipment; 
13.  Hiking, bicycling, or horseback riding within an open space area, or part thereof, which is closed for such specific use, as established by notices which shall be posted in such locations as will reasonably bring the closure to the attention of the public; 
14.  Operating motor vehicles, bicycles, motorbikes, motorcycles, or other off-highway vehicles (OHV) off of established roadways or onto trails, unless such trails have been specifically marked for such uses; 
15.  Operating any motor vehicle, bicycle, motorbike, motorcycle, snowmobile or other off-highway vehicle (OHV) in an open space area or part thereof when the same has been closed to such traffic; 
16.  Operating any motor vehicle, motorbike, motorcycle, or snowmobile in such a manner as will annoy or disturb other users of the open space area; and 
17.  Operating or parking any motor vehicle, off-highway vehicle (OHV) or snowmobile in any open space area that does not have a current vehicle registration displayed. The registration shall either be in the form of license plates issued by a State Department of Motor Vehicles or an off-highway vehicle (OHV) registration from an appropriate State agency. 
B.  Any person who knowingly violates Subsections (A)(4), (5), (11), (13) and (15) of this section commits a Class B municipal offense. Any person who knowingly violates Subsections (A)(6) and (9) of this section commits a Class A municipal offense. Any person who knowingly violates any other subsection of this section commits a non-criminal municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 6.03.110) 
Section 6.03.120. - Seizure of vehicles. 
    In the event a person is issued a summons and complaint alleging a violation of Section 6.03.110(A)(4), (15) or (17), the officer issuing such summons and complaint may seize and impound the vehicle involved in the alleged violation which shall be held as evidence pending trial or other disposition of the charges. In the event such person is found guilty of such offense, the defendant shall be assessed the Town's costs for towing or otherwise removing such vehicle, together with applicable charges for storage. No vehicle seized or impounded pursuant to this section shall be released to the owner until such charges have been paid. 
(Code 1972, § 6.03.120) 
Section 6.03.130. - Trails map. 
    The following map shows all approved soft path trails in the Town open space areas. 

(Code 1972, § 6.03.130) 
Section 6.03.140. - Eagle Ranch PUD Development Plan Map dated December 18, 1998. 
    The following map shows the open space parcels OS1 and OS2 which require seasonal closures per the Eagle Ranch Annexation and Development Agreement: 

(Code 1972, § 6.03.140) 
Section 6.03.150. - Eagle Ranch PUD Development Plan Map dated February 10, 2003. 
    The following map shows the open space parcels OS3, OS4, OS-A, OS-B, OS-C, OS-D, OS-E, and OS-F which have a seasonal closure or no closure status that is determined by the Town Board of Trustees: 

(Code 1972, § 6.03.150) 
CHAPTER 6.04. - PROCEDURE FOR PROPOSING NEW TRAILS OR TRAIL USES ON TOWN OPEN SPACE 

Section 6.04.010. - Proposal procedure. 
    Members of the public and recreation user groups who wish to propose a new trail or change the allowed uses on a trail shall request a pre-application meeting with the Town's open space coordinator. The open space coordinator shall determine the extent of the information and application materials needed based on the nature of the proposal. The open space coordinator will then schedule a public hearing with the Town Board of Trustees to review the proposal. The Town Board of Trustees shall review the proposal at a public hearing which shall be advertised for a minimum of 15 days prior to the date of the hearing. In addition, property owners within 250 feet of any new trail segment (if applicable) or trail with a proposed change in use shall be sent notice of such hearing by first class mail. Notice of the hearing shall be published in the Town's newspaper of record. At the said hearing, the Board of Trustees shall have the authority to take final action on the proposed construction of a new trail or change in existing trails allowed uses. 
(Code 1972, § 6.04.010) 
CHAPTER 6.05. - SPECIAL EVENTS AND DEMONSTRATIONS 

Section 6.05.010. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide for and regulate the use of public property to minimize the impacts of large groups and to ensure that public property is reasonably available and safe for use by the public. 
(Ord. No. 12-2019 , § 2, 5-14-2019) 
Section 6.05.020. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Demonstration means a rally, picketing, protest, speechmaking, march, vigil, religious service or any similar gathering that primarily involves the communication or expression of views or grievances that involves 50 or more participants and occurs on a public property. 
    Public property means any property owned or controlled by the Town and open to the public or available for public use, including without limitation public streets, rights-of-way, sidewalks, parks, open space, facilities and public buildings. 
    Special event means a planned event involving a gathering of 50 or more people which occurs on public property, including without limitation block parties, parades, festivals, walks, running or bicycle races, fundraisers, picnics, or sports tournaments, but excluding demonstrations. 
(Ord. No. 12-2019 , § 2, 5-14-2019) 
Section 6.05.030. - Permit required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to stage, hold, present, or conduct a special event or demonstration within the Town without a valid permit issued under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 12-2019 , § 2, 5-14-2019) 
Section 6.05.040. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
1.  An indoor special event of any kind; or 
2.  A recreational event at Eagle Town Park, Brush Creek Park, Terrace Park or the Town's multipurpose fields and scheduled through the Town. 
(Ord. No. 12-2019 , § 2, 5-14-2019) 
Section 6.05.050. - Application. 
A.  Any person desiring to sponsor or conduct a special event or demonstration shall file an application with the Town Manager's office on a form supplied by the Town. 
B.  Each application shall be accompanied by a signed indemnification agreement stating that the applicant, in exchange for issuance of the permit, agrees to reimburse the Town for any costs incurred by the Town in repairing damages to public property caused by the applicant, sponsors, invitees, or participants of the special event or demonstration and agreeing to defend the Town against, and indemnify and hold the Town harmless from, any liability to any person or property that arises from or is related to the special event or demonstration. 
C.  Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in such amount established by resolution of the Board of Trustees. Demonstration permits shall not be subject to an application fee. 
(Ord. No. 12-2019 , § 2, 5-14-2019) 
Section 6.05.060. - Review; decision. 
A.  Upon receipt of a complete application, the Town Manager shall transmit copies of the application to such persons, agencies, or departments as the Town Manager deems appropriate. Within ten days, the referral agencies shall provide the Town Manager with any comments concerning the application. 
B.  The Town Manager shall approve, deny or conditionally approve an application for a special event permit within 40 days of receipt of the completed application. Notice shall be provided by e-mailing a copy of the Town Manager's decision to the applicant at the e-mail address provided in the application. If an application is denied or conditionally approved, the Town Manager shall clearly set forth in writing the grounds for such denial or conditional approval. 
C.  The Town Manager shall approve, deny or conditionally approve an application for a demonstration permit within 48 hours of receipt of the completed application. The Town shall, upon a showing of good cause, consider an application for a demonstration to occur within 48 hours of the receipt of the completed application if there is sufficient time to process and investigate the application and obtain necessary Town services for the demonstration. Notice shall be provided by e-mailing a copy of the Town Manager's decision to the applicant at the e-mail address provided in the application. If an application is denied or conditionally approved, the Town Manager shall clearly set forth in writing the grounds for such denial or conditional approval. 
(Ord. No. 12-2019 , § 2, 5-14-2019) 
Section 6.05.070. - Criteria for denial; conditions. 
A.  The Town Manager shall approve a permit application unless the Town Manager determines, upon consideration of the application and other pertinent information, that: 
1.  Information contained in the application or supplemental information obtained from the applicant is found to be false in any material detail; 
2.  The applicant is not legally competent to contract under Colorado law; 
3.  The applicant or the person on whose behalf the application is made has failed to pay costs, fees, or deposits for a previous special event or demonstration permit within the preceding five years; or the applicant has failed to pay the Town for damages arising from a previous special event or demonstration held by the applicant, regardless of when such event was held; 
4.  The applicant has failed to abide by the requirements or conditions of a previous permit within the preceding five years; 
5.  The special event or demonstration will conflict with: a special event or demonstration for which a permit has already been issued; a Town-sponsored event; or an annual special event which is reasonably expected to be held again, but for which an application has yet to be submitted. 
6.  The location of the special event or demonstration will substantially interfere with any scheduled construction or maintenance work; 
7.  The special event or demonstration will cause significant disruption in the ability of the Town to deliver or provide essential governmental services; 
8.  Adequate sanitation and other required health facilities are not and cannot be made available at or sufficiently near the proposed special event or demonstration area(s); or 
9.  Sufficient parking is not available near the location of the special event or demonstration to accommodate the number of vehicles reasonably expected, and an acceptable transportation and parking plan to provide adequate parking has not been submitted. 
B.  When the grounds for denial of an application can be corrected by the imposition of reasonable conditions, the Town Manager shall, instead of denying the application, conditionally approve the application with conditions necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the public, including without limitation: 
1.  Alteration of the date, time, duration, frequency, route or location of the special event or demonstration; 
2.  A deposit in an amount the Town Manager finds is appropriate based upon an estimate of the actual costs to be incurred by the Town in the clean-up of the special event or demonstration; 
3.  Proof of insurance demonstrating that the permittee has in effect a policy of general liability insurance in an amount determined by the Town Manager based upon issues routinely considered by the Town in evaluating loss exposures; 
4.  Conditions concerning parking, pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including without limitation restricting the special event or demonstration to only a portion of a street or right-of-way; 
5.  Traffic control requirements, such as traffic cones, barricades or other traffic control devices; 
6.  Provision of emergency access and first aid or sanitary facilities; 
7.  Supplemental fire protection or law enforcement personnel to be present at the special event; 
8.  Notice of the special event or demonstration to surrounding neighborhoods; 
9.  Restrictions on the number and type of vehicles, animals or structures and inspection and prior approval of floats, structures and decorated vehicles; 
10.  Required trash receptacles, cleanup and restoration of property; 
11.  Restrictions on amplified sound; and 
12.  Designation of a contact person with decision-making authority who will be continuously available to law enforcement personnel and present at the special event or demonstration. 
Section 6.05.075. - Duties of permittee; posting. 
    In connection with the holding of the special event or demonstration for which a permit is issued, a permittee shall: 
A.  Comply with all of the terms and conditions of the permit and all applicable Town ordinances, the rules, regulations and policies adopted by the Town Manager pursuant to Section 6.05.120, and state and federal law; 
B.  Permit inspection of its records and special event or demonstration facilities by the Town Manager for the purpose of determining the permittee's compliance with the terms and conditions of the permit; and 
C.  Ensure that a copy of the permit is continuously posted in a conspicuous location at the site of the special event or demonstration throughout the duration of the event or demonstration. 
(Ord. No. 12-2019 , § 2, 5-14-2019) 
Section 6.05.080. - Suspension; revocation. 
A.  The Town Manager may suspend or revoke a permit at any time prior to the special event or demonstration if: conditions change or facts come to light so that the application could have been denied in the first instance; or the terms of a conditional permit have not been satisfied in the time specified for meeting the condition. 
B.  The Town Manager may suspend or revoke a permit during the course of the special event or demonstration if: continuation of the special event or demonstration presents a clear and present danger to the participants or the public health, safety or welfare; or the special event or demonstration fails to comply with any condition of the permit or any applicable law. 
C.  In deciding whether a permit should be suspended or revoked, the Town Manager shall consider: the nature and seriousness of the issue; the corrective action, if any, taken by the permittee; and the likelihood of recurrence. 
D.  The Town Manager's decision under this section is appealable to the Board of Trustees pursuant to Section 6.05.100. 
E.  No application fees paid by a permittee in connection shall be refunded if such permit is suspended or revoked, unless the decision is overturned on appeal. 
(Ord. No. 12-2019 , § 2, 5-14-2019) 
Section 6.05.090. - Permit non-transferable. 
    A permit is non-transferable and non-assignable. Any attempt to transfer or assign such permit voids the permit. 
(Ord. No. 12-2019 , § 2, 5-14-2019) 
Section 6.05.100. - Appeal. 
A.  Special event permit. 
1.  A decision of the Town Manager regarding a special event permit may be appealed to the Board of Trustees by filing a written notice of appeal setting forth the grounds for appeal within ten days after the decision is rendered. Failure to timely appeal the Town Manager's decision is a waiver of the right to appeal. 
2.  The applicant or permittee shall be provided with not less than ten days' prior written notice of an appeal hearing to be held by the Board of Trustees. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant or permittee. 
3.  If the Board of Trustees finds by a preponderance of the evidence that the decision of the Town Manager was correct, the Board of Trustees shall uphold the decision of the Town Manager. If the Board of Trustees finds by a preponderance of the evidence that the decision of the Town Manager was incorrect, the Town Manager's decision shall be set aside. 
4.  The decision of the Board of Trustees shall be final, subject only to judicial review. 
B.  Demonstration permit. 
1.  A decision of the Town Manager regarding a demonstration permit may be appealed by filing a written notice of appeal setting forth the grounds for such appeal within ten days after the decision is rendered. 
2.  Within 24 hours of the receipt of such appeal, the Mayor shall review the appeal and issue a written decision, which decision shall be final and subject only to judicial review. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant or permittee. 
3.  If the Mayor finds by a preponderance of the evidence that the decision of the Town Manager was correct, the Mayor shall uphold the decision of the Town Manager. If the Mayor finds by a preponderance of the evidence that the decision of the Town Manager was incorrect, the Town Manager's decision shall be set aside. 
4.  If an appeal is filed less than 24 hours prior to the requested date for the demonstration, and the Mayor is unable to review the appeal prior to the requested date, the Mayor shall notify the appellant that circumstances do not permit a determination of the appeal, and said applicant is entitled to seek judicial review of the denial with no further administrative review. 
(Ord. No. 12-2019 , § 2, 5-14-2019) 
Section 6.05.110. - Relationship to other ordinances. 
A.  The permittee shall ensure that the special event or demonstration complies with all other applicable law. Specifically: 
1.  A permit issued under this chapter is not a special events liquor license. If alcoholic beverages are to be served, the permittee must obtain the required permit or approval from the Town Clerk. 
2.  A development permit or building permit may be required depending upon the size and scale of any temporary structures proposed to be used in connection with the special event or demonstration. 
B.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, a permit issued under this chapter may authorize the permittee to display temporary signage in connection with the special event or demonstration, if the signage is included in the application and approved as part of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 12-2019 , § 2, 5-14-2019) 
Section 6.05.120. - Rules, regulations and policies. 
    The Town Manager is authorized to adopt administrative rules, regulations and policies as may be necessary for the proper administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 12-2019 , § 2, 5-14-2019) 
Section 06.05.130. - Violation and penalty. 
A.  It is unlawful to violate any provision of this chapter. Violations of this chapter shall be punished as set forth in Chapter 1.12. 
B.  In addition to all other available remedies, a special event or demonstration without a valid permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be enjoined by any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 12-2019 , § 2, 5-14-2019) 
Title 7 - HEALTH AND SANITATION 
CHAPTER 7.04. - RUBBISH COLLECTION 

Section 7.04.010. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Rubbish Collection Ordinance." 
(Code 1972, § 7.04.010; Ord. No. 131, § 1, 1969; Ord. No. 14-1976(part), 1976) 
Section 7.04.020. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ashes means the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, or other combustible materials. 
    Common pickup point means the practice of two or more residential customers placing their refuse and refuse containers close together in one place, so that the collection of their refuse can be easily made without having to move the vehicle used to collect the refuse. 
    Garbage means putrescible animal, vegetable, or mineral waste. 
    Party means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. 
    Refuse means all putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes, except body wastes, including garbage, rubbish ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and solid market and industrial wastes. 
    Residential means noncommercial, non-transient customers whose refuse is derived principally from their own ordinary domestic activities. 
    Rubbish means non-putrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. 
    Yard waste means all woody biomass (tree components, forestry/logging residues such as timber thinning, wood waste residues such as stumpage, bark, trimmings, sawdust, shavings, slabs, edgings, and pulp screens) grass clippings, and leaves. The term "yard waste" shall not contain construction and demolition debris and any materials having paint or other chemical treatment, residue or contaminants. The term "yard waste" shall also not contain any dirt, rocks, plastic bags, trash or garbage. 
(Code 1972, § 7.04.020; Ord. No. 131, § 3, 1969; Ord. No. 14-1976(part), 1976; Amended Ord. No. 15-2012, § 1, 2012; Ord. No. 26, series 2014, § 1, 10-14-2014) 
Section 7.04.030. - Collection system established. 
    A system for the collection and disposal of refuse is established for the benefit of all persons residing within the Town. This system shall serve all commercial, industrial and residential establishments within the Town, except for customers of licensed refuse haulers, as authorized by this chapter. Refuse shall be collected at least once a week by the Town from all locations within the Town limits, unless otherwise deemed appropriate or necessary by the Town Manager. 
(Code 1972, § 7.04.030) 
Section 7.04.040. - Authorization to haul refuse. 
A.  Only the following may collect, transport or remove refuse, garbage, rubbish or toxic refuse from any location within the Town: 
1.  An individual may remove refuse from his own property, using his own equipment: 
2.  The Town, utilizing the collection system herein established: 
3.  Licensed and registered refuse haulers. 
B.  No other person shall collect, transport or remove refuse, garbage, rubbish or toxic refuse over any of the streets or alleys of the Town. 
(Code 1972, § 7.04.035) 
Section 7.04.050. - Licensed refuse haulers. 
A.  Only those refuse haulers who have obtained current authority from a State Public Utilities Commission, and have been licensed by the Town may collect, transport or remove refuse, garbage, rubbish or toxic refuse within the Town, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
B.  Every licensed refuse hauler shall use a packer type truck or vehicle, or a truck or vehicle equipped with a type of metal lining or side frames and a flame proof cover attached to such lining or side frames to prevent the loss of any contents thereof. Every licensed trash hauler shall identify such truck or vehicle in the manner required by law, rule or regulation of the State Public Utilities Commission. 
C.  In order to qualify for a Town license, a refuse hauler must produce evidence of applicable licenses and permits issued by the State, must show an ability to carry out such activity in conformance with this chapter, and shall pay the general occupation tax pursuant to Chapter 5.02. Failure of a refuse hauler licensed under this section to pay the required fee, or to carry out refuse collection, conveyance or disposal in accordance with the requirements of this chapter shall render that refuse hauler liable to suspension or revocation of the license granted under this section. Suspension or revocation shall be effected by the Town after a hearing at which the licensee has been given an opportunity to be heard on such matter. 
(Code 1972, § 7.04.038) 
Section 7.04.060. - Licensed refuse haulers, contract. 
    Any industrial or commercial establishment or multifamily residence of eight or more units exempted by the provisions of C.R.S. § 30-15-401(7) from the payment of the rates and charges for the Town refuse collection system shall file a valid contract for refuse removal services with a licensed refuse hauler with the Town Manager at least 30 days prior to the beginning of the next month in which the customer intends to cease using the Town's refuse collection system. Failure of the customer to so file the contract shall make the customer responsible for payment of the refuse removal fees set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 7.04.039) 
Section 7.04.070. - Collection, supervision. 
A.  All refuse in the Town shall be collected, conveyed, and disposed of only by supervision of the director of public works (director). The director shall have the authority to make regulations concerning the days and frequency of collection, type and location of waste containers and such other matters pertaining to the collection, conveyance and disposal as he shall find necessary, and to change and modify the same after notice as required by law, provided that such regulations are not contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Any party aggrieved by a regulation of the director shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Trustees, who shall have the authority to confirm, modify or revoke any such regulation. 
(Code 1972, § 7.04.040; Ord. No. 131, § 4, 1969; Ord. No. 14-1976(part), 1976) 
Section 7.04.080. - Pre-collection practices. 
    The following practices are required prior to collection: 
A.  Separation of refuse. Garbage, ashes, and rubbish shall be placed and maintained in separate containers. 
B.  Preparation of refuse. 
1.  All garbage, before being placed in garbage cans for collection, shall have drained from it all free liquids and may be wrapped in paper. 
2.  All rubbish shall be drained of liquid before being deposited for collection. 
3.  Tree trimmings, hedge clippings, and similar material shall be cut to lengths not to exceed four feet and securely tied in bundles not more than two feet thick before being deposited for collection. 
C.  Refuse containers. Refuse containers shall be of a type approved by the director and shall be kept in a clean, neat and sanitary condition at all times. 
D.  Storing of refuse. 
1.  No party shall place any refuse in any street, alley, or other public place, or upon private property, whether owned by such person or not, within the Town except in proper containers for collection or under express approval granted by the director; nor shall any person throw or deposit any refuse in any stream or other body of water. 
2.  Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse on any premises is declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Any person who knowingly fails to remove any accumulation of refuse within 30 days commits a non-criminal municipal offense. 
3.  No party shall cast, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the Town any refuse in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, alley, sewer, parkway, or other public place, or into any occupied premises within the Town. 
(Code 1972, § 7.04.050; Ord. No. 131, § 5, 1969; Ord. No. 14-1976(part), 1976; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 16, 2001; Amended Ord. No. 15-2012, § 2, 2012) 
Section 7.04.090. - Collection practices. 
    The following regulations apply to special refuse problems: 
A.  Contagious disease refuse. The removal of wearing apparel, bedding, or other refuse from homes or other places where highly infectious or contagious diseases have prevailed shall be performed under the supervision and direction of the director at the expense of the owner or occupant thereof. Such refuse shall not be placed in containers for refuse collection. 
B.  Flammable or other explosive refuse. Highly flammable or explosive refuse materials shall not be placed in containers for refuse collection but shall be disposed of as directed by the director at the expense of the owner or possessor thereof. 
C.  Collection by actual producers or outside collectors. 
1.  Parties who desire to dispose of waste material not included in the definition of refuse and collectors of refuse from outside the Town who desire to haul over the streets of the Town, shall use watertight vehicles provided with a tight cover and so operated as to prevent offensive odors escaping therefrom and refuse from being blown, dropped or spilled. 
2.  Disposal of refuse by parties so permitted under this Subsection (C) shall be made outside the Town limits, unless otherwise specifically authorized by the director. The director shall have the authority to permit the disposal of such material on the Town dump provided the charge as provided in Section 7.04.110 is paid. 
3.  The director shall have the authority to make such other reasonable regulations concerning individual collections and disposal and relating to the hauling of refuse over the Town streets by outside collectors as he shall find necessary, subject to the right of appeal as set forth in Section 7.04.070. 
(Code 1972, § 7.04.060; Ord. No. 131, § 6, 1969; Ord. No. 14-1976(part), 1976; Ord. No. 12-2004, § 6(part), 2004) 
Section 7.04.100. - Deposit restrictions. 
A.  It shall be unlawful to dispose of refuse, garbage, rubbish or toxic refuse, to throw or deposit the same, or to cause the same to be thrown or deposited, upon any street, alley, gutter, park or other public place, or to throw or deposit the same in any vacant lot or back yard, or to store or keep the same otherwise than in cans or receptacles as required by this chapter. It shall also be unlawful for any person to store, deposit, or keep refuse, garbage, rubbish or toxic refuse in locations such that rats or other rodents can have access thereto or feed thereon. It shall be unlawful to deposit or leave any refuse, garbage, rubbish or toxic refuse or any abandoned object or substance in such a place or condition that it can be blown by the wind so as to be scattered or cause clouds of dust or particles. Any person who knowingly violates this subsection commits a non-criminal municipal offense. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person, without permission or license, to throw or deposit refuse, garbage, rubbish or toxic refuse in any can, receptacle or container belonging to another. Any person who knowingly violates this subsection commits a non-criminal municipal offense. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to knowingly dispose of any toxic refuse in any manner other than provided by this chapter, or by Federal or State regulation. Any person who knowingly violates this subsection commits a Class A municipal offense. 
D.  It shall be unlawful for any industrial or commercial establishment or business, or an owner or occupant of a multifamily residence in a complex containing eight or more units to throw or deposit yard waste at the Town's yard waste facility located at 311 Violet Lane in the Town. The Town's yard waste facility is for paying customers. Paying customers are charged a yard waste fee on their monthly utility bill. Any person who knowingly violates this subsection for the first time within one year commits a non-criminal municipal offense. Any person convicted of violating this subsection for a second or subsequent time within one year commits a Class B municipal offense. 
E.  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly deposit construction and demolition debris and any materials having paint or other chemical treatment, residue or contaminants, or dirt, rocks, plastic bags, or garbage at the Town's yard waste facility located at 311 Violet Lane in the Town. Any person who knowingly violates this subsection for the first time within one year commits a non-criminal municipal offense. Any person who knowingly violates this subsection a second or subsequent time within one year commits a Class B municipal offense. 
F.  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly deposit any material, including yard waste, outside the designated yard waste facility during or after hours of operation. The designated yard waste facility will be delineated by fence, barrier, or signage. Hours of operation will be posted at the yard waste facility. Any person who knowingly violates this subsection for the first time within one year commits a non-criminal municipal offense. Any person convicted of violating this subsection for a second or subsequent time within one year commits a Class B municipal offense. 
G.  Each day's violation of this section shall be treated and considered to be a separate and distinct offense. Said offense shall be deemed one of strict liability. 
(Code 1972, § 7.04.065; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, §§ 17-19, 2001; Ord. No. 26, series 2014, § 1, 10-14-2014) 
Section 7.04.110. - Fees. 
A.  All owners of occupied residential dwelling units and all owners of occupied commercial or industrial establishments shall be assessed the cost of the Town's refuse collection system in at least the minimum rates set forth in this section. This charge shall be for the operation and maintenance of the Town's refuse collection system. Such fees 
charged for refuse collection by the Town shall be billed monthly. Payment therefore shall be ten days following the date of mailing of the statement by the Town, unless a different date due is shown on said statement. Fees for refuse collection service shall be paid in advance for the following month. Such fees shall be assessed against every owner of an occupied residential unit and every owner of an occupied commercial or industrial establishment, regardless of whether or not the Town's refuse collection system is used by said owner, except for those industrial or commercial establishments or multifamily residences of eight or more units exempted by the provision of C.R.S. § 30-15-401(7). 
B.  In the event refuse collection is discontinued during the billing period at the request of an owner or occupant because of non-occupancy of a residential unit or commercial or industrial establishment, the fee shall be prorated based on the number of days in the billing period service was provided. In such an event, a rebate shall be given. 
C.  Fees charged by the Town for refuse collection shall be established from time to time by resolution or other action of the Board of Trustees. Adjustments to said fees shall be based on the annual Denver-Boulder Consumer Price Index (CPI-U), annual tipping fee adjustments made by the county landfill and quarterly fuel surcharge adjustments in accordance with an agreement entered into by the Town and its contractor, Vail Honeywagon Enterprises, Inc., for refuse collections and disposal services. 
D.  Each dumpster or similar high capacity container classified as commercial shall be considered as one user, regardless of the number of parties using such container, and shall be billed as such. The Town shall have the right to determine the number of pickups from a dumpster per week, to be determined on the basis of the quantity of material commonly placed in a dumpster. The Town shall have the right to choose whether to bill each dumpster use separately, or bill the owner of the dumpster for the entire charge for that dumpster. 
E.  The Town may impose a higher charge for refuse which is greater in size than containers allowed under this chapter, or where the refuse output of a party is so considerable that more pickups per week are required than those indicated above for that party's category, or because the Town will necessarily incur additional or extraordinary expenses due to the nature and classification of the refuse deposited. The determination of the additional charge shall be made by the Town Manager, and shall bear a reasonable relationship to the additional service which is required, or additional or extraordinary expenses incurred by the Town for that party's refuse. Such decision by the Town Manager shall be subject to appeal to the Town Board of Trustees. 
F.  In the event of any dispute between any person and the Town regarding refuse collection, the procedures set forth in Section 7.04.070 shall be followed. 
G.  All fees and assessments levied under this chapter which have not been paid when due shall be deemed to be delinquent. In such an event, refuse collection by the Town may be suspended for non-payment. Such suspension shall not relieve the person owing such assessment the duty of complying with the requirements of this chapter and all public nuisance laws. 
H.  All assessments and fees provided by this chapter shall become and remain a lien on the premises until said fees and assessments have been paid to the Town. This lien on the premises may be foreclosed by an action at law or in equity in the name of the Town in any court having jurisdiction thereof. In the event the fees and assessments are not paid when due, such delinquent amount shall be certified to the County Treasurer to be placed on the tax list for the current year, and to be collected in the same manner as other general taxes are collected, with ten percent added to defray the costs of collection, pursuant to C.R.S. § 31-20-105. All laws of this State for the assessment and collection of general taxes, including the laws for the sale of property for taxes and redemption of the same, shall apply. 
I.  If the Town must resort to Court action for collection of amounts due it under this chapter, the Town shall also be entitled to recover its reasonable Attorney's fees and other expenses incurred in such action. 
(Code 1972, § 7.04.070; Amended Ord. No. 28-2001, § 1, 2001; Amended Ord. No. 35-2002, § 1, 2002; Amended Ord. No. 56-2003, § 1, 2003; Amended Ord. No. 45-2006, § 1(part), 2006; Amended Ord. No. 15-2012, § 3, 2012) 
CHAPTER 7.05. - REGULATION OF TREES 

Section 7.05.010. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to promote and enhance the beauty of the Town through tree preservation and protection on Town and private property by establishing a Tree Department with the authority and responsibility of establishing standards for tree care, placement, and removal. ;hn; (Ord. No. 38-2018 , § 1, 12-11-2018) 
Section 7.05.020. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Tree means a woody, perennial plant, ordinarily with one main stem or trunk, which develops many branches and which ordinarily grows to a height of ten feet or more with a diameter in excess of four inches at a height of five feet. 
    Town property means any public right-of-way, street, alley, park, or recreation area in the Town which is owned, leased, operated or controlled by the Town. ;hn; (Ord. No. 38-2018 , § 1, 12-11-2018) 
Section 7.05.030. - Tree Department. 
A.  There is hereby created and established a Town Tree Department, which department shall be under the direction of the Public Works Department and consist of employees within the Public Works Department. 
B.  The Tree Department shall be responsible for the study, investigation and development of a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, removal or disposition of trees on Town property. Such plan shall be presented to the Board of Trustees and, upon its approval, shall constitute the official Comprehensive Town Tree Plan. 
C.  The Tree Department shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees on Town property as may be necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such property. 
(Ord. No. 38-2018 , § 1, 12-11-2018) 
Section 7.05.040. - Pruning of private trees. 
    The owner of any tree overhanging any street or sidewalk in the Town shall prune the branches so that such branches do not obstruct the light from any streetlight or obstruct the view of any street intersection, and so that there is a clear space of eight feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 38-2018 , § 1, 12-11-2018) 
Section 7.05.050. - Removal of dangerous trees on private property. 
A.  Property owners shall remove all dead, diseased or otherwise dangerous trees and broken or decayed limbs which constitute a public safety hazard. 
B.  The Tree Department shall have the right to prune any tree on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a street light or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign, provided that the tree may be accessed from public property. 
C.  The Tree Department shall have the right to order removal of any dead or diseased tree on private property which cannot be accessed from public property when such tree constitutes a public safety hazard to life and property, or harbors insects or disease which threaten other trees within the Town. The Tree Department shall issue written notice to the owner of such tree, and removal shall be completed by at the owner's expense within 60 days after the date of the notice. 
(Ord. No. 38-2018 , § 1, 12-11-2018) 
Section 7.05.060. - Permit required. 
    No person shall remove or plant trees on Town property without a tree planting or removal permit. Such permit may be obtained from the Tree Department in accordance with standards and procedures set by the Tree Department. 
(Ord. No. 38-2018 , § 1, 12-11-2018) 
Section 7.05.070. - Spacing of trees. 
A.  Trees shall be spaced at least 30 feet apart within the public right-of-way. No trees shall be planted closer than five feet from a driveway or alley or be planted in such a way so as to interfere with or obstruct any improvements such as traffic and street signs and signals, fire hydrants, overhead utility wires, street lights, utility poles and the like. 
B.  When a space of less than five feet in width exists between the curb and the abutting property line, no trees or woody plants shall be planted in such space. 
(Ord. No. 38-2018 , § 1, 12-11-2018) 
Section 7.05.080. - Species of trees permitted. 
    It is unlawful to plant any tree on Town property of a species not listed on the Approved Tree Planting List in the Comprehensive Town Tree Plan. It is the responsibility of the owner of any private property in the Town, to remove any tree from the parkway adjacent to his or her property upon notification from the Town. 
(Ord. No. 38-2018 , § 1, 12-11-2018) 
Section 7.05.090. - Violations. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed, upon conviction thereof, guilty of a municipal offense and punished in accordance with Section 1.12.010 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 38-2018 , § 1, 12-11-2018) 
Title 8 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate running at large and keeping of animals, C.R.S. § 31-15-401(1)(m); authority to prohibit and punish cruelty to animals, C.R.S. § 31-15-401(i); dangerous dogs, C.R.S. § 18-9-204.5; rabies control in general, C.R.S. § 25-4-601 et seq. 

CHAPTER 8.12. - ANIMAL CONTROL 

Section 8.12.010. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of the Board of Trustees in adopting this chapter pursuant to C.R.S. § 31-15-401 that pet animal owners be responsible for their pet animals' conduct, that they exercise control with respect to their pet animals in a manner which recognizes the rights, health and safety of others in the community, and that they be held strictly liable for the conduct of their pet animals which violates the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 8.12.010; Ord. No. 15-2005, § 1(part), 2005) 
Section 8.12.020. - Definitions. 
    Words used in this chapter shall have their natural meaning, their statutory meaning, if applicable, or the meaning set forth in this section, according to the context in which they appear. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandon means: 
A.  To fail to provide a pet animal necessary care for a period in excess of 24 hours or immediate care when notably injured; or 
B.  To deposit, leave, drop off or otherwise dispose of any pet animal on public or private property without providing necessary care. For the purposes of this chapter, any pet animal is presumed to be abandoned if, after the posting or personal service of written notice describing deficiencies of necessary care for a pet animal, the deficiencies are not corrected within 24 hours of such notice by any person other than an animal control officer. 
    Animal means any living dumb creature. 
    Animal control officer means any person empowered by the Town to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
    Animal shelter means all facilities and premises authorized by the Board of Trustees to care for pet animals impounded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Such facilities and premises shall also be considered public animal shelters for the purpose of impounding dangerous dogs pursuant to the provisions of C.R.S. § 18-9-204.5. 
    Attack means aggressive behavior such as in biting, injuring or chasing a person or animal that may result in bodily injury, serious bodily injury, or the death of a person or animal. 
    Bite means the piercing, laceration, or breaking of the skin by the teeth or jaws of any animal. 
    Cat means any animal of the species felis domesticus or any hybrid thereof. 
    Common ground means the yard of any multiple occupancy building which is occupied by other persons; or in the common areas of mobile home parks, apartments or condominium developments; or in open space areas of subdivisions that are not owned or operated by the Town, or an area that constitutes the access to public right-of-way for other residential or commercial areas. The term "common ground" does not include sidewalks, paved recreation paths and maintained recreation paths anywhere within the Town which are open and have free access to the public, and which are otherwise not marked "private." 
    Control means supervision of, and influence over, any pet animal sufficient to prevent the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. Control shall be by physical control or demonstrable control as defined herein. 
    Dangerous animal means any pet animal or working dog that has inflicted serious physical injury to a human being without provocation on public or private property; or has, while off the premises of its owner or responsible person, killed a domestic animal without provocation; or has been previously classified as potentially dangerous and is found in violation of the provisions of this chapter, or whose owner or relation to that animal, violated any provisions of this chapter relating to potentially dangerous animals; or is a venomous animal or has caused the death of a person. 
    Demonstrable control means control of an animal by the physical presence of the owner or responsible person and such person can exhibit real and demonstrable control over the pet animal. This type of control can be accomplished by voice, whistle or electronic means. The term is further defined as the dog responding without delay to a verbal, whistle or electronic command of heel, come, sit, lie down or a similar command. The dog owner or keeper of a dog shall be able to demonstrate control if requested by an authorized officer. 
    Dog means any animal of the canine species, including dogs of wild extraction and any animal related to the wolf, fox, coyote or jackal. 
    Dog park means area(s) officially designated and signed by the Town allowing dogs to be off leash within the designated area. Any dog off leash within a dog park must still be under demonstrable control by the owner or the responsible person. 
    Habitual offender means any pet animal owner who has pled guilty to, or been found guilty of, violating any provision of this chapter or similar provisions of a county resolution or ordinance of another municipality in the county, three times within any 24-consecutive-month period and such offenses do not involve a previously classified potentially dangerous animal or dangerous animal. The term also means any pet animal owner who has pled guilty to, or been found guilty of, violating any provision of this chapter or similar provisions of a county resolution or ordinance of another municipality in the State and such offense involves a previously classified potentially dangerous animal or dangerous animal, three times within any 24-consecutive-month period. For the purposes of this chapter, pleading guilty pursuant to a deferred judgment and sentence shall be considered a violation for purposes of determining a habitual offender. 
    Minor physical injury means physical pain or minor impairment of physical condition. 
    Mistreat means every act or omission which causes or unreasonably permits the continuation of unnecessary or unjustifiable pain or suffering. 
    Necessary care for a pet animal includes, but is not limited to, providing food, water, protection from the weather and removal of waste from the animal's enclosure. 
    Neglect means failure to provide food, water, protection from the elements, or other care generally considered to be normal, usual, and accepted for a pet animal's or working dog's health and well-being consistent with the species, breed, and type of animal. 
    Owner means a person or any parent, guardian, or legal custodian of any unemancipated child under 18 years of age who owns, co-owns, possesses, controls, maintains, keeps, or harbors a pet animal or knowingly permits or intends to permit a pet animal to remain for seven consecutive days on or about property or premises owned, controlled, or occupied by him; a kennel is not a pet animal owner within the purview of this definition. 
    Permitted area of a special event means the geographic area within which the Town has authorized a special event to be conducted on a specified date and time as described in a special event permit issued by the Town. The term applies only to those date(s) and time(s) specified in the special event permit issued by the Town. 
    Pet animal means dogs, cats, rabbits, guinea pigs, hamsters, mice, ferrets, birds, fish, reptiles, amphibians, and invertebrates, or any species of wild or domestic or hybrid animal sold, transferred, or retained for the purpose of being kept as a household pet, except livestock, and includes any other animal specified in C.R.S. § 35-80-102(10) as that subsection may be amended from time to time. As used herein, "livestock" includes cattle, horses, mules, burros, sheep, poultry, swine, llama, goats, and any other animal, when used for working purposes or raised for food or fiber production on a farm or ranch. The term does not include an animal used for working purposes on a farm or ranch or a working dog. 
    Pet animal facility means any facility licensed as such pursuant to the provisions of C.R.S. § 35-80-101 et seq. 
    Physical control means control of a pet animal by means of a tether or a leash, not longer than ten feet, attached to the animal, and held by the owner or responsible person, or confinement within a vehicle or secure animal enclosure. 
    Potentially dangerous animal means any pet animal or working dog that, without provocation, threatens to attack, chases or approaches a person on any property other than the owner's property in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or bites, causing minor physical injury to, a human being or domestic animal; or, without provocation, chases or approaches a person upon the streets, highways, sidewalks, or other areas open to the public in a menacing fashion; or has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack without provocation, or cause physical injury or otherwise threatens the safety of human beings or domestic animals; or is owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of fighting or is trained for fighting, or is a poisonous animal. 
    Premises means property owned, leased, or expressly permitted to be used by an owner, including any confined area or locality such as a residence, business, room, shop, building, or motor vehicle, including the open space bed of a truck. 
    Provocation means harassment, teasing, threatening, striking, or attacking an animal or its owner in the animal's presence, by either a person or another animal. 
    Public custody means the confinement of an animal in an animal shelter, or in the physical control of an animal control officer performing duties pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
    Quarantine means the confinement of a pet animal in public custody for observation to detect symptoms of disease. 
    Secure animal enclosure means a structure which is suitable to prevent the escape of the animal and prevents the entry of young children, having a top, bottom, all sides, and is locked. 
    Serious physical injury means such injury which, either at the time of the attack or at a later time, involves a substantial risk of injury that results in long term or permanent physical disability, impairment, or a disfigurement; or a substantial risk of protracted loss or impairment of the function of any part or organ of the body, or breaks, fractures or burns of the second or third degree; or death. 
    Special event means an event or occurrence for which a special event permit has been issued by the Town. 
    Tether means to securely tie, chain or leash a pet animal to an inanimate object. 
    Trespass means the entry by a pet animal upon any private property other than that of the animal's owner, or upon public property which is posted as not permitting animals or such particular animals. 
    Working dog means a dog which is actually working livestock, assisting law enforcement officers, assisting in rescue efforts or dispersing geese at the Eagle Ranch Golf Course under the demonstrable control of authorized golf course personnel. 
(Code 1972, § 8.12.020; Ord. No. 15-2005, § 1(part), 2005; Amended Ord. No. 4-2006, §§ 1-4(part), 2006; Amended Ord. No. 10-2006, § 1(part), 2006; Ord. No. 15, series 2015, §§ 1, 2, 4-7; Ord. No. 26-2015, § 2, 9-8-2015; Ord. No. 07-2016, § 1(8.12.020(N)), 2-23-2016; Ord. No. 17-2016, § 1(8.12.020(H)), 6-14-2016) 
Section 8.12.030. - Vaccination of pet animals required. 
A.  Owners of pet animals and working dogs which are harbored, kept, or maintained in the Town, for which animals the United States Department of Agriculture has licensed a rabies vaccine, shall: 
1.  Vaccinate; 
2.  Maintain the efficacy of the vaccination; and 
3.  Maintain proof of current, efficacious rabies vaccination for their pet animals and working dogs. 
B.  Pet animals and working dogs shall be vaccinated when the animal reaches the age of four months or is licensed (if applicable), whichever occurs first, and the vaccinations shall be repeated as necessary in accordance with recommendations of the United States Department of Agriculture or vaccine manufacturer to maintain efficacy of the vaccination. 
C.  Any person who violates any provision of this section commits a non-criminal municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 8.12.030; Ord. No. 15-2005, § 1(part), 2005; Ord. No. No. 17-2016, § 2(8.12.030(B)), 6-14-2016) 
Section 8.12.040. - Annual dog licensing. 
    All dogs harbored, kept, or maintained in the Town shall be licensed, except dogs kept as part of the operation of a pet animal facility or Town maintained or authorized animal shelter. 
A.  All dogs over the age of four months shall have a valid pet animal license issued by the Town or any agency designated by the Board of Trustees in writing such as the County Animal Control Department, after the dog has been kept, maintained, or harbored in the Town for any consecutive 30-day period or immediately upon citation for any other violation of this chapter. 
B.  An owner or responsible party is required to maintain a valid dog license and shall be responsible for renewal of the license upon expiration when the intent is to keep a dog harbored or maintained in the Town. 
C.  A valid dog license tag shall be attached to a collar or harness and shall be worn by the dog at all times. It shall be a defense to prosecution that the owner or responsible party can produce a certification by a veterinarian that the dog cannot wear a collar or harness because of a permanent medical condition or the dog was, at the time of notice, working in a capacity that made the wearing of a collar or harness hazardous to the dog. 
D.  A dog license shall be comprised of and evidenced by a written license form and a dog license tag. 
E.  The Town, or any agency designated by the Board of Trustees in writing, such as the County Animal Control Department and/or any animal licensing vendors of the County Animal Control Department, will issue a dog license upon the receipt of the executed application, payment of the license fee and evidence of a current rabies vaccination with efficacy extending past the date of license issuance. 
F.  Any person who violates any provision of this section commits a non-criminal municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 8.12.040; Ord. No. 15-2005, § 1(part), 2005; Ord. No. 07-2016, § 2(8.12.040(A)), 2-23-2016; Ord. No. 17-2016, §§ 3-5(8.12.040(A), (B), (E)), 6-14-2016) 
Section 8.12.050. - Voluntary cat identification. 
    Owners of cats harbored or kept or maintained in the Town may obtain an identification tag suitable to be worn on a collar or harness. Cat identification tags will be available from the Town or any agency designated by the Board of Trustees in writing, such as the County Animal Control Department and/or any animal licensing vendors of the County Animal Control Department, upon the receipt of the executed application, payment of the identification tag fee and evidence of a current rabies vaccination with efficacy extending past the date of tag issuance. 
(Code 1972, § 8.12.050; Ord. No. 15-2005, § 1(part), 2005; Ord. No. 17-2016, § 6, 6-14-2016) 
Section 8.12.060. - Failure to control a pet animal. 
A.  It shall be unlawful, and considered a failure to control a pet animal, when: 
1.  A pet animal is off the owner's premises in any area of the Town, other than a Town designated dog park, as defined in Section 8.12.020, or a common ground, as defined in Section 8.12.020, without the presence of a person having physical control, as defined in Section 8.12.020. 
2.  A pet dog is within a Town designated dog park, as defined in Section 8.12.020, without the presence of a person having either physical control or demonstrable control of such animal, as defined in Section 8.12.020. 
3.  A pet animal is allowed to become a danger to any person or property. 
4.  A pet animal is tethered upon any public property or is tethered upon private property without the permission of the person owning, leasing, or otherwise controlling the property in question. 
5.  Any pet animal reaches past the perimeter of the owner's premises with its teeth or claws causing or threatening injury or property damage to another. 
6.  A pet animal is allowed to defecate on public or private property and the owner or responsible person of the animal does not remove the waste in a timely manner. 
7.  A female cat or dog, during estrus, is not under physical control, confined indoors or confined within a secure animal enclosure. 
8.  A pet dog is not under physical control in areas posted by any agency of the Federal government, the State, or the Town as requiring the animal to be on a leash. 
9.  A pet animal is allowed to enter private property not that of the owner's or on public property which is posted as not permitting such animals. 
10.  A pet dog is within a common ground, as defined in Section 8.12.020, without the presence of a person having either physical control of said animal or demonstrable control of such animal, as defined in Section 8.12.020. 
B.  1.  Any person who is convicted of, or any person whose pet animal violates, the provisions of Subsection (A)(1), (2), (8) or (10) of this section for the first time in 24 consecutive months and such offense does not involve a previously classified potentially dangerous animal or dangerous animal commits a non-criminal municipal offense punishable by a fine of not less than $40.00. Any person who is convicted of, or any person whose pet animal violates, the provisions of Subsection (A)(1), (2), (8) or (10) of this section or similar provisions contained in a county resolution or ordinance of a municipality located in the county for a second time in 24 consecutive months and such offense does not involve a previously classified potentially dangerous or dangerous animal commits a Class B municipal offense punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 and possible incarceration. Any person who is convicted of, or any person whose pet animal violates, the provisions of Subsection (A)(1), (2), (8) or (10) of this section or similar provisions contained in a county resolution or ordinance of a municipality located in the county for third or subsequent time within 24 consecutive months and such offense does not involve a previously classified potentially dangerous or dangerous animal commits a Class B municipal offense punishable by a fine of not less than $250.00 and possible incarceration. 
2.  Any person who is convicted of, or any person whose pet animal violates, the provisions of Subsection (A)(3), (4), (7) or (9) of this section for the first time within 24 consecutive months and such offense does not involve a previously classified potentially dangerous or dangerous animal commits a non-criminal municipal offense. Any person who is convicted of, or any person whose pet animal violates, the provisions of Subsection (A)(3), (4), (7) or (9) of this section or similar provisions contained in a county resolution or ordinance of a municipality located in the county for second or subsequent time in 24 consecutive months and such offense does not involve a previously classified potentially dangerous or dangerous animal commits a Class B municipal offense. 
3.  Any person who is convicted of, or any person whose pet animal violates, the provisions of Subsection (A)(1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (8), (9) or (10) of this section for the first time within 24 consecutive months and such offense does involve a previously classified potentially dangerous or dangerous animal commits a Class B municipal offense and shall be subject to a fine in an amount not less than $200.00 and possible incarceration. 
4.  Any person who is convicted of, or any person whose pet animal violates, the provisions of Subsection (A)(1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (8), (9) or (10) of this section or similar provisions contained in a county resolution or ordinance of another municipality located in the State for a second time within 24 consecutive months and such offense involves a previously classified potentially dangerous or dangerous animal commits a Class A municipal offense and shall be subject to a fine of not less than $500.00 and possible incarceration. Said minimum fine shall not be suspended by the Court. 
5.  Any person who is convicted of, or any person whose pet animal violates, the provisions of Subsection (A)(1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (8), (9) or (10) of this section or a similar provision contained in a county resolution or ordinance of another municipality located in the State for any third or subsequent offense and such offense involves a previously classified dangerous animal commits a Class A municipal offense and shall be subject to a minimum fine of $999.00 and possible incarceration. Said minimum fine shall not be suspended by the Court. 
6.  Any person who violates the provisions of Subsection (A)(6) or (7) of this section commits a non-criminal municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 8.12.060; Ord. No. 15-2005, § 1(part), 2005; Amended Ord. No. 4-2006, § 6(part), 2006; Amended Ord. No. 10-2006, §§ 2, 3(part), 2006; Amended Ord. No. 7-2013, §§ 1, 2, 2013; Amended Ord. No. 13, § 1, 2013; Amended Ord. No. 15, series 2015, §§ 8-10; Ord. No. No. 26-2015, § 1, 9-8-2015; Ord. No. 07-2016, §§ 3, 4(8.12.060(D), (K)), 2-23-2016) 
Section 8.12.070. - Dogs prohibited at designated special events. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for the owner of a dog, or a person in charge or control of a dog, to permit such dog to be within the permitted area of any special event that is held within the Town if: 
1.  A written notice has been posted at or near each main entrance to the special event stating that dogs are prohibited at such event; 
2.  The dog owner or person in charge or control of the dog has received actual notice from an enforcement officer or a representative of the special event that dogs are prohibited at such event, and the dog owner or person in charge or control of the dog fails or refuses to promptly remove the dog from the permitted area of the special event; or 
3.  Having previously removed the dog from the permitted area of the special event at the direction of an enforcement officer or representative of the special event, the dog owner or person in charge or control of the dog brings the dog back into the permitted area of the special event. 
B.  Neither physical or demonstrable control nor immediate control of the dog is a defense to prosecution under this section. 
C.  This section does not apply to: 
1.  Law enforcement dogs; 
2.  Dogs authorized to be in the permitted area of a special event under the special event permit issued by the Town; or 
3.  Service dogs trained to provide a specific service for the owner. 
D.  Any person who violates this section commits a non-criminal municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 8.12.065; Ord. No. 15, series 2015, § 11) 
Section 8.12.080. - Athletic fields and public parks, dogs prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for the owner or keeper of a dog to allow said dog to be on or within 100 feet of any athletic field or public park within the Town while an athletic event or other organized activity or event is in progress, except that a dog may be within 100 feet of an athletic field or public park while any athletic event or other organized activity or event is in progress if the dog is on a public road or right-of-way. Any person who violates this section commits a non-criminal municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 8.12.070; Ord. No. 15-2005, § 1(part), 2005) 
Section 8.12.090. - Interference with an owner's control of a pet animal. 
    It shall be a non-criminal municipal offense for any person to perform any act which interferes with, prevents, or hinders the efforts of an owner to control any of the owner's pet animals. 
(Code 1972, § 8.12.080; Ord. No. 15-2005, § 1(part), 2005) 
Section 8.12.100. - Dangerous and potentially dangerous conduct by animals prohibited. 
    It shall constitute a Class A municipal offense for any person to own or harbor any pet animal or working dog that, without provocation, attacks, threatens to attack, bites, inflicts minor physical injury, serious physical injury, or death to a human being or domestic animal; or, without provocation, chases or approaches a person upon the streets, highways, sidewalks, or other areas open to the public in a menacing fashion. 
(Code 1972, § 8.12.090; Ord. No. 15-2005, § 1(part), 2005) 
Section 8.12.110. - Classification of dangerous and potentially dangerous animals; appeals; restrictions pending appeals. 
A.  An animal control officer or the Chief of Police or his designate, shall have the authority to determine, based on probable cause, that a pet animal or working dog is potentially dangerous or dangerous. The Eagle Municipal Court, based upon a preponderance of the evidence, shall also have the authority to determine that a pet animal or working dog is potentially dangerous or dangerous. 
B.  Written notice of a pet animal's classification under Subsection (A) of this section shall be served on the owner or the responsible person of the animal at the owner's or responsible person's last known address. The notice shall describe the animal, state the grounds for its classification, and state the restrictions applicable to such pet animal by reason of its classification. If the determination is made by an animal control officer or the Chief of Police or his designate, the notice shall also state that, if a written request for an administrative hearing is filed with the Town Clerk within 14 days after receipt of the notice, an administrative hearing will be conducted to review the classification of the pet animal. The right to an administrative hearing shall be deemed waived if not timely requested as set forth in this chapter. There is no right to an administrative hearing if the classification of the pet animal has been determined by the Court. 
C.  The notice referred to in Subsection (B) of this section shall be given either by personal delivery to the owner or responsible person or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner or responsible person at the person's last known address. Notice by personal delivery shall be complete upon delivery and the receipt or upon return of the notice as undeliverable, refused, or unclaimed. 
D.  All administrative hearings held under this section shall be heard by the Board of Trustees or its designate, hereinafter referred to as the "Hearing Officer," pursuant to Chapter 2.20. The burden of proof shall be on the owner or responsible person to show cause as to why the animal's behavior does not support the designation of dangerous or potentially dangerous animal. The classification shall be determined based upon the preponderance of the evidence. The Hearing Officer shall not be required to file a full opinion or make formal findings of fact or conclusion of law, but the Hearing Officer must state the reasons for the determination, and indicate the evidence relied upon. Such determination shall be made no later than 72 regular business hours after the close of the hearing. The proceedings at the hearing shall be recorded and retained for a reasonable period of time. 
E.  When an animal has been classified as dangerous by an animal control officer or the Chief of Police or his designate, the Hearing Officer shall first determine if that classification is proper. If the Hearing Officer determines that the animal was improperly classified as dangerous, the Hearing Officer shall then determine if the animal is potentially dangerous. Should the Hearing Officer determine that the pet animal is potentially dangerous, the owner or person responsible shall comply with the requirements of this chapter applicable to potentially dangerous animals. 
F.  During the pendency of any hearing and any appeal therefrom on the classification of a potentially dangerous pet animal, the Town may require that the animal be kept securely confined on the premises of the owner or responsible person, or other location acceptable to an animal control officer. 
G.  During the pendency of any hearing and any appeal therefrom on the designated classification of a pet animal as dangerous, the pet animal shall be quarantined at the Town's designated animal shelter at the owner's or responsible person's expense. 
H.  Should the Hearing Officer determine that the pet animal is neither dangerous nor potentially dangerous, no costs shall be charged for quarantine of the pet animal during pendency of the hearing. 
(Code 1972, § 8.12.100; Ord. No. 15-2005, § 1(part), 2005) 
Section 8.12.120. - On-premises confinement for potentially dangerous animals. 
A.  While on the owner's or responsible person's property, a previously classified potentially dangerous animal must immediately be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure suitable for preventing the entry of young children and designed to prevent the pet animal from escaping by climbing, burrowing, or otherwise. The potentially dangerous pet animal must be securely confined indoors at all times until such enclosure is available. Such enclosure must have minimum dimensions of four feet by eight feet and must have secure sides and a secure top. If the enclosure has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded into the ground to a depth of not less than one foot. The enclosure must also provide adequate protection from the elements and be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
B.  Violation of the provisions of this section for the first time in 18 consecutive months shall constitute a Class B municipal offense. Violation of such provisions for a second or subsequent time within 18 consecutive months shall constitute a Class A municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 8.12.110; Ord. No. 15-2005, § 1(part), 2005) 
Section 8.12.130. - Off-premises restraint for potentially dangerous animals. 
A.  A previously classified potentially dangerous pet animal may be off the owner's or responsible person's premises only if it is restrained by a substantial leash not exceeding four feet in length. The leash and pet animal shall be under the actual physical control of a person suitable for controlling the pet animal at all times. Such pet animal shall not be leashed to inanimate objects such as trees, posts, buildings, etc. 
B.  Violation of the provisions of this section for the first time in 18 consecutive months shall constitute a Class B municipal offense. Violation of such provisions for a second or subsequent time within 18 consecutive months shall constitute a Class A municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 8.12.120; Ord. No. 15-2005, § 1(part), 2005) 
Section 8.12.140. - Notification of change of status of potentially dangerous animals. 
A.  The owner or responsible person shall immediately notify the Eagle Police Department or animal control officer if a potentially dangerous pet animal is loose, unconfined, has attacked another animal, or a human being, or has died, been sold, been given away, or is otherwise no longer in the possession of the owner or responsible person. If the pet animal has been sold or given away, the owner or responsible person shall provide the Police Department or an animal control officer with the new owner's or responsible person's name, address and telephone number. If the new owner or responsible person maintains the pet animal within the Town, the new owner or responsible person shall comply with the requirements previously applied to such animal and the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  Violation of any of the provisions of this section shall constitute a Class B municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 8.12.130; Ord. No. 15-2005, § 1(part), 2005) 
Section 8.12.150. - Signs for potentially dangerous animals. 
A.  Display required. The owner or responsible person shall display a sign or signs in such form as required by the Town on his premises warning that there is a potentially dangerous pet animal on the premises. Such a sign or signs shall be visible and capable of being read from any public right-of-way abutting the premises. Such a sign shall also be posted on the enclosure for the potentially dangerous pet animal. Violation of this subsection shall constitute a non-criminal municipal offense. 
B.  Cost; additional signs. The Town shall provide one sign required by this section at no cost to the owner or responsible person. Additional or duplicate signs shall be purchased from the Town for an amount equal to the Town's cost for providing the signs. 
(Code 1972, § 8.12.140; Ord. No. 15-2005, § 1(part), 2005) 
Section 8.12.160. - Special license and tag for potentially dangerous animals. 
A.  The owner or person responsible for any potentially dangerous pet animal shall obtain an annual special license for such animal, which license shall expire on December 31 of the year for which the license is issued. 
B.  An application for a special license shall be made to the Town or the Town's designated animal control agency which shall include the information required by Section 8.12.040. 
C.  All potentially dangerous pet animals shall be issued a special license identification tag which shall be worn by the pet animal at all times. 
D.  Failure to obtain the special license and tag required by this section shall constitute a non-criminal municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 8.12.150; Ord. No. 15-2005, § 1(part), 2005) 
Section 8.12.170. - Spay or neuter requirement for potentially dangerous animals. 
    Within 14 calendar days after its classification as a potentially dangerous animal, the owner or responsible person shall have the pet animal spayed or neutered and present proof of that fact to the Town Clerk or animal control officer. Failure to comply with such requirements shall constitute a non-criminal municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 8.12.160; Ord. No. 15-2005, § 1(part), 2005) 
Section 8.12.180. - Destruction of dangerous animals. 
A.  It shall constitute a Class A municipal offense to own a classified dangerous animal. 
B.  Any animal that is classified as dangerous shall be humanely euthanized in accordance with any recommended State standards after being quarantined for the period provided by law. 
(Code 1972, § 8.12.170; Ord. No. 15-2005, § 1(part), 2005; Ord. No. 07-2016, § 5, 2-23-2016) 
Section 8.12.190. - Duty to report animal bites and injury caused by animals. 
    It shall be a Class B municipal offense for any medical personnel who provide treatment to a person or animal for animal bite or injury caused by a pet animal to fail to report to the Eagle Police Department or County Animal Control Department any information known to him regarding the animal bite or injury. The report shall be made within 24 hours after such information is received by him, and shall include with the report the name, address, and telephone number of the person making the report. The report may be made by telephone to the County Animal Control Department on voice mail. 
(Code 1972, § 8.12.180; Ord. No. 15-2005, § 1(part), 2005) 
Section 8.12.200. - Duty to produce biting animal for inspection or quarantine. 
    Upon the request of a police officer or an animal control officer, an owner shall make available for inspection and/or quarantine any pet animal or working dog which has bitten a person or is suspected of biting a person. 
A.  If the quarantine of a pet animal is deemed necessary, the place of quarantine shall be determined by the Town's Police Chief or an animal control officer. 
B.  All costs of a quarantine shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
C.  If the quarantine of a pet animal is deemed necessary, the disposition of the animal will be at the discretion of the Town, which may include a home quarantine, quarantine by county animal services, or quarantine by State officials. 
D.  Failure to comply with the requirements of this section shall constitute a Class B municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 8.12.190; Ord. No. 15-2005, § 1(part), 2005; Ord. No. 07-2016, § 6(8.12.190(C)), 2-23-2016) 
Section 8.12.210. - Impoundment of animals. 
A.  Any Eagle police officer or animal control officer may impound any animal that is not under control as required by this chapter, or when it and/or its owner is in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Any Eagle police officer or animal control officer may impound any potentially dangerous or dangerous animal that is not under proper control. A police officer or animal control officer may perform such impoundment prior to notifying the owner, if such owner is not immediately present to exercise proper control of such animal. 
C.  As soon as practical after the impoundment of any animal, the Eagle Police Department or an animal control officer shall make a reasonable effort to notify the owner of the animal's location by telephone, posting of a notice at the owner's residence, or by written notice mailed to the owner's last known address, if the identity of the owner is known. If needed to establish the identity of the owner, information contained on any identification, rabies, or license tag found attached to the animal shall be used. 
(Code 1972, § 8.12.200; Ord. No. 15-2005, § 1(part), 2005) 
Section 8.12.220. - Owner's duty to redeem impounded animal and pay fees. 
A.  The owner of any impounded animal shall be held responsible for all the costs of impoundment, including medical treatment and boarding, and such costs shall be fully paid prior to the release of the animal. In addition, prior to the release, the owner shall pay for rabies inoculation or provide proof of efficacious rabies vaccination. 
B.  Prior to release of any impounded dog, the owner shall pay for a Town dog license or provide proof of current licensure in the Town or the place the animal regularly is kept. 
C.  It shall constitute a Class B municipal offense for any owner to fail to make arrangements for the redemption or surrender of any animal impounded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or fail to pay any fees associated with the redemption or surrender of such animal. 
(Code 1972, § 8.12.210; Ord. No. 15-2005, § 1(part), 2005) 
Section 8.12.230. - Disposition of impounded animals. 
A.  Any animal impounded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall become the property of the Town after ten days of impoundment, after which the Town may humanely euthanize the animal in accordance with any recommended State standards. For the purposes of this section, a "day" means a 24-hour period beginning at the time of the day at, and the date on, which the animal was taken into public custody. 
B.  The Town's designated animal shelter may humanely euthanize any animal in accordance with any recommended State standards at any time prior to the expiration of the ten-day impoundment period if the animal is seriously injured or ill, or if the animal poses a risk to the health of any person. 
C.  After the required time period, in lieu of having an animal destroyed, the Town may release an animal which is not diseased to a bona fide humane society or to a person having no previous interest in the animal. Upon release of the animal, the recipient shall pay a fee as established by the Town, including, but not limited to, fees for adoption, rabies inoculations, dog license, and sterilization costs. 
D.  All animals adopted from the Town's designated animal shelter are required to be sterilized at the time of adoption unless such surgery would be dangerous to the animal due to its age or physical condition, as determined by the selected veterinarian of record. Transfer of ownership shall not occur until sterilization has been performed, although possession may be given to the adopting person upon his promise to have the sterilization performed by a specified date. 
(Code 1972, § 8.12.220; Ord. No. 15-2005, § 1(part), 2005; Ord. No. 07-2016, §§ 7, 8(8.12.220(A), (B)), 2-23-2016) 
Section 8.12.240. - Liability for accident or subsequent disease from impoundment. 
    The Board of Trustees of the Town, its employees, agents and persons authorized herein to enforce the provisions of this chapter, shall not be held responsible for any accident or subsequent disease which may be suffered by an animal as a result of the administration or implementation of this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 8.12.230; Ord. No. 15-2005, § 1(part), 2005) 
Section 8.12.250. - Failure to comply with certain terms of a sales or adoption contract. 
    It shall constitute a non-criminal municipal offense to fail to comply with any of the terms of an adoption or fostering contract when the animal is obtained from the Town's designated animal shelter pursuant to such contract. 
(Code 1972, § 8.12.240; Ord. No. 15-2005, § 1(part), 2005) 
Section 8.12.260. - Abandonment, cruelty to animals, or neglect of animals prohibited. 
A.  It shall constitute a Class A municipal offense if any person knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence over drives, overloads, overworks, torments, deprives of necessary sustenance, poisons, unnecessarily or cruelly beats, allows to be housed in a manner that results in chronic or repeated serious physical harm, carries or confines in or upon any vehicles in a cruel or reckless manner, or otherwise mistreats or neglects any pet animal or working dog, or causes or procures it to be done, or, having the charge or custody of any pet animal or working dog, fails to provide it with proper food, drink, or protection from the weather consistent with the species, breed and type of animal. 
B.  It shall constitute a Class A municipal offense for any person to knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence abandon a pet animal or working dog. 
(Code 1972, § 8.12.250; Ord. No. 15-2005, § 1(part), 2005) 
Section 8.12.270. - Threatening of livestock or wildlife. 
A.  It shall constitute a Class A municipal offense for any person to fail to properly control any pet animal in his custody or control so as to prevent such animal from running after, chasing, pursuing, biting, attacking, or in any other way threatening livestock or wildlife. 
B.  Any pet animal threatening livestock or wildlife may be immediately destroyed at the discretion of any police officer or animal control officer. If not destroyed, the animal shall be immediately impounded. 
C.  A violation of this section shall require a mandatory Court appearance by the defendant. Upon conviction, if the pet animal was not destroyed at the time of the incident, the Court may order it destroyed under the supervision of the Town's designated animal shelter; if the Court does not order the animal destroyed, the Court shall designate the animal as a potentially dangerous animal, and possession shall be returned to the owner subject to the regulations applicable to potentially dangerous animals under this chapter and other State law. Upon a second conviction of a violation of this section with respect to a specific pet animal, the Court shall designate the animal as dangerous and the animal destroyed under the supervision of the Town's designated animal shelter. 
D.  Upon conviction of any violation of this section, the defendant shall be required by the Court to pay restitution for any livestock or wildlife injured or killed by the pet animal. 
(Code 1972, § 8.12.260; Ord. No. 15-2005, § 1(part), 2005) 
Section 8.12.280. - Nuisance, animal noise and feces. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any owner to fail to prevent his pet animal from disturbing the peace of any other person by habitual or persistent barking, howling, yelping, or whining, or any other unprovoked noise, whether the animal is on or off the owner's property. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any owner to permit the accumulation of a pet animal's feces on the property on which the animal is kept such that it is detectable visually or odorously by neighbors. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any owner to fail to confine pet animal feces, or any part thereof, within the perimeters of the property on which the animal is kept, regardless of whether such failure to confine is the result of natural causes, such as surface water flow, or other causes. 
D.  Any person who violates the provisions of Subsection (A) of this section for the first time within 18 consecutive months commits a non-criminal municipal offense. Any person who violates Subsection (A) of this section a second or subsequent time within 18 consecutive months commits a Class B municipal offense. Provided, however, no person shall be charged with a first violation of Subsection (A) of this section within said 18-month period unless a written warning for a separate violation has previously been given at least 72 hours prior to the issuance of the citation. 
E.  Any person who violates Subsections (B) and (C) of this section commits a non-criminal municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 8.12.270; Ord. No. 15-2005, § 1(part), 2005; Amended Ord. No. 4-2006, § 7(part), 2006) 
Section 8.12.290. - Habitual offender. 
    It shall constitute a Class A municipal offense for any person to become a habitual offender, as defined in Section 8.12.020. Any person committing such offense upon conviction shall be subject to a minimum fine of $300.00 and possible incarceration. In the event such person is deemed a habitual offender because such person owned or harbored a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal as prohibited by Section 8.12.100 or similar provisions of a county resolution or ordinance of another municipality three times within any 24-month period, the minimum fine shall not be suspended by the Court. Any person may be charged as a habitual offender in addition to any other charges brought pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Upon conviction of an owner as a habitual offender, the owner's offending animal(s) may be ordered by the Court removed from the Town or surrendered to the Town's designated animal shelter, along with any other penalties imposed by this Court. 
(Code 1972, § 8.12.280; Ord. No. 15-2005, § 1(part), 2005; Amended Ord. No. 15, series 2015, § 12; Ord. No. 07-2016, § 9, 2-23-2016) 
Section 8.12.300. - Penalties. 
A.  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished for such offense in accordance with the classification of such offense and the penalties set forth in Section 1.12.010. Unless otherwise provided in a section describing the offense, all offenses contained in this chapter shall be deemed offenses of strict liability. If any offense contained in this chapter is not classified as a Class A offense, Class B offense, or non-criminal municipal offense, and such offense does not involve serious injury to persons or property, said offense shall be deemed to be a non-criminal municipal offense upon the first complaint within 18 consecutive months. Upon a second or subsequent complaint concerning such violation within 18 consecutive months, such person shall be deemed to have committed a Class B municipal offense. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, any violation of any provisions of this chapter which result in serious bodily injury to any person or animal caused by a pet animal shall constitute a Class A municipal offense. 
B.  The presiding Municipal Court Judge is hereby authorized to promulgate a penalty assessment schedule for violations of this chapter in accordance with the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure, except as otherwise provided herein. Penalty assessments shall not be issued for violations of Sections 8.12.060(A)(1), (2), (3), (4), (7) or (8) (involving classified potentially dangerous or dangerous animal or a second or subsequent offense), 8.12.100, 8.12.120, 8.12.130, 8.12.180, 8.12.190, 8.12.200, 8.12.220, 8.12.260, 8.12.270, 8.12.280(A) (second and subsequent offenses), 8.12.290 and 8.12.360. 
C.  When a person is charged with a violation of this chapter for which a penalty assessment exists pursuant to an order of the Eagle Municipal Court, the charging officer may either give the person a penalty assessment notice, and release him upon its terms, or take him before a Judge of the Eagle Municipal Court. The choice of procedure shall be based upon the circumstances which reasonably persuade the officer that the alleged offender is likely or unlikely to comply with the terms of the penalty assessment notice. Said circumstances may include the officer accompanying the offender to a post office or mail box and witnessing the deposit in the mail of the notice with payment of the fine attached. Any penalty assessment issued pursuant to this chapter shall constitute a summons and complaint containing the identification of the alleged offender, specification of the offense and applicable fine, a requirement that the alleged offender pay the fine or appear to answer the charge at a specific time and place, and other matters reasonably adopted to effectuate the purposes of this section. A duplicate copy shall be delivered to the Clerk of the Eagle Municipal Court by the officer or agency designated by the Board of Trustees. When a payment of the penalty assessment notice has not been made within 20 days of the date of issuance of said notice, such person shall be required to appear before the Municipal Court. If a person given a penalty assessment notice chooses to acknowledge his guilt, he may pay the specified fine in person or by mail within 20 days of issuance of the notice. If the person elects not to pay the penalty assessment notice, trial is held or a default judgment entered, and the alleged offender is found guilty, the fine imposed shall be that specified in the notice for the offense of which he was found guilty, but customary Court costs may be assessed against him in addition to the fine. 
D.  For purposes of determining the proper sentence for violations of this chapter which do not result in bodily injury to any person or animal, only those convictions (admissions of guilt) occurring within 18 consecutive months of the date of the offense for which the penalty is now being imposed shall be considered. This 18-month limitation shall not apply to what evidence may be introduced in aggravation of any sentencing for any violation of this chapter which does result in bodily injury to any person or animal, nor shall any time limitation apply to determination of sentences for violation of Sections 8.12.100 and 8.12.270. 
E.  Upon conviction of any violation involving injury to persons, other animals, or property, the Court may order restitution be paid to the injured party or owner of the animal or animals harmed. 
F.  Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent impoundment of any dog under Section 8.12.210. 
(Code 1972, § 8.12.290; Ord. No. 15-2005, § 1(part), 2005) 
Section 8.12.310. - Power of the Court to order destruction of animals. 
    In addition to any penalties which may be provided for in this chapter, the Court shall have the authority, upon making a finding that a pet animal constitutes a nuisance or that a pet animal constitutes a real and present danger to the citizens of the Town, to order that the animal be destroyed in a humane fashion. 
(Code 1972, § 8.12.300; Ord. No. 15-2005, § 1(part), 2005) 
Section 8.12.320. - Notice and evidence of warnings. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, an owner shall be deemed to have been issued and received an appropriate notice or warning as herein referred if the warning is personally served upon the owner, posted on the owner's premises, or placed in the U.S. mail, postage prepaid and addressed to the owner according to the last address given by the owner to obtain a dog license or cat identification tag, or to such other address as may be on file for the owner with any government agency. 
(Code 1972, § 8.12.310; Ord. No. 15-2005, § 1(part), 2005) 
Section 8.12.330. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Eagle Police Department or any designated Eagle animal control officer. 
(Code 1972, § 8.12.320; Ord. No. 15-2005, § 1(part), 2005) 
Section 8.12.340. - Hot pursuit. 
    A police officer or an animal control officer in hot pursuit of an animal that is suspected of inflicting minor or serious injury to a human being or other animal may enter onto private property for the purposes of enforcing this chapter, including for the purpose of effecting an impoundment and/or quarantine and removing the animal from the property, ascertaining the identity of the animal, its owner, and/or the currency or existence of dog tags, or issuing a citation. This section, however, does not grant any police officer or animal control officer authority to enter into any dwelling. 
(Code 1972, § 8.12.330; Ord. No. 15-2005, § 1(part), 2005) 
Section 8.12.350. - Animal control officers. 
A.  The Town Manager may from time to time appoint a person or persons to serve as the Town animal control officer who shall be employed by the Town, at such compensation and such qualifications as from time to time shall be fixed by order of the Board of Trustees. 
B.  Pursuant to C.R.S. § 31-15-105, personnel engaged in animal control, however titled or administratively assigned, may issue citations or summons and complaints enforcing this chapter. Personnel so engaged shall be included in the definition of "peace officer or fireman" as described in C.R.S. § 18-3-201(2). Nothing herein contained is intended to vest authority in any person so engaged to enforce any ordinance or statute other than this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 8.12.340; Ord. No. 15-2005, § 1(part), 2005) 
Section 8.12.360. - Interference with an animal control officer. 
A.  No person shall interfere with, molest, hinder, prevent, or obstruct an animal control officer in his performance of duty pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  No person shall remove any animal from the public custody of such animal without the consent of an animal control officer. 
C.  Any violation of this section shall constitute a Class A municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 8.12.350; Ord. No. 15-2005, § 1(part), 2005) 
Section 8.12.370. - Authority to contract for services. 
    The Town may enter into agreements with other entities, such as the county, for the performance of the duties provided for in this chapter concerning the licensing and control of dogs or other animals and the enforcement of this chapter. If such an agreement is entered into, it may provide that certain county officials may act in the place of Town officials under this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 8.12.360; Ord. No. 15-2005, § 1(part), 2005) 
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE, SAFETY AND MORALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipalities general police powers, C.R.S. § 31-15-401. 

CHAPTER 9.02. - GENERAL 

Section 9.02.010. - Authority. 
    The Town hereby adopts this Title relating to public peace, safety and morals in accordance with the powers granted it in C.R.S. § 31-15-401 et seq. 
(Code 1972, § 9.02.010) 
Section 9.02.020. - Purpose. 
    This title shall be construed in such manner as to promote maximum fulfillment of its general purposes, namely: 
A.  To define offenses, to define adequately the act and mental state which constitute each offense, to place limitations upon the condemnation of conduct as criminal when it is without fault, and to give fair warning to all persons concerning the nature of the conduct prohibited and the penalties authorized upon conviction; 
B.  To forbid the commission of offenses, and to prevent their occurrence through the deterrent influence of the sentences authorized; 
C.  To provide for the rehabilitation of those convicted, and their punishment when required in the interest of public protection. 
(Code 1972, § 9.02.020) 
Section 9.02.030. - Penalties. 
    Unless otherwise specified, any person violating any of the provisions of this Title shall be deemed, upon conviction thereof, guilty of a municipal offense and punished in accordance with Section 1.12.010. 
(Code 1972, § 9.02.030; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, §§ 46, 47, 2001) 
CHAPTER 9.04. - PRINCIPLES OF CRIMINAL CULPABILITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C.R.S. § 18-1-501 et seq.; criminal attempt, C.R.S. § 18-2-101. 

Section 9.04.010. - Applicability. 
    This chapter shall be applicable to all offenses defined in this Title as well as any other criminal offenses prosecuted in the Eagle Municipal Court. 
(Code 1972, § 9.04.010) 
Section 9.04.020. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions are applicable to the determination of culpability requirements for offenses defined in this Title as well as any other criminal offenses prosecuted in the Eagle Municipal Court. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means a bodily movement, and includes words and possession of property. 
    Conduct means an act or omission and its accompanying state of mind or, where relevant, a series of facts or omissions. 
    Criminal negligence. A person acts with criminal negligence when, through a gross deviation from the standard of care that a reasonable person would exercise, he fails to perceive a substantial and unjustifiable risk that a result will occur or that a circumstance exists. 
    Culpable mental state means intentionally, or with intent, or knowingly, or willfully, or recklessly, or with criminal negligence, as these terms are defined in this section. 
    Intentionally or with intent. All criminal offenses in which the mental culpability requirement is expressed as "intentionally" or "with intent" are declared to be specific intent offenses. A person acts "intentionally" or "with intent" when his conscious objective is to cause the specific result proscribed by the statute defining the offenses. It is immaterial to the issue of specific intent whether or not the result actually occurred. 
    Knowingly or willfully. All criminal offenses in which the mental culpability requirement is expressed as "knowingly" or "willfully" are declared to be general intent crimes. A person acts "knowingly" or "willfully" with respect to conduct or to a circumstance described by a section defining an offense when he is aware that his conduct is of such nature or that such circumstance exists. A person acts "knowingly" or "willfully" with respect to a result of his conduct when he is aware that his conduct is practically certain to cause the result. 
    Omission means a failure to perform an act as to which a duty of performance is imposed by law. 
    Recklessly. A person acts recklessly when he consciously disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that a result will occur or that a circumstance exists. 
    Voluntary act means an act performed consciously as a result of effort or determination, and includes the possession of property if the actor was aware of his physical possession or control thereof for a sufficient period to have been able to terminate it. 
(Code 1972, § 9.04.020) 
Section 9.04.030. - Requirements for criminal liability. 
    The minimum requirement for criminal liability is the performance by a person of conduct which includes a voluntary act or the omission to perform an act which he is physically capable of performing. If that conduct is all that is required for commission of a particular offense, or if an offense or some material element thereof does not require a culpable mental state on the part of the actor, the offense is one of strict liability. If a culpable mental state on the part of the actor is required with respect to any material element of an offense, the offense is one of "mental culpability." 
(Code 1972, § 9.04.030) 
Section 9.04.040. - Construction of sections with respect to culpability requirements. 
A.  When the commission of an offense, or some element of an offense, requires a particular culpable mental state, that mental state is ordinarily designated by use of the terms "intentionally," "with intent," "knowingly," "willfully," "recklessly," or "criminal negligence," or by use of the terms "with intent to defraud" and "knowing it to be false" describing a specific kind of intent or knowledge. 
B.  Although no culpable mental state is expressly designated in a section defining an offense, a culpable mental state may nevertheless be required for the commission of that offense, or with respect to some or all of the material elements thereof, if the proscribed conduct necessarily involves such a culpable mental state. 
C.  If a section provides that criminal negligence suffices to establish an element of an offense, that element also is established if a person acts recklessly, knowingly, or intentionally. If recklessness suffices to establish an element, that element also is established if a person acts knowingly or intentionally. If acting knowingly suffices to establish an element, that element also is established if a person acts intentionally. 
D.  When a section defining an offense prescribes as an element thereof a specified culpable mental state, that mental state is deemed to apply to every element of the offense unless an intent to limit its application clearly appears. 
(Code 1972, § 9.04.040) 
Section 9.04.050. - Principles of criminal culpability. 
A.  If the criminality of conduct depends on a child being younger than 18 years of age and the child was in fact at least 15 years of age, it shall be an affirmative defense that the defendant reasonably believed the child to be 18 years of age or older. This affirmative defense shall not be available if the criminality of conduct depends on the defendant being in a position of trust. 
B.  If the criminality of conduct depends on a child being younger than 18 years of age and the child was in fact younger than 15 years of age, there shall be no defense that the defendant reasonably believed the child was 18 years of age or older. 
C.  If the criminality of conduct depends on a child being younger than 15 years of age, it shall be no defense that the defendant did not know the child's age or that the defendant reasonably believed the child to be 15 years of age or older. 
Section 9.04.060. - Effect of ignorance or mistake. 
A.  A person is not relieved of criminal liability for conduct because he engaged in that conduct under a mistaken belief of fact, unless: 
1.  It negates the existence of a particular mental state essential to commission of the offense; 
2.  The section defining the offense or any section relating thereto expressly provides that a factual mistake or the mental state resulting therefrom constitutes a defense or exemption; or 
3.  The factual mistake or the mental state resulting therefrom is of a kind that supports a defense of justification as defined in this Title. 
B.  A person is not relieved of criminal liability for conduct because he engages in that conduct under a mistaken belief that it does not, as a matter of law, constitute an offense, unless the conduct is permitted by one of the following: 
1.  A statute or ordinance binding in this State; 
2.  An administrative regulation, order, or grant of permission by a body or official authorized and empowered to make such order or grant the permission under the laws of the Town and the State; 
3.  An official written interpretation of the ordinance or law relating to the offense, made or issued by a public servant, agency, or body legally charged or empowered with the responsibility of administering, enforcing, or interpreting an ordinance, regulation, order, or law. If such interpretation is by judicial decision, it must be binding in the Town and the State. 
C.  Any defense authorized by this section is an affirmative defense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.04.050) 
Section 9.04.070. - Consent. 
A.  The consent of the victim to conduct charged to constitute an offense or to the result thereof is not a defense unless the consent negates an element of the offense or precludes the infliction of the harm or evil sought to be prevented by the law defining the offense. 
B.  When conduct is charged to constitute an offense because it causes or threatens bodily injury, consent to that conduct or to the infliction of that injury is a defense only if the bodily injury consented to or threatened by the conduct consented to is not harmful or the conduct and the injury are reasonably foreseeable hazards of joint participation in a lawful athletic contest or competitive sport, or the consent established a justification under this Title. 
C.  Unless otherwise provided by this Title or by the law defining the offense, assent does not constitute consent if: 
1.  It is given by a person who is legally incompetent to authorize the conduct charged to constitute the offense; 
2.  It is given by a person who, by reason of immaturity, mental disease or mental defect, or intoxication, is manifestly unable and is known or reasonably should be known by the defendant to be unable to make a reasonable judgment as to the nature or harmfulness of the conduct charged to constitute the offense; 
3.  It is given by a person whose consent is sought to be prevented by the law defining the offense; or 
4.  It is induced by force, duress, or deception. 
D.  Any defense authorized by this section is an affirmative defense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.04.060) 
Section 9.04.080. - Criminal attempt. 
A.  A person commits criminal attempt if, acting with the kind of culpability otherwise required for commission of an offense, he engages in conduct constituting a substantial step toward the commission of the offense. A substantial step is any conduct, whether an act, omission, or possession, which is strongly corroborative of the firmness of the actor's purpose to complete the commission of the offense. Factual or legal impossibility of committing the offense is not a defense if the offense could have been committed had the attendant circumstances been as the actor believed them to be, nor is it a defense that the crime attempted was actually perpetrated by the accused. 
B.  A person who engages in conduct intending to aid another to commit an offense commits criminal attempt if the conduct would establish his complicity under Section 9.06.040 were the offense committed by the other person, even if the other is not guilty of committing or attempting the offense. 
C.  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the defendant abandoned his effort to commit the crime or otherwise prevented its commission, under circumstances manifesting the complete and voluntary renunciation of his criminal intent. 
(Code 1972, § 9.04.080) 
CHAPTER 9.06. - PARTIES TO OFFENSES - ACCOUNTABILITY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C.R.S. § 18-1-601 et seq. 

Section 9.06.010. - Applicability. 
    This chapter shall be applicable to all offenses in this Title as well as to any other criminal offenses prosecuted in the Eagle Municipal Court. 
(Code 1972, § 9.06.010) 
Section 9.06.020. - Liability based upon behavior. 
    A person is guilty of an offense if it is committed by the behavior of another person for which he is legally accountable as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 9.06.020) 
Section 9.06.030. - Behavior of another. 
A.  A person is legally accountable for the behavior of another person if: 
1.  He is made accountable for the conduct of that person by the law defining the offense or by specific provision of this Code; or 
2.  He acts with the culpable mental state sufficient for the commission of the offense in question and he causes an innocent person to engage in such behavior. 
B.  As used in Subsection (A) of this section, the term "innocent person" includes any person who is not guilty of the offense in question, despite his behavior, because of duress, legal incapacity or exemption, or unawareness of the criminal nature of the conduct in question or of the defendant's criminal purpose, or any other factor precluding the mental state sufficient for the commission of the offense in question. 
(Code 1972, § 9.06.030) 
Section 9.06.040. - Complicity. 
    A person is legally accountable as principal for the behavior of another constituting a criminal offense if, with the intent to promote or facilitate the commission of the offense, he aids, abets, or advises or encourages the other person in planning or committing the offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.06.040) 
Section 9.06.050. - Exemptions from liability based upon behavior of another. 
A.  Unless otherwise provided by the section defining the offense, a person shall not be legally accountable for behavior of another constituting an offense if he is a victim of that offense or the offense is so defined that his conduct is inevitably incidental to its commission. 
B.  It shall be an affirmative defense to a charge under Section 9.06.040 if, prior to the commission of the offense, the defendant terminated his effort to promote or facilitate its commission and either gave timely warning to law enforcement authorities or gave timely warning to the intended victim. 
(Code 1972, § 9.06.050) 
Section 9.06.060. - Liability based on behavior of another, no defense. 
    In any prosecution for an offense in which criminal liability is based upon the behavior of another pursuant to this chapter, it is no defense that the other person has not been prosecuted for or convicted of any offense based upon the behavior in question or has been convicted of a different offense or degree of offense, or the defendant belongs to a class of persons who by definition of the offense are legally incapable of committing the offense in an individual capacity. 
(Code 1972, § 9.06.060) 
CHAPTER 9.08. - JUSTIFICATION AND EXEMPTIONS FROM CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C.R.S. § 18-1-701 et seq. 

Section 9.08.010. - Applicability. 
    This chapter shall be applicable to all offenses in this Title as well as to any other criminal offenses prosecuted in the Eagle Municipal Court. 
(Code 1972, § 9.08.010) 
Section 9.08.020. - Execution of public duty. 
    Unless inconsistent with other provisions of this chapter, defining justifiable use of physical force, or with some other provision of law, conduct which would otherwise constitute an offense is justifiable and not criminal when it is required or authorized by a provision of law or a judicial decree binding in Eagle, Colorado. 
(Code 1972, § 9.08.020) 
Section 9.08.030. - Choice of evils. 
A.  Unless inconsistent with other provisions of this chapter, defining justifiable use of physical force or with some other provision of law, conduct which would otherwise constitute an offense is justifiable and not criminal when it is necessary as an emergency measure to avoid an imminent public or private injury which is about to occur by reason of a situation occasioned or developed through no conduct of the actor, and which is of sufficient gravity that, according to ordinary standards of intelligence and morality, the desirability and urgency of avoiding the injury clearly outweigh the desirability of avoiding the injury sought to be prevented by the law defining the offense in issue. 
B.  The necessity and justifiability of conduct under Subsection (A) of this section shall not rest upon considerations pertaining only to the morality and advisability of the chapter, either in its general application or with respect to its application to a particular class of cases arising thereunder. When evidence relating to the defense of justification under this section is offered by the defendant, before it is submitted for the consideration of the jury, the court shall first rule as a matter of law whether the claimed facts and circumstances would, if established, constitute a justification. 
(Code 1972, § 9.08.030) 
Section 9.08.040. - Use of physical force, special relations. 
    The use of physical force upon another person which would otherwise constitute an offense is justifiable and not criminal under any of the following circumstances: 
A.  A parent, guardian, or other person entrusted with the care and supervision of a minor or an incompetent person, and a teacher or other person entrusted with the care and supervision of a minor, may use reasonable and appropriate physical force upon the minor or incompetent person when and to the extent it is reasonably necessary and appropriate to maintain discipline or promote the welfare of the minor or incompetent person. 
B.  A superintendent or other authorized official of a jail, prison, or correctional institution may, in order to maintain order and discipline, use reasonable and appropriate physical force when and to the extent that he reasonably believes it necessary to maintain order and discipline, but he may use deadly force only when he reasonably believes it necessary to prevent death or serious bodily injury. 
C.  A person responsible for the maintenance of order in a common carrier of passengers, or a person acting under his direction, may use reasonable and appropriate physical force when and to the extent that it is necessary to maintain order and discipline. 
D.  A person acting under a reasonable belief that another person is about to commit suicide or to inflict serious bodily injury upon himself may use reasonable and appropriate physical force upon that person to the extent that it is reasonably necessary to thwart the result. 
E.  A duly licensed physician, or a person acting under his direction, may use reasonable and appropriate physical force for the purpose of administering a recognized form of treatment which he reasonably believes to be adapted to promoting the physical or mental health of the patient if: 
1.  The treatment is administered with the consent of the patient, or if the patient is a minor or an incompetent person, with the consent of his parent, guardian, or other person entrusted with his care and supervision; or 
2.  The treatment is administered in an emergency when the physician reasonably believes that no one competent to consent can be consulted and that a reasonable person, wishing to safeguard the welfare of the patient, would consent. 
(Code 1972, § 9.08.040) 
Section 9.08.050. - Use of physical force in defense of a person. 
A.  Except as provided in Subsections (B) and (C) of this section, a person is justified in using physical force upon another person in order to defend himself or a third person from what he reasonably believes to be the use or imminent use of unlawful physical force by that other person, and he may use a degree of force which he reasonably believes to be necessary for that purpose. 
B.  Notwithstanding the provisions in Subsection (A) of this section, a person is not justified in using physical force if: 
1.  With intent to cause bodily injury or death to another person, he provokes the use of unlawful physical force by that other person; 
2.  He is the initial aggressor, except that his use of physical force upon another person under the circumstances is justifiable if he withdraws from the encounter and effectively communicates to the other person his intent to do so, but the latter nevertheless continues or threatens the use of unlawful force; or 
3.  The physical force involved is the product of a combat by agreement not specifically authorized by law. 
(Code 1972, § 9.08.050) 
Section 9.08.060. - Use of physical force in defense of premises. 
    A person in possession or control of any building, realty, or other premises, or a person who is licensed or privileged to be thereon, is justified in using reasonable and appropriate physical force upon another person when and to the extent that it is reasonably and actually necessary to prevent or terminate what he reasonably believes to be the commission or attempted commission of an unlawful trespass by the other person in or upon the building, realty, or premises. 
(Code 1972, § 9.08.060) 
Section 9.08.070. - Use of physical force in defense of property. 
    A person is justified in using reasonable and appropriate physical force upon another person when and to the extent that it is reasonably and actually necessary to prevent what he reasonably believes to be an attempt by the other person to commit theft, criminal mischief, or criminal tampering involving property. 
(Code 1972, § 9.08.070) 
Section 9.08.080. - Use of physical force in making an arrest. 
A.  A peace officer is justified in using reasonable and appropriate physical force upon another person when and to the extent that he reasonably believes it necessary: 
1.  To effect an arrest or to prevent the escape from custody of an arrested person unless he knows that the arrest is unauthorized; or 
2.  To defend himself or a third person from what he reasonably believes to be the use or imminent use of physical force while effecting or attempting to effect such an arrest or while preventing or attempting to prevent such an escape. 
B.  1.  A peace officer is justified in using a chokehold upon another person for the purposes specified in Subsection (A) of this section only when he reasonably believes that it is necessary: 
a.  To defend himself or a third person from what he reasonably believes to be the use or imminent use of deadly physical force or infliction of bodily injury; or 
b.  To effect an arrest, or to prevent the escape from custody, of a person whom he reasonably believes: 
i.  Has committed or attempted to commit a felony involving or threatening the use of a deadly weapon; 
ii.  Is attempting to escape by the use of physical force; or 
iii.  Indicates, except through a motor vehicle, that he is likely to endanger human life or to inflict serious bodily injury to another unless he is apprehended without delay. 
2.  For the purposes of this Subsection (B), the term "chokehold" means a method by which a person holds another person by putting his arm around the other person's neck with sufficient pressure to make breathing difficult or impossible and includes, but is not limited to, any pressure to the throat or windpipe, which may prevent or hinder breathing or reduce intake of air. 
C.  Nothing in Subsection (B) of this section shall be deemed to constitute justification for reckless or criminally negligent conduct by a peace officer amounting to an offense against or with respect to innocent persons whom he is not seeking to arrest or retain in custody. 
D.  For purposes of this section, a reasonable belief that a person has committed an offense means a reasonable belief in facts or circumstances which if true would in law constitute an offense. If the believed facts or circumstances would not in law constitute an offense, an erroneous though not unreasonable belief that the law is otherwise does not render justifiable the use of force to make an arrest or to prevent an escape from custody. A peace officer who is effecting an arrest pursuant to a warrant is justified in using the physical force prescribed in Subsection (A) of this section unless the warrant is invalid and is known by the officer to be invalid. 
E.  A person who has been directed by a peace officer to assist him to effect an arrest or to prevent an escape from custody is justified in using reasonable and appropriate physical force when and to the extent that he reasonably believes that force to be necessary to carry out the peace officer's direction, unless he knows that the arrest or prospective arrest is not authorized. 
F.  A private person acting on his own account is justified in using reasonable and appropriate physical force upon another person when and to the extent that he reasonably believes it necessary to effect an arrest, or to prevent the escape from custody of an arrested person who has committed an offense in his presence. 
(Code 1972, § 9.08.080) 
Section 9.08.090. - Duress. 
    A person may not be convicted of an offense, based upon conduct in which he engaged because of the use or threatened use of unlawful force upon him or upon another person, which force or threatened use thereof a reasonable person in his situation would have been unable to resist. This defense is not available when a person intentionally or recklessly places himself in a situation in which it is foreseeable that he will be subjected to such force or threatened use thereof. The choice of evils defense, provided in Section 9.08.030, shall not be available to a defendant in addition to the defense of duress provided under this section unless separate facts exist which warrant its application. 
(Code 1972, § 9.08.090) 
Section 9.08.100. - Entrapment. 
    The commission of acts which would otherwise constitute an offense is not criminal if the defendant engaged in the proscribed conduct because he was induced to do so by a law enforcement official or other person acting under his direction, seeking to obtain evidence for the purpose of prosecution, and the methods used to obtain that evidence were such as to create a substantial risk that the acts would be committed by a person who, but for such inducement, would not have conceived of or engaged in conduct of the sort induced. Merely affording a person an opportunity to commit an offense is not entrapment even though representations or inducements calculated to overcome the offender's fear of detection are used. 
(Code 1972, § 9.08.100) 
Section 9.08.110. - Affirmative defense. 
    The issues of justification or exemption from criminal liability under this chapter are affirmative defenses in any prosecution of a criminal offense in the Eagle Municipal Court. 
(Code 1972, § 9.08.110) 
CHAPTER 9.10. - RESPONSIBILITY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C.R.S. § 18-1-801 et seq. 

Section 9.10.010. - Applicability. 
    This chapter shall be applicable to all offenses in this Title as well as to any other criminal offense prosecuted in the Eagle Municipal Court. 
(Code 1972, § 9.10.010) 
Section 9.10.020. - Insufficient age. 
    No child under ten years of age shall be found guilty of any offense prosecuted in the Eagle Municipal Court. 
(Code 1972, § 9.10.020) 
Section 9.10.030. - Intoxication. 
A.  Intoxication of the accused is not a defense to any criminal offense, except as provided in Subsection (B) of this section. 
B.  A person is not criminally responsible for his conduct if, by reason of intoxication that is not self-induced at the time he acts, he lacks capacity to conform his conduct to the requirements of the law. 
C.  The term "intoxication," as used in this section, means a disturbance of mental or physical capacities resulting from the introduction of any substance into the body. 
D.  The term "self-induced intoxication" means intoxication caused by substances which the defendant knows or ought to know have the tendency to cause intoxication and which he knowingly introduced or allowed to be introduced into his body, unless they were introduced pursuant to medical advice or under similar circumstances that would afford a defense to a criminal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.10.030) 
Section 9.10.040. - Responsibility, affirmative defense. 
    The issue of responsibility under this chapter is an affirmative defense in any prosecution of a criminal offense in the Eagle Municipal Court. 
(Code 1972, § 9.10.040) 
CHAPTER 9.12. - OFFENSES RELATING TO PUBLIC PEACE, ORDER AND SAFETY 

Section 9.12.010. - Obstructing highway or other passageway. 
A.  An individual or a corporation commits an offense if, without legal privilege, he intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly: 
1.  Obstructs a highway, street, sidewalk, railway, waterway, building entrance, elevator, aisle, stairway, or hallway to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access or any other place used for the passage of persons, vehicles, or conveyances, whether the obstruction arises from his acts alone or from his acts and the acts of others; or 
2.  Disobeys a reasonable request or order to move issued by a person he knows to be a peace officer, a firefighter, or a person with authority to control the use of the premises, to prevent obstruction of a highway or passageway or to maintain public safety by dispersing those gathered in dangerous proximity to a fire, riot, or other hazard. 
B.  For purposes of this section, the term "obstruct" means to interfere with, to render impassable or to render passage unreasonably inconvenient or hazardous. 
C.  Any person who violates this section commits a Class B municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.12.010; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 48, 2001) 
Section 9.12.020. - Disrupting lawful assembly. 
    A person commits the Class A municipal offense of disrupting a lawful assembly if, intending to prevent or disrupt any lawful meeting, procession, or gathering, he significantly obstructs or interferes with the meeting, procession, or gathering by physical action, verbal utterance or any other means. 
(Code 1972, § 9.12.020; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 49, 2001) 
Section 9.12.030. - Interference with staff, faculty or students of educational institution. 
A.  No person shall, on or near the premises or facilities of any educational institution, willfully deny to students, school officials, employees, and invitees: 
1.  Lawful freedom of movement on the premises; 
2.  Lawful use of the property or facilities of the institution; 
3.  The right of lawful ingress and egress to the institution's physical facilities. 
B.  No person shall, on the premises of any educational institution or at or in any building or other facility being used by any educational institution, willfully impede the staff or faculty of such institution in the lawful performance of their duties or willfully impede a student of the institution in the lawful pursuit of his educational activities through the use of restraint, abduction, coercion, or intimidation or when force and violence are present or threatened. 
C.  No person shall willfully refuse or fail to leave the property of or any building or other facility used by any educational institution upon being requested to do so by the chief administrative officer, or his designee charged with maintaining order on the school premises and in its facilities, if such person is committing, threatens to commit, or incites others to commit any act which would disrupt, impair, interfere with, or obstruct the lawful missions, processes, procedures, or functions of the institution. 
D.  It shall be an affirmative defense that the defendant was exercising his right to lawful assembly and peaceful and orderly petition for the redress of grievances, including any labor dispute between an educational institution and its employees, any contractor or subcontractor, or any employee thereof. 
E.  Any person who violates this section commits a Class A municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.12.030; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 50, 2001) 
Section 9.12.040. - Public buildings, trespass, interference. 
A.  No person shall so conduct himself at or in any public building owned, operated, or controlled by the Town as to willfully deny to any public official, public employee, or invitee on such premises the lawful rights of such official, employee, or invitee to enter, to use the facilities of, or to leave any such public building. 
B.  No person shall, at or in any such public building, willfully impede any public official or employee in the lawful performance of duties or activities through the use of restraint, abduction, coercion, or intimidation or by force and violence or threat thereof. 
C.  No person shall willfully refuse or fail to leave any such public building upon being requested to do so by the chief administrative officer or his designee charged with maintaining order in such public building, if the person has committed, is committing, threatens to commit, or incites others to commit any act which did, or would if completed, disrupt, impair, interfere with, or obstruct the lawful missions, processes, procedures, or functions being carried on in the public building. 
D.  No person shall, at any meeting or session conducted by any judicial, legislative, or administrative body or official at or in any public building willfully impede, disrupt, or hinder the normal proceedings of such meeting or session by any act of intrusion into the chamber or other areas designated for the use of the body or official conducting the meeting or session or by any act designed to intimidate, coerce, or hinder any member of such body or official engaged in the performance of duties at such meeting or session. 
E.  No person shall, by any act of intrusion into the chamber or other areas designated for the use of any executive body or official at or in any public building, willfully impede, disrupt, or hinder the normal proceedings of such body or official. 
F.  The term "public building," as used in this section, includes any premises being permanently or temporarily used by a public officer or employee in the discharge of his official duties. 
G.  It shall be an affirmative defense that the defendant was exercising his right to lawful assembly and peaceful and orderly petition for the redress of grievances, including any labor dispute between the Town and its employees, any contractor or subcontractor, or any employee thereof. 
H.  Any person who violates this section commits a Class A municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.12.040; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 51, 2001) 
Section 9.12.050. - Harassment. 
A.  A person commits the Class A municipal offense of harassment if, with intent to harass, annoy, or alarm another person, he: 
1.  Strikes, shoves, kicks, or otherwise touches a person or subjects him to physical contact; 
2.  In a public place, directs obscene language or makes an obscene gesture to or at another person; 
3.  Follows a person in or about a public place; 
4.  Directly or indirectly initiates communication with a person or directs language toward another person, anonymously or otherwise, by telephone, telephone network, data network, text message, instant message, computer, computer network, computer system, or other interactive electronic medium in a manner intended to harass or threaten bodily injury or property damage, or make any comment, request, suggestion, or proposal by telephone, computer, computer network, computer system, data network, text message, instant message, or other interactive electronic medium that is obscene; 
5.  Makes a telephone call or causes a telephone to ring repeatedly, whether or not a conversation ensues, with no purpose of legitimate conversation; 
6.  Makes repeated communications at inconvenient hours or in offensively coarse language; or 
7.  Repeatedly insults, taunts, or challenges another in a manner likely to provoke a violent or disorderly response. 
B.  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm means to arouse to a sense of danger, to put on the alert, to strike with fear, to fill with anxiety as to threaten danger or harm. 
    Annoy means to irritate with a nettling or exasperating effect. 
    Obscene means a patently offensive description of ultimate sexual acts or solicitation to commit ultimate sexual acts, whether or not said ultimate sexual acts are normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including masturbation, cunnilingus, fellatio, analingus, or excretory functions. 
C.  Any act prohibited by Subsections (A)(4) through (6) of this section may be deemed to have occurred or have been committed at the place at which the telephone call was either made or received. 
(Code 1972, § 9.12.050; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 52, 2001; Ord. No. 15-2016, § 1(9.12.050(A)(4)), 5-10-2016) 
Section 9.12.060. - Disorderly conduct. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit disorderly conduct. A person commits disorderly conduct if he intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly: 
1.  Uses abusive, indecent, profane, or vulgar language in a public place, and the language by its very utterance tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace; 
2.  Makes an obviously offensive gesture or display in a public place, and the gesture or display tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace; 
3.  Abuses or threatens a person in a public place in an obviously offensive manner; 
4.  Urinates or defecates in any public place not designed for such purpose; 
5.  Exposes his genitals to the view of any person under circumstances in which such conduct is likely to cause affront or alarm to the other person. 
B.  Any person who violates Subsections (A)(1) through (3) and (5) of this section commits a Class A municipal offense. Any person who violates Subsection (A)(4) of this section commits a non-criminal municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.12.060; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 53, 2001) 
Section 9.12.070. - Assault and battery. 
A.  Any person who intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly assaults, strikes, fights, injures or commits battery upon the person of another, except in an amateur or professional contest of athletic skill, commits a Class A municipal offense. 
B.  The term "assault," as used in this section, shall mean an attempt, coupled with a present ability, to commit a bodily injury upon the person of another. The term "battery," as used in this section, shall mean any use of force or violence upon the person of another. 
(Code 1972, § 9.12.070; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 54, 2001) 
Section 9.12.080. - Disturbing the peace. 
A.  A person commits the offense of disturbing the peace if he intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly disturbs the peace and quiet of others by violent or tumultuous carriage or conduct or by making loud, unusual or unreasonable noise in a public place or near or in a private residence, whether or not he has a right to occupy said residence. 
B.  A person commits the offense of disturbing the peace if he knowingly allows or permits other persons to congregate in a dwelling or other premises under his control where the conduct of such persons disturbs the peace and quiet of others by violent or tumultuous carriage or conduct or by making loud, unusual or unreasonable noise near a private residence. 
C.  Any person who violates this section commits a Class B municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.12.080; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 55, 2001) 
Section 9.12.090. - Panhandling and solicitation; loitering on school grounds. 
A.  For the purpose of this section, the term "aggressive panhandling" means: 
1.  Intentionally causing physical contact with another person without that person's consent in the course of soliciting; 
2.  Intentionally blocking or interfering with safe or free passage of a pedestrian or vehicle by any means, including unreasonably causing a pedestrian or vehicle operator to take evasive action to avoid physical contact; 
3.  Using violent or threatening gestures toward a person being solicited; 
4.  Using profane or abusive language which is likely to provoke an immediate violent reaction from the person being solicited; or 
5.  Approaching or following a person for solicitation as part of a group of two or more persons, in a manner and with conduct, words or gestures intended or likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or damage to or loss of property or otherwise to be intimidated into giving money or other thing of value. 
B.  For the purpose of this section, the term "public place" means a place to which the public or substantial group of persons has access, including, but not limited to, any street, sidewalk, highway, parking lot, plaza, transportation facility, school, place of amusement, park, or playground. 
C.  For the purposes of this section, the terms "soliciting" and "panhandling" are interchangeable and mean any solicitation made in person requesting an immediate donation of money. Purchase of an item for an amount far exceeding its value, under circumstances where a reasonable person would understand that the purchase is in substance a donation, is a donation for the purpose this section. The term "panhandling" does not include passively standing or sitting with a sign or other indication that one is seeking donations, without addressing any solicitation to any specific person other than in response to an inquiry by that person. 
D.  A person commits a Class A municipal offense if he engages in aggressive panhandling in any public place. A person further commits a Class A municipal offense if he panhandles on private or residential property unless the owner or other person lawfully in possession of such property grants permission for such activity to occur on such property prior to the commencement of the panhandling activity. 
E.  A person commits a Class A municipal offense if he loiters in or upon a school building or grounds or within 100 feet of school grounds when persons under the age of 18 are present in the building or on the grounds, not having any reason or relationship involving custody of, or responsibility for, a pupil, or not having any other reason or relationship involving the business, functions or mission of the school and impairs the orderly educational process, after having been asked to leave by a school administrator or his representative or by a peace officer. 
(Code 1972, § 9.12.090; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 56, 2001; Ord. No. 05-2016, § 1, 1-26-2016) 
Section 9.12.100. - Tents, campers and trailers, restrictions on use in public places. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly sleep, spend the night, cook or establish a place of abode in any vehicle, tent, travel trailer, mobile home or camper vehicle in any public park, place or public street, way or sidewalk within the Town or owned by the Town, except in any area designated for camping and the temporary parking of such vehicles referred to herein. In no event shall any vehicle, travel trailer, mobile home, tent or camper vehicle be parked or stored in the designated area for a period in excess of ten days. Any violation of this section shall constitute a Class B municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.12.100; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 57, 2001) 
Section 9.12.110. - Hindering transportation. 
    A person commits a Class B municipal offense if he knowingly and without lawful authority forcibly stops or hinders the operation of any vehicle used in providing transportation of any kind to the public or to any person, association, or corporation. 
(Code 1972, § 9.12.110; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 58, 2001) 
Section 9.12.120. - Throwing missiles. 
    No person shall knowingly throw or shoot any stone, snowball or other missile at or upon any person, animal, motor vehicle, public property or at or upon any building, structure, tree or other private property not belonging to that person. Violation of this section shall constitute a Class B municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.12.120; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 59, 2001) 
Section 9.12.130. - Unlawful to carry concealed weapon. 
A.  A person commits a Class A municipal offense if he knowingly and unlawfully wears, or carries under his cloths, or concealed about or upon his person, any dangerous or deadly weapon including, but not by way of limitation, any firearm; explosive or incendiary device; blackjack; cross knuckles or knuckles of lead, brass or other metal; knife, dagger, dirk or stiletto with a blade over 31/2 inches in length; nunchakus, stun gun; or any other dangerous or deadly weapon. 
B.  Any person convicted of any violation of this section shall forfeit to the Town such dangerous or deadly weapon so concealed or displayed. 
C.  It shall be an affirmative defense that the defendant was: 
1.  A person in his own dwelling or place of business, or on property owned or under his control at the time of the act of carrying; 
2.  A person in a private automobile or other private means of conveyance who carries a weapon for lawful protection of his or another's personal property while traveling; 
3.  A person who, at the time of carrying a concealed weapon, held a valid written permit to carry a concealed weapon issued pursuant C.R.S. § 18-12-105.1, as it existed prior to its repeal, or, if the weapon involved was a handgun, held a valid permit to carry a concealed handgun or a temporary emergency permit issued pursuant to C.R.S. Title 18, Art. 12; except that it shall be an offense under this section if the person was carrying a concealed handgun in violation of the provisions of C.R.S. § 18-12-214; or 
4.  A peace officer as defined in C.R.S. § 16-2.5-101, as amended. 
(Code 1972, § 9.12.130; Amended Ord. No. 24-2004, § 1, 2004; Ord. No. 24-2017, § 1, 9-26-2017) 
Section 9.12.140. - Prohibited use of weapons. 
A.  A person commits a Class A municipal offense if: 
1.  He knowingly and unlawfully displays or aims a deadly weapon at another person in a manner calculated to alarm; 
2.  Not being a peace officer, he knowingly fires or discharges any cannon, gun, pistol, revolver, or any other firearm anywhere within the Town except at a lawfully authorized target range; 
3.  He knowingly and unlawfully discharges any air gun, gas operated gun, BB gun, pellet gun, slingshot, or spring gun anywhere within the Town; 
4.  He knowingly and unlawfully sets off, or explodes any firecracker, torpedo ball, rocket or other fireworks, except on the celebration of some holiday or event, by the consent of the Mayor or Town Manager; 
5.  He knowingly and unlawfully explodes or sets off any combustible or explosive material; 
6.  He knowingly sets a loaded gun, trap, or device designed to cause explosion upon being tripped or approached, and leaves it unattended by a competent person immediately present; 
7.  He has in his possession a firearm while he is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or of a controlled substance, as defined in C.R.S. § 18-18-102(5), unless such person held a valid written permit to carry a concealed weapon issued pursuant to C.R.S. § 18-12-105.1 as it existed prior to its repeal, or, if the firearm involved was a handgun, held a valid permit to carry a concealed handgun or a temporary emergency permit issued pursuant to C.R.S. Title 18, Art. 12; except that it shall be an offense under this section if the person was carrying a concealed handgun in violation of the provisions of C.R.S. § 18-12-214; or 
8.  He knowingly aims, swings, or throws a throwing star or nunchaku as defined herein at another person, or he knowingly possesses a throwing star or nunchaku in a public place, except for the purpose of presenting an authorized public demonstration or exhibition or pursuant to instruction in conjunction with an organized school or class. When transporting a throwing star or nunchaku for a public demonstration or exhibition or for a school or class, they shall be transported in a closed, non-accessible container. For purposes of this subsection, the term "nunchaku" means an instrument consisting of two sticks, clubs, bars or rods to be used as handles, connected by a rope, cord, wire, or chain, which is in the design of a weapon used in connection with the practice of a system of self-defense; and the term "throwing star" means a disk having sharp radiating points or any disk-shaped blade object which is hand-held and thrown and which is in the design of a weapon used in connection with the practice of a system of self-defense. 
B.  The Mayor or Town Manager may grant an exception to this section, in writing, for contests, sporting events, construction and/or maintenance work. Said permission shall limit the time and place of such firing, and shall be subject to being revoked by the Board of Trustees at any time after the same has been granted. 
C.  Every person convicted of any violation of this section shall forfeit to the Town such firearm or weapon illegally discharged or displayed. 
(Code 1972, § 9.12.140; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 61, 2001; Amended Ord. No. 24-2004, § 2, 2004) 
Section 9.12.150. - Selling weapons to intoxicated persons prohibited. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to knowingly sell, loan, or furnish a gun, pistol, or other firearm in which any explosive substance can be used, to any person under the influence of intoxicating liquor or of a controlled substance, as defined in C.R.S. § 18-18-102(5), as amended, or to any person in a condition of agitation and excitability. 
B.  Any such unlawful sale, loan or furnishing of a weapon shall be grounds for the revocation of any license issued by the Town to such person, firm or corporation. 
C.  Any violation of this section shall constitute a Class A municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.12.150; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 62, 2001) 
Section 9.12.160. - Possession of weapons in licensed establishment prohibited. 
A.  Any person who knowingly carries, possesses, or has on or about his person a knife, as defined in Section 9.12.130(A), including a hunting or fishing knife, or a firearm or other deadly weapon, in any establishment having a license to sell fermented malt beverages or malt, vinous or spirituous liquors for consumption on the premises commits a Class A municipal offense. 
B.  It shall be an affirmative defense that the defendant was a peace officer, as defined in C.R.S. § 18-1-901(3)(1), that the defendant was the licensee, proprietor, agent or employee of the licensed establishment, or if the defendant was authorized to carry a concealed weapon under State law. 
C.  Every person convicted of a violation of this section shall forfeit to the Town such knife, firearm or other weapon illegally possessed or carried. 
(Code 1972, § 9.12.160; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 63, 2001) 
Section 9.12.170. - Storage of explosives prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly store within the Town limits or within one mile thereof any amount of gunpowder, blasting power, nitroglycerin, dynamite, or other high explosive in excess of one 50 pound box or in excess of 500 caps or other devices used for the detonation of such high explosives. This section shall not be deemed to apply to sporting goods businesses and other businesses licensed to store explosives pursuant to law. Violation of this section shall constitute a Class A municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.12.170; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 64, 2001) 
Section 9.12.180. - Fire restrictions. 
A.  The Mayor or the Town Manager or their designee shall have the authority to implement, modify, and rescind restrictions on open fires within the Town limits. The Mayor or Town Manager shall consider the recommendations issued by officials from other affected government agencies, including the County Sheriff and the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District, prior to implementing, modifying, or rescinding a restriction on open fires. 
B.  For the purposes of this section, "open fires" shall be defined as any open fire, including, but not limited to, camp fires, slash or trash burning, warming fires, charcoal or wood burning grills and barbeques, fused explosives, the discharge of firearms, fireworks of any kind, sparklers, anything or instrumentality that emits a flame or flammable sparks, any incendiary device, and disposing of ignited cigarettes, cigars, pipes, or other tobacco or marijuana burning instrumentalities other than by placing them in a fire proof receptacle. 
C.  The specific terms and conditions of the fire restrictions, as well as the applicability to various types of operations, including commercial operations, shall be determined by the Mayor or Town Manager at the time the fire restrictions are implemented or modified. 
D.  Any action taken by the Mayor or Town Manager shall be subject to review by the Board of Trustees at its next regular or special meeting. At said meeting, the Board of Trustees may modify, ratify or rescind the action. 
E.  The penalty for violating this section shall be as follows: any person violating this section and the fire restrictions promulgated hereunder commits a non-criminal municipal offense and shall be subject to a penalty assessment in the amount of $100.00 for the first offense committed within the previous 12 months. Any person violating this section and the fire restrictions promulgated hereunder as a second offense within the previous 12 months commits a class B municipal offense. Any person violating this section and the fire restrictions promulgated hereunder for a third or subsequent offense within the previous 12 months commits a class A municipal offense. This section and any orders made pursuant to this section shall be enforced by the Town of Eagle Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 29-2018 , § 1, 8-14-2018) 
CHAPTER 9.14. - OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONAL AND REAL PROPERTY 

Section 9.14.010. - Petty theft. 
A.  A person commits the Class A municipal offense of petty theft when he knowingly obtains or exercises control over anything of value of less than $500.00 belonging to another without authorization or, if applicable, without paying the purchase price therefor, or by threat or deception, and: 
1.  Intends to deprive the other person permanently of the use or benefit of the thing of value; 
2.  Knowingly uses, conceals, or abandons the thing of value in such manner as to deprive the other person permanently of its use or benefit; 
3.  Uses, conceals, or abandons the thing of value intending that such use, concealment, or abandonment will deprive the other person permanently of its use and benefit; or 
4.  Demands any consideration to which he is not legally entitled as a condition of restoring the thing of value to the other person. 
For the purposes of this section, a thing of value is that of another if anyone other than the defendant has a possessory or proprietary interest therein. 
B.  If any person willfully conceals unpurchased goods, wares, or merchandise owned or held by and offered or displayed for sale by any store or mercantile establishment, whether the concealment is on his own person or otherwise, and whether on or off the premises of said store or mercantile establishment, such concealment constitutes prima facie evidence that the person intended to obtain control over a thing of value and intended to deprive the owner permanently of its use or benefit without paying the purchase price therefor. 
C.  For the purposes of this section, in all cases where theft occurs, evidence of the value of the thing involved may be established through the sales price of other similar property and may include, but shall not be limited to, testimony regarding affixed labels and tags, signs, shelf tags, and notices tending to indicate the price of the thing involved. Hearsay evidence shall not be excluded in determining the value of the thing involved. 
(Code 1972, § 9.14.010; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, §§ 65, 66, 2001) 
Section 9.14.020. - Theft of rental property. 
A.  A person commits the Class A municipal offense of theft of rental property if he: 
1.  Knowingly obtains the temporary use of personal property of another with a value of less than $500.00, which is available only for hire, by means of threat or deception, or knowing that such use is without the consent of the person providing the personal property; or 
2.  Having lawfully obtained possession for temporary use of the personal property of another with a value of less than $500.00, which is available only for hire, knowingly fails to reveal the whereabouts of or to return said property to the owner thereof or his representative or to the person from whom he has received it within 72 hours after the time at which he agreed to return it. 
B.  For the purposes of this section, personal property is that of another if anyone other than the defendant has a possessory or proprietary interest therein. 
C.  If a person signs a rental agreement or a similar agreement for the temporary use of the personal property of another, and said agreement provides that failure to reveal the whereabouts of said property or to return said property within 72 hours after the time at which he agreed to return it shall constitute a wrongful or unlawful retention of the rental property, such agreement shall constitute prima facie evidence of the culpable mental state required under Subsection (A)(2) of this section. 
(Code 1972, § 9.14.015; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 67, 2001) 
Section 9.14.030. - Fraud by check. 
A.  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Check means a written, unconditional order to pay a sum certain in money, drawn on a bank or other financial institution, payable on demand, and signed by the drawer. The term for the purposes of this section only, also includes a negotiable order of withdrawal and a share draft. 
    Drawee means the bank or other financial institution upon which a check is drawn or a bank, savings and loan association, industrial bank, or credit union on which a negotiable order of withdrawal or a share draft is drawn. 
    Drawer means a person, either real or fictitious, whose name appears on a check as the primary obligor, whether the actual signature is that of himself or of a person authorized to draw the check on himself. 
    Insufficient funds. A drawer has insufficient funds with the drawee to pay a check when the drawer has no checking account, negotiable order of withdrawal account, or share draft account with the drawee or has funds in such an account with the drawee in an amount less than the amount of the check plus the amount of all other checks outstanding at the time of issuance; and a check dishonored for "no account" shall also be deemed to be dishonored for insufficient funds. 
    Issue. A person issues a check when he makes, draws, delivers, or passes it or causes it to be made, drawn, delivered, or passed. 
    Negotiable order of withdrawal and share draft mean negotiable or transferable instruments drawn on a negotiable order of withdrawal account or a share draft account, as the case may be, for the purpose of making payments to third parties or otherwise. 
    Negotiable order of withdrawal account means an account in a bank, savings and loan association, or industrial bank, and "share draft account" means an account in a credit union, on which payment of interest or dividends may be made on a deposit with respect to which the bank, savings and loan association, or industrial bank or credit union, as the case may be, may require the depositor to give notice of an intended withdrawal not less than 30 days before the withdrawal is made, even though in practice such notice is not required and the depositor is allowed to make withdrawals by negotiable order of withdrawal or share draft. 
B.  Any person knowing he has insufficient funds with the drawee, who, with intent to defraud, issues a check in the sum of less than $500.00 for the payment of services, wages, salary, commissions, labor, rent, money, property, or other thing of value, commits the Class A municipal offense of fraud by check. 
C.  Any person having acquired rights with respect to a check which is not paid because the drawer has insufficient funds shall have standing to file a complaint under this section, whether or not he is the payee, holder, or bearer of the check. 
D.  Any person who opens a checking account, negotiable order withdrawal account, or share draft account using false identification or an assumed name for the purposes of issuing fraudulent checks commits a Class A municipal offense. 
E.  If a deferred prosecution or judgment and sentence is ordered, the court as a condition of probation may require the defendant to make restitution on all checks issued by the defendant which are unpaid as of the date of commencement of the probation in addition to other terms and conditions appropriate for the treatment or rehabilitation of the defendant. 
F.  This section does not relieve the prosecution from the necessity of establishing the required culpable mental state. However, for purposes of this section, the issuer's knowledge of insufficient funds is presumed, except in the case of a postdated check or order, if: 
1.  He has no account upon which the check or order is drawn with the bank or other drawee at the time he issued the check or order; or 
2.  He has insufficient funds upon deposit with the bank or other drawee to pay the check or order, on presentation within 30 days after issue. 
(Code 1972, § 9.14.020; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 68, 2001; Amended Ord. No. 12-2004, § 7(part), 2004) 
Section 9.14.040. - Procuring food or accommodations with intent to defraud. 
A.  Any person who, with intent to defraud, procures food or accommodations in any public establishment, without making payment therefor in accordance with his agreement with such public establishment, is guilty of a Class B municipal offense if the total amount due under such agreement is $500.00 or less. Upon conviction thereof, a person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed more than $500.00, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
B.  The term "agreement with such public establishment" means any written or verbal agreement as to the price to be charged for, and the acceptance of, food, beverage, service, or accommodations where the price to be charged therefor is printed on a menu or schedule of rates shown to or made available by a public establishment to the patron and includes the acceptance of such food, beverage, service, or accommodations for which a reasonable charge is made. 
C.  The term "public establishment" means any establishment selling or offering for sale prepared food or beverages to the public generally, or any establishment leasing or renting overnight sleeping accommodations to the public generally, including, but not exclusively, restaurants, cafes, dining rooms, lunch counters, coffee shops, boardinghouses, hotels, motor hotels, motels, and roominghouses, unless the rental thereof is on a month-to-month basis or a longer period of time. 
D.  It shall be evidence of an intent to defraud that food, service, or accommodations were given to any person who gave false information concerning his name or address, or both, in obtaining such food, service, or accommodations, or that such person removed or attempted to remove his baggage from the premises of such public establishment without giving notice of his intent to do so to such public establishment. These provisions shall not constitute the sole means of establishing evidence that a person accused under Subsection (A) of this section had an intent to defraud. Proof of such intent to defraud may be made by any facts or circumstances sufficient to establish such intent to defraud beyond a reasonable doubt as provided by law. 
(Code 1972, § 9.14.030; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 69, 2001) 
Section 9.14.050. - Injuring or destroying public property. 
A.  No person shall intentionally, knowingly, negligently, or recklessly injure, deface, destroy, or remove real property or improvements thereto or moveable or personal property belonging to the Town. 
B.  No person shall intentionally, knowingly, negligently, or recklessly tamper with, injure, deface, destroy, or remove any sign, notice, marker, fire alarm box, fire plug, topographical survey monument, or any other personal property erected or placed by the Town. 
C.  Violation of this section shall constitute a Class A municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.14.040; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 70, 2001) 
Section 9.14.060. - Criminal mischief. 
A.  Any person who intentionally, knowingly, negligently, or recklessly damages, injures, defaces, destroys, removes, or causes, aids in, or permits the damaging, injuring, defacing, destruction, or removal, of real property or improvements thereto, or movable or personal property of another in a course of single criminal episode where the aggregate damage to the real or personal property is less than $500.00 commits a Class A municipal offense. 
B.  For the purposes of this section, property shall be deemed to be injured or damaged when physical effort or the expenditure of monies is required to restore the property to its previous condition. 
C.  For the purposes of this section, property shall be deemed to belong to another if anyone other than the defendant has a possessory or proprietary interest therein. 
(Code 1972, § 9.14.050; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 71, 2001) 
Section 9.14.070. - Criminal trespass. 
A.  A person commits the Class A municipal offense of criminal trespass if he intentionally, knowingly, or willfully: 
1.  Unlawfully enters or remains in or upon premises which are enclosed in a manner designed to exclude intruders or are fenced or if he unlawfully enters or remains in or upon the premises or a hotel, motel, bar, lounge, restaurant, condominium, or apartment building. 
2.  Unlawfully enters or remains in or upon any other premises or a motor vehicle. 
B.  A person unlawfully enters or remains in or upon premises when he is not licensed, invited, or otherwise privileged to do so. A person who, regardless of his intent, enters or remains in or upon premises which are at the time open to the public does so with license and privilege unless he defies a lawful order not to enter or remain, personally communicated to him by the owner of the premises or some other authorized person in charge or control thereof. License or privilege to enter or remain in a building which is only partly open to the public is not a license or privilege to enter or remain in that part of the building which is not open to the public. A person who enters or remains upon unimproved and apparently unused land which is neither fenced nor otherwise enclosed in a manner designed to exclude intruders does so with license and privilege unless notice against trespass is personally communicated to him by the owner of the land or some other authorized person or unless notice forbidding entry is given by posting with signs at intervals of not more than 440 yards or, if there is a readily identifiable entrance to the land, by posting with signs at such entrance to the private land or the forbidden part of the land. 
C.  As used in this section, the term "premises" means real property, buildings, and other improvements thereon. 
(Code 1972, § 9.14.060; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 72, 2001) 
Section 9.14.080. - Littering of public and private property. 
A.  Any person who knowingly deposits, throws, or leaves any litter on any public or private property or in any waters, or permits the same, commits the Class A municipal offense of littering. 
B.  It shall be an affirmative defense that: 
1.  Such property is an area designated by law for the disposal of such material and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to so use the property; 
2.  The litter is placed in a receptacle or container installed on such property for that purpose; or 
3.  Such person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or he has first obtained written consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or the act is done under the personal direction of said owner or tenant. 
C.  The term "litter," as used in this section, means all rubbish, waste material, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, or other foreign substances, solid or liquid, of every form, size, kind, and description. 
D.  The phrase "public or private property," as used in this section, includes, but is not limited to, the right-of-way of any road or highway, any body of water or watercourse, including frozen areas or the shores or beaches thereof, any park, playground, or building, any refuge, conservation, or recreation area, and any residential, commercial, farm, or ranch properties. 
E.  Littering is punishable, upon conviction, by a fine of $15.00 if only one item is deposited, thrown, or left. If two or more items are thrown, deposited, or left, said offense shall be punishable, upon conviction, by a fine of not less than $25.00. 
F.  It is in the discretion of the court, upon the conviction of any person and the imposition of a fine under this section, to suspend the fine upon the condition that the convicted person gather and remove from specified public property or specified private property, with prior permission of the owner or tenant in lawful possession thereof, any litter found thereon. 
G.  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from any motor vehicle in violation of this section, the operator of said motor vehicle is presumed to have caused or permitted the litter to be so thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped therefrom. 
(Code 1972, § 9.14.070; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 73, 2001) 
Section 9.14.090. - Posting of handbills and circulars prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to knowingly place, post, erect or paint any handbill, placard, circular, notice, advertising device or matter of any kind upon any public building, structure, or upon any tree, post, pole or other improvement located within a Town right-of-way, park or open space without the prior written permission of the Town Manager. 
B  It is unlawful for any person to knowingly place, post, erect or paint any handbill, placard, circular, notice, advertising device or matter of any kind upon any private premises without permission from the owner, tenant, or occupant of the same. 
C.  Any violation of this section shall constitute a non-criminal municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.14.080; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 74, 2001) 
Section 9.14.100. - Abandoned containers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building or other structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned building, structure or dwelling under his control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other container which has a door or lid, snaplock, or other locking device which may not be released from the inside without first removing said door or lid, snaplock or other locking device. Any violation of this section shall constitute a Class A municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.14.090; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 75, 2001) 
Section 9.14.110. - Theft of cable television service. 
A.  A person commits the Class B municipal offense of theft of cable television service if he knowingly: 
1.  Obtains cable television service from a licensed or duly permitted cable television system without the authorization of the cable television system supplying service; 
2.  Makes or maintains a connection or connections, whether mechanically, electrically, or acoustically, or attaches or maintains an attachment of any device or devices to any cable, wire, or other component of a licensed or duly permitted cable television system without the authorization of such system, or makes or maintains any modification or alteration to any device installed with the authorization of a licensed or duly permitted cable television system, but shall not include the attachment of a wire or cable to extend service he has paid for or which has been authorized; or 
3.  Manufactures, distributes, sells, or offers for sale, rental, or use any decoding or descrambling device or any plan or kit for such device, designed in whole or in part to facilitate the doing of any of the acts specified in Subsection (A)(1) or (2) of this section. 
B.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to satellite dishes. 
(Code 1972, § 9.14.100; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 76, 2001) 
CHAPTER 9.15. - OFFENSES RELATING TO INTOXICATING LIQUOR AND DRUGS 

Section 9.15.010. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic beverage means any fermented malt beverage or malt, vinous, or spirituous liquors, including 3.2 percent beer, of any kind and in any quantity. 
    Establishment means a business, firm, enterprise, service or fraternal organization, club, institution, entity, group, or residence; any real property, including buildings and improvements, connected therewith; and any members, employees, and occupants associated therewith. 
    Ethyl alcohol means any substance which is or contains ethyl alcohol. 
    Fermented malt beverage means any beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any similar product or any combination thereof in water containing not less than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume and not more than 3.2 percent alcohol by weight or four percent alcohol by volume; except that the term shall not include confectionery containing alcohol within the limits prescribed by C.R.S. § 25-5-410(1)(i)(II). 
    Malt liquors includes beer and shall be construed to mean any beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination thereof, in water containing more than 3.2 percent of alcohol by weight or four percent alcohol by volume. 
    Marijuana has the same meaning as in Section 16(2)(f) of Article XVIII of the State Constitution. 
    Marijuana accessories means any equipment, products or material of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, composting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, vaporizing or containing marijuana or ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana into the human body. 
    Marijuana club means any place of private assembly for the purpose of inviting members, their guests or members of the general public to use or consume marijuana 
and/or marijuana products on the premises of any commercial or industrial zoned property, except for those spaces which are occupied for residential use in accordance with the Town's Land Use and Development Code governing residential uses. 
    Marijuana enterprise means any commercial operation, facility, machine or business which sells or dispenses marijuana or marijuana products, including, but not limited to, marijuana or marijuana products in vending machines. 
    Marijuana paraphernalia has the same meaning as "marijuana accessories" in Section 16(2)(g) of Article XVIII of the State Constitution. 
    Possession of ethyl alcohol means that a person has or holds any amount of ethyl alcohol anywhere on his person or that a person owns or has custody of ethyl alcohol or has ethyl alcohol within his immediate presence and control. 
    Possession of marijuana means that a person has or holds any amount of marijuana anywhere on his person or that a person owns or has custody of marijuana or has marijuana within his immediate presence and control. 
    Private property means any dwelling and its curtilage which is being used by a natural person or natural persons for habitation and which is not open to the public, and privately-owned real property which is not open to the public. The term shall not include: 
A.  Any establishment which has or is required to have a license pursuant to C.R.S. Title 44, Articles 3, 4 or 5; 
B.  Any establishment which sells ethyl alcohol or upon which ethyl alcohol is sold; or 
C.  Any establishment which leases, rents, or provides accommodations to members of the public generally. 
    Spirituous liquor means any alcohol beverage obtained by distillation, mixed with water and other substances in solution, and includes, among other things, brandy, rum, whiskey, gin, and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing at least one-half of one percent alcohol by volume and which is fit for use for beverage purposes. Any liquid or solid containing beer or wine in combination with any other liquor, except as provided in the definitions of the terms "malt liquors" and "vinous liquors," shall not be construed to be fermented malt or malt or vinous liquor but shall be construed to be spirituous liquor. 
    Transfer means to deliver or convey in a manner not permissible pursuant to Section 16 of Article XVIII of the State Constitution. 
    Vinous liquors means wine and fortified wines that contain not less than one-half of one percent and not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume and shall be construed to mean an alcohol beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural sugar contents of fruits or other agricultural products containing sugar. 
(Code 1972, § 9.15.005; Ord. No. 17, § 2, 2013; Amended Ord. No. 27, §§ 4, 5, 2014; Ord. No. 36-2018 , § 16, 11-27-2018) 
Section 9.15.020. - Establishment restrictions. 
A.  It shall constitute a Class B municipal offense for the licensee, proprietor, agent or employee of any establishment having a license to sell fermented malt beverages or malt, vinous, or spirituous liquors for consumption on the premises, to permit or allow the following: 
1.  Persons under the age of 21 years to enter, frequent, visit, or be present in any establishment where fermented malt beverages or malt, vinous, or spirituous liquors are sold for consumption on the premises. 
2.  Persons, customers, and guests to be in places where fermented malt beverages, malt, vinous, or spirituous liquors are sold for consumption on the premises during the hours and days that State law prohibits the sale, serving or distribution of fermented malt beverages, or malt, vinous, or spirituous liquors. 
B.  The offense created under this section shall be one of strict liability. 
C.  It shall be an affirmative defense to any prosecution for violation of this section, if said licensee, proprietor, agent or employee of the licensed establishment can establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, that he required a minor to exhibit a State operator's license, chauffeur's license, or identification card, prior to entry by said person into the establishment, and said proof of age exhibited was fraudulent. 
(Code 1972, § 9.15.010; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 77, 2001) 
Section 9.15.030. - Warning display required. 
    Every licensee or proprietor of an establishment where fermented malt beverages or malt, vinous, or spirituous liquors are sold for consumption on the premises shall display, at all times, in a prominent place near each entry way of the establishment, a printed card with a minimum height of 14 inches and a width of 11 inches, with each letter to be of a minimum of one-half inch in height, which shall read as follows: 
A.  For establishments selling fermented malt beverages or malt, vinous or spirituous liquors, for consumption on the premises and not serving regular meals: 
    "WARNING 
    IT IS ILLEGAL TO SELL 3.2 BEER OR WHISKEY, WINE, OR BEER TO ANY PERSON UNDER TWENTY ONE (21) YEARS OF AGE, AND IT IS ILLEGAL FOR ANY PERSON UNDER TWENTY ONE (21) YEARS OF AGE TO POSSESS OR ATTEMPT TO PURCHASE THE SAME. 
    IT IS ILLEGAL FOR ANY PERSON UNDER TWENTY ONE (21) YEARS OF AGE TO BE IN OR VISIT THIS ESTABLISHMENT. 
    IF YOU ARE TWENTY ONE (21) YEARS OF AGE OR OLDER, IT IS ILLEGAL FOR YOU TO PURCHASE 3.2 BEER OR WHISKEY, WINE OR BEER FOR A PERSON UNDER TWENTY ONE (21) YEARS OF AGE. 
    IDENTIFICATION CARDS WHICH APPEAR TO BE FRAUDULENT WHEN PRESENTED BY PURCHASERS MAY BE CONFISCATED BY THIS ESTABLISHMENT AND TURNED OVER TO A LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. 
    FINES AND IMPRISONMENT MAY BE IMPOSED BY THE COURTS FOR VIOLATION OF THESE PROVISIONS." 
B.  For establishments holding a hotel and restaurant license and selling fermented malt beverages or malt, vinous or spirituous liquors, for consumption on the premises: 
    "WARNING 
    IT IS ILLEGAL TO SELL 3.2 BEER OR WHISKEY, WINE OR BEER TO ANY PERSON UNDER TWENTY ONE (21) YEARS OF AGE, AND IT IS ILLEGAL FOR ANY PERSON UNDER TWENTY ONE (21) YEARS OF AGE TO POSSESS OR ATTEMPT TO PURCHASE THE SAME. 
    IT IS ILLEGAL FOR ANY PERSON UNDER TWENTY ONE (21) YEARS OF AGE TO VISIT OR BE IN THIS ESTABLISHMENT UNLESS HE IS ACTUALLY CONSUMING A MEAL SERVED BY THIS ESTABLISHMENT PRIOR TO 8:00 P.M. 
    IF YOU ARE TWENTY ONE (21) YEARS OF AGE OR OLDER, IT IS ILLEGAL FOR YOU TO PURCHASE 3.2 BEER OR WHISKEY, WINE OR BEER FOR A PERSON UNDER TWENTY ONE (21) YEARS OF AGE. 
    IDENTIFICATION CARDS WHICH APPEAR TO BE FRAUDULENT WHEN PRESENTED BY PURCHASERS MAY BE CONFISCATED BY THIS ESTABLISHMENT AND TURNED OVER TO A LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. 
    FINES AND IMPRISONMENT MAY BE IMPOSED BY THE COURTS FOR VIOLATION OF THESE PROVISIONS." 
C.  Any violation of this section shall constitute a non-criminal municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.15.020; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 78(part), 2001) 
Section 9.15.040. - Underage persons in premises prohibited. 
A.  It shall constitute a non-criminal municipal offense for any person under the age of 21 years to enter, visit, frequent, or be present in any establishment where fermented malt beverages or malt, vinous, or spirituous liquors are sold for consumption on the premises. 
B.  Any offense created under this section shall be one of strict liability. 
(Code 1972, § 9.15.030; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 79, 2001) 
Section 9.15.050. - Exceptions. 
    Nothing contained in Sections 9.15.010 and 9.15.030 shall prohibit: 
A.  Minors from entering the dining room portion of a licensed establishment for the consumption of food, when the dining room portion of said establishment is separated from the bar portion of said establishment by a complete physical barrier; 
B.  Minors from entering or remaining in the restaurant portion of an establishment, holding a hotel and restaurant liquor license, prior to 8:00 p.m., for the limited purpose of consuming meals actually and regularly served; provided however, a minor must leave the premises after consuming said meal; 
C.  Minors from entering or remaining in the restaurant portion of an establishment, holding a fermented malt beverages license for consumption on the premises, prior to 8:00 p.m., for the limited purpose of consuming meals actually and regularly served; provided, however, a minor must leave the premises after consuming said meal; 
D.  Minors from passing through the bar portion of an establishment for the necessary ingress and egress to and from restrooms; 
E.  Owners or necessary maintenance employees from being in the establishment which they own or where they work; 
F.  Minors between the age of 18 and 21 who are members of an entertainment group paid or employed by the licensee from being present in a licensed establishment during the period of time they are actually working or performing. 
(Code 1972, § 9.15.040) 
Section 9.15.060. - Distribution of alcohol to underage persons and others prohibited. 
    It shall be a Class A municipal offense for any person to sell, serve, give away, dispose of, exchange, procure, or deliver or permit the sale, serving, giving or procuring of any fermented malt beverages or malt, vinous, or spirituous liquors to or for any person under the age of 21 years, or to a visibly intoxicated person, or to a known habitual drunkard. Said offense shall be one of strict liability. 
(Code 1972, § 9.15.050; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 80, 2001) 
Section 9.15.070. - Possession of open alcoholic or fermented malt beverage container prohibited. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally, knowingly, willfully, or negligently have either in his possession or within a motor vehicle under his control, while in or upon any public street, highway, alley, sidewalk, park, elementary or secondary school building or grounds, or other publicly owned property located within the Town limits, or parking area open to the public, a bottle, can or other receptacle which is open, or which has a broken seal, or the contents of which have been partially removed, and which contains any alcoholic or fermented malt beverage. Any violation of this section shall constitute a non-criminal municipal offense. 
B.  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the consumption, possession or sale of alcoholic or fermented malt beverages when the Town Manager or Town Clerk has issued a permit therefor, provided that: 
1.  Such permit shall be issued only for a designated area; 
2.  Such permit shall not be issued for longer than ten calendar days in any year; and 
3.  The Town Manager or Town Clerk shall have determined that the permit shall be necessary for conducting a public event or celebration and that adequate provision has been made for police supervision and area maintenance. 
C.  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the consumption or possession of fermented malt beverages (beer) and vinous liquors (wine) in the following public parks: the Main Town Park at 500 Broadway Street, Chamber's Park at 100 Fairgrounds Road and Eagle Town Water Park at 200 Fairgrounds Road, subject to the following limitations: 
1.  No alcohol beverages in glass containers are allowed. 
2.  No alcohol beverage shall be consumed in any parking lot or inside a motor vehicle. 
3.  No alcohol beverage shall be possessed or consumed in any designated park when the park is closed, or between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
4.  Any Town official, including without limitation the Town Manager, Town Clerk, Town Special Event Coordinator and any Town Police Officer, may order any individual to remove alcohol beverages from the park at any time, for any reason. 
(Code 1972, § 9.15.060; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 81, 2001; Ord. No. 04-2019 , § 1, 2-12-2019) 
Section 9.15.080. - Unlawful purchase, possession or consumption of alcohol by an underage person. 
A.  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ethyl alcohol means any substance which is or contains ethyl alcohol. 
B.  1.  Any person under 21 years of age who obtains, or attempts to obtain, ethyl alcohol by any method in any place where fermented malt beverages or malt, vinous or spirituous liquors are sold commits the municipal offense of illegal purchase of ethyl alcohol by an underage person. Illegal purchase of ethyl alcohol by an underage person is a strict liability offense. 
2.  Any person under 21 years of age who uses any false, fraudulent or altered identification card or makes other misrepresentations of age in order to purchase, or to attempt to purchase, any fermented malt beverage or any malt, vinous or spirituous liquor commits the municipal offense of fraudulent purchase of ethyl alcohol. Said offense is a strict liability offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.15.070) 
Section 9.15.090. - Illegal possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol or marijuana by an underage person, illegal possession of marijuana paraphernalia by an underage person. 
A.  Except as described by C.R.S. § 18-1-711 and Subsection (K) of this section, a person under 21 years of age who possesses or consumes ethyl alcohol anywhere in the State commits illegal possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol by an underage person. Illegal possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol by an underage person is a strict liability offense. 
B.  Except as described by Section 14 of Article XVIII of the State Constitution and C.R.S. § 18-18-406.3, a person under 21 years of age who possesses one ounce or less of marijuana or consumes marijuana anywhere in the Town commits illegal possession or consumption of marijuana by an underage person. Illegal possession or consumption of marijuana by an underage person is a strict liability offense. 
C.  Except as described by Section 14 of Article XVIII of the State Constitution and C.R.S. § 18-18-406.3, a person under 21 years of age who possesses marijuana paraphernalia anywhere in the Town and knows or reasonably should know that the drug paraphernalia could be used in circumstances in violation of the laws of this Town commits illegal possession of marijuana paraphernalia by an underage person. Illegal possession of marijuana paraphernalia by an underage person is a strict liability offense. 
D.  Any violation of this section shall constitute a municipal offense. 
E.  Upon conviction of a first offense under this section, the court shall sentence the underage person to a fine of not more than $100.00, or the court shall order that the underage person complete a substance abuse education program approved by the court, or both. 
F.  Upon conviction of a second offense under this section, the court shall sentence the underage person to a fine of not more than $100.00 and the court shall order the underage person to: 
1.  Complete a substance abuse education program approved by the court; 
2.  If determined necessary and appropriate, submit to a substance abuse assessment approved by the court and complete any treatment recommended by the assessment; and 
3.  Perform up to 24 hours of useful public service. 
G.  Upon conviction of a third or subsequent offense under this section, the court shall sentence the defendant to a fine of up to $250.00, and the court shall order the underage person to: 
1.  Submit to a substance abuse assessment approved by court and complete any treatment recommended by the assessment; and 
2.  Perform up to 36 hours of useful public service. 
H.  Nothing in this section prohibits the Town Attorney from entering into a deferred judgment agreement with any underage person for any offense under this section, and the Town Attorney is encouraged to enter into those agreements when they are consistent with this section and in the interests of justice. 
I.  It is an affirmative defense to the offense described in Subsection (A) of this section that the ethyl alcohol was possessed or consumed by a person under 21 years of age under the following circumstances: 
1.  While such person was legally upon private property with the knowledge and consent of the owner or legal possessor of such private property and the ethyl alcohol was possessed or consumed with the consent of his parent or legal guardian who was present during such possession or consumption; 
2.  When the existence of ethyl alcohol in a person's body was due solely to the ingestion of a confectionery which contained ethyl alcohol within the limits prescribed by C.R.S. § 25-5-410(1)(i)(II) or the ingestion of any substance which was manufactured, designed, or intended primarily for a purpose other than oral human ingestion; or the ingestion of any substance which was manufactured, designed, or intended solely for medicinal or hygienic purposes; or solely from the ingestion of a beverage which contained less than one-half of one percent of ethyl alcohol by weight; or 
3.  The person is a student who: 
a.  Tastes but does not imbibe an alcohol beverage only while under the direct supervision of an instructor who is at least 21 years of age and employed by a post-secondary school; 
b.  Is enrolled in a university or a post-secondary school accredited or certified by an agency recognized by The United States Department of Education, a nationally recognized accrediting agency or association, or the "Private Occupational Education Act of 1981," C.R.S. Title 12, Art. 59; 
c.  Is participating in a culinary arts, food service, or restaurant management degree program; and 
d.  Tastes but does not imbibe the alcohol beverage for instructional purposes as a part of a required course in which the alcohol beverage, except the portion the student tastes, remains under the control of the instructor. 
J.  The possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol or marijuana shall not constitute a violation of this section if such possession or consumption takes place for religious purposes protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. 
K.  An underage person shall be immune from criminal prosecution under this section if he establishes the following: 
1.  The underage person called 911 and reported in good faith that another underage person was in need of medical assistance due to alcohol or marijuana consumption; 
2.  The underage person who called 911 provided his name to the 911 operator; 
3.  The underage person was the first person to make the 911 report; and 
4.  The underage person who made the 911 call remained on the scene with the underage person in need of medical assistance until assistance arrived and cooperated with medical assistance or law enforcement personnel on the scene. 
L.  Prima facie evidence of a violation of Subsection (A), (B) or (C) of this section shall consist of: 
1.  Evidence that the defendant was under 21 years of age and possessed or consumed ethyl alcohol or marijuana or possessed marijuana paraphernalia anywhere in the Town; or 
2.  Evidence that the defendant was under the age of 21 years and manifested any of the characteristics commonly associated with ethyl alcohol intoxication or impairment or marijuana impairment while present anywhere in the Town. 
M.  During any trial for a violation of Subsection (A) of this section, any bottle, can, or any other container with labeling indicating the contents of such bottle, can, or container shall be admissible into evidence, and the information contained on any label on such bottle, can, or other container shall be admissible into evidence and shall not constitute hearsay. A jury or a Judge, whichever is appropriate, may consider the information upon such label in determining whether the contents of the bottle, can, or other container were composed in whole or in part of ethyl alcohol or marijuana. A label which identifies the contents of any bottle, can, or other container as "beer," "ale," "malt beverage," "fermented malt beverage," "malt liquor," "wine," "champagne," "whiskey" or "whisky," "gin," "vodka," "tequila," "schnapps," "brandy," "cognac," "liqueur," "cordial," "alcohol," or "liquor" shall constitute prima facie evidence that the contents of the bottle, can, or other container was composed in whole or in part of ethyl alcohol. 
N.  A parent or legal guardian of a person under 21 years of age or any natural person who has the permission of such parent or legal guardian may permit the possession and consumption of ethyl alcohol to or by a person under 21 years of age under the conditions described in Subsection (I)(1) hereof. This subsection shall not be construed to permit any establishment which is licensed or is required to be licensed pursuant to C.R.S. Title 44, Articles 3, 4 or 5, or any members, employees, or occupants of any such establishment to give, provide, make available, or sell ethyl alcohol to a person under 21 years of age. 
O.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit or preclude prosecution for any offense pursuant to C.R.S. Title 44, Articles 3, 4 or 5, except as provided in such articles. 
P.  Sealing of record. 
1.  Upon dismissal of a case pursuant to this section after completion of a deferred judgment or any other action resulting in dismissal of the case or upon completion of the court-ordered substance abuse education and payment of any fine for a first conviction of Subsection (A), (B), or (C) of this section, the court shall immediately order the case sealed and provide to the underage person and the Town Attorney a copy of the order sealing the case for distribution by the appropriate party to all law enforcement agencies in the case. 
2.  Upon the expiration of one year from the date of a second or subsequent conviction for a violation of Subsection (A), (B), or (C) of this section, the underage person convicted of such violation may petition the Municipal Court for an order sealing the record of the conviction. The petitioner shall submit a verified copy of his criminal history, current through at least the 20th day prior to the date of the filing of the petition, along with the petition at the time of filing, but in no event later than the tenth day after the petition is filed. The petitioner shall be responsible for obtaining and paying for his criminal history record. The court shall grant the petition if the petitioner has not been arrested for, charged with, or convicted of any felony, misdemeanor, petty offense, or municipal offense during the period of one year following the date of the petitioner's conviction for a violation of Subsection (A), (B), or (C) of this section. 
Q.  The qualitative result of an alcohol or marijuana test or tests shall be admissible at the trial of any person charged with a violation of Subsection (A) or (B) of this section upon a showing that the device or devices used to conduct such test or tests have been approved as accurate in detecting alcohol or marijuana by the executive director of the department of public health and environment. 
R.  Official records of the State Department of Public Health and Environment relating to the certification of breath test instruments, certification of operators and operator instructors of breath test instruments, certification of standard solutions, and certification of laboratories shall be official records of the State. Copies of such records, attested by the executive director of the Department of Public Health and Environment or his designee and accompanied by a certificate bearing the official seal for said department, which state that the executive director of the department has custody of such records, shall be admissible in the Municipal Court and shall constitute prima facie evidence of the information contained in such records. The official seal of the department described in this subsection may consist of a watermark of the state seal within the document. 
S.  In any proceeding in the Municipal Court concerning a charge under Subsection (A) or (B) of this section, the court shall take judicial notice of methods of testing a person's blood, breath, saliva, or urine for the presence of alcohol or marijuana and of the design and operation of devices certified by the department of public health and environment for testing a person's blood, breath, saliva, or urine for the presence of alcohol or marijuana. This subsection shall not prevent the necessity of establishing during a trial that the testing devices were working properly and that such testing devices were properly operated. Nothing in this subsection shall preclude a defendant from offering evidence concerning the accuracy of testing devices. 
T.  A law enforcement officer may not enter upon any private property to investigate any violation of this section without probable cause. 
(Code 1972, § 9.15.080; Ord. No. 17, § 3, 2013; Amended Ord. No. 27, § 6, 2014; Ord. No. 36-2018 , § 17, 11-27-2018) 
Section 9.15.100. - Possession of more than one ounce of marijuana by a person 21 years of age and over prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person 21 years of age and over to knowingly possess more than one ounce of marijuana. A person who possesses not more than two ounces of marijuana commits a non-criminal municipal offense and shall be punished by a fine of up to $500.00. A person who possesses more than two ounces of marijuana but not more than six ounces of marijuana commits a Class B municipal offense. 
B.  During any trial for a violation of Subsection (A) of this section, any container with labeling indicating the contents of the container is admissible into evidence, and the information contained on the label on the container is admissible into evidence and is not hearsay. A jury or a Judge, whichever is appropriate, may consider the information upon the label in determining whether the contents of the container were composed in whole or in part of marijuana. 
C.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit or preclude prosecution for any offense pursuant to the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, C.R.S. Title 44, Article 11, or the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, C.R.S. Title 44, Article 12, except as provided in such articles. 
D.  The qualitative result of a drug test or tests performed by or on behalf of a law enforcement agency with relevant jurisdiction shall be admissible at the trial of any person charged with a violation of Subsection (A) of this section upon a showing that the device or devices used to conduct such test or tests have been approved as accurate in detecting drugs by the executive director of the State Department of Public Health and Environment. 
(Code 1972, § 9.15.090; Ord. No. 36-2018 , § 18, 11-27-2018) 
Section 9.15.110. - Open and public use of marijuana prohibited. 
A.  Except as described in C.R.S. § 18-1-711 concerning immunity for persons who suffer or report an emergency drug or alcohol overdose, a person who openly and publicly displays, consumes, or uses two ounces or less of marijuana, commits a non-criminal municipal offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of up to $500.00 and up to 24 hours of useful public service. The open and public display, consumption, or use of more than two ounces of marijuana or any amount of marijuana concentrate shall be deemed possession thereof and a violation shall be punished as provided for in this chapter or in the Colorado Revised Statutes. 
B.  As used in this section, the term "open and public" means a place open to the general public which includes a place to which the public or a substantial number of the public has access without restriction, including, but not limited to, streets, highways, public sidewalks, transportation facilities including rest areas, recreation areas, golf courses, places of amusement, parks, playgrounds, Town owned property including open space, bicycle and pedestrian trails, common open space owned by owners' associations, common areas of public buildings and facilities that are generally open or accessible to members of the public without restriction, parking lots and areas, and shopping centers or shopping areas. 
C.  As used in this section, the term "openly" means not protected from unaided observation lawfully made from outside the perimeter of the subject building or property not involving physical intrusion. 
D.  As used in this section, the term "publicly" means an area that is open to general access with or without some restrictions and includes marijuana social clubs. 
(Code 1972, § 9.15.100) 
Section 9.15.120. - Transfer of marijuana prohibited. 
    Any person who knowingly transfers or dispenses more than one ounce, but not more than two ounces, of marijuana, from one person to another for no consideration commits a non-criminal municipal offense and shall not be deemed dispensing for the sale thereof which shall be punishable by a fine of up to $500.00. 
(Code 1972, § 9.15.110) 
Section 9.15.130. - Consumption of marijuana and open marijuana containers in motor vehicles prohibited. 
A.  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Open marijuana container means a receptacle or marijuana accessory that contains any amount of marijuana and: 
1.  That is open or has a broken seal; 
2.  The contents of which are partially removed; and 
3.  There is evidence that marijuana has been consumed within the motor vehicle. 
    Passenger area means the area designed to seat the driver and passengers, including seating behind the driver, while a motor vehicle is in operation and any area that is readily accessible to the driver or a passenger while in his seating position, including, but not limited to, the glove compartment. 
B.  1.  Except as otherwise permitted in Subsection (B)(2) of this section, a person while in the passenger area of a motor vehicle that is on a public street, highway or the right-of-way of a public street or highway within the Town shall not knowingly: 
a.  Use or consume marijuana; or 
b.  Have in his possession an open marijuana container. 
2.  The provisions of this Subsection (B) shall not apply to: 
a.  Passengers, other than the driver or a front seat passenger, located in the passenger area of a motor vehicle designed, maintained, or used primarily for the transportation of persons for compensation; 
b.  The possession by a passenger, other than the driver or a front seat passenger, of an open marijuana container in the living quarters of a house coach, house trailer, camper, motor home, as defined in C.R.S. § 42-1-102(57), or trailer coach, as defined in C.R.S. § 42-1-102(106)(a); 
c.  Possession of an open marijuana container in the area behind the last upright seat of a motor vehicle that is not equipped with a trunk; or 
d.  The possession of an open marijuana container in an area not normally occupied by the driver or a passenger in a motor vehicle that is not equipped with a trunk. 
3.  Any person who violates the provisions of this Subsection (B) commits a non-criminal municipal offense and shall be punished by a fine of up to $500.00. 
(Code 1972, § 9.15.120; Ord. No. 27, § 7, 2014) 
Section 9.15.140. - Possession of drug paraphernalia prohibited. 
A.  The term "drug paraphernalia" means all equipment, products, and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagation, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the laws of this State. The term "drug paraphernalia" includes, but is not limited to: 
1.  Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of controlled substances under circumstances in violation of the laws of this State; 
2.  Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances; 
3.  Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana; 
4.  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances; 
5.  Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other containers used, intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances; 
6.  Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances; or 
7.  Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as: 
a.  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls; 
b.  Water pipes; 
c.  Carburetor tubes and devices; 
d.  Smoking and carburetor masks; 
e.  Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand; 
f.  Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials; 
g.  Chamber pipes; 
h.  Carburetor pipes; 
i.  Electric pipes; 
j.  Air-driven pipes; 
k.  Chillums; 
l.  Bongs; or 
m.  Ice pipes or chillers. 
B.  Drug paraphernalia does not include any marijuana accessories as defined in Section 16(2)(g) of Article XVIII of the State Constitution, if possessed or used by a person age 21 years or older. 
C.  In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, the Municipal Court, in its discretion, may consider, in addition to all other relevant factors, the following: 
1.  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use; 
2.  The proximity of the object to controlled substances; 
3.  The existence of any residue of controlled substances; 
4.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the knowledge of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, or evidence that such person reasonably should know, that it will be delivered to persons who he knows, or reasonably should know, could use the object to facilitate a violation of this section or other applicable law; 
5.  Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use; 
6.  Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use; 
7.  National or local advertising concerning its use; 
8.  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale; 
9.  Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a supplier of like or related items to the community for legal purposes, such as an authorized distributor or dealer of tobacco products; 
10.  The existence and scope of legal uses for the object in the community; and 
11.  Expert testimony concerning its use. 
D.  1.  Except as described in C.R.S. § 18-1-711 concerning immunity for persons who suffer or report an emergency drug or alcohol overdose, a person commits the offense of possession of drug paraphernalia if he possesses drug paraphernalia and knows or reasonably should know that the drug paraphernalia could be used under circumstances in violation of the laws of this State or the Town. 
2.  Any person who commits possession of drug paraphernalia commits a non-criminal municipal offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of up to $500.00. 
(Code 1972, § 9.15.130) 
Section 9.15.150. - Marijuana clubs prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly own, operate or maintain a marijuana club within the Town. Any person who violates this section commits a Class A municipal offense. Each and every day a violation of the provisions of this section is committed, exists or continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.15.140) 
Section 9.15.160. - Marijuana enterprises prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to own, operate or maintain a marijuana enterprise within the Town unless duly licensed pursuant to the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, C.R.S. Title 44, Article 11 and permitted pursuant to Title 4 of this Code. Any person who violates this section commits a Class A municipal offense. Each and every day a violation of the provisions of this section is committed, exists or continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.15.150; Ord. No. 36-2018 , § 19, 11-27-2018) 
Section 9.15.170. - Abusing toxic vapors prohibited. 
A.  No person shall knowingly smell or inhale the fumes of toxic vapors for the purpose of causing a condition of euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction, or dulled senses of the nervous system. No person shall knowingly possess, buy, or use any such substance for the purposes described in this subsection, nor shall any person knowingly aid any other person to use any such substance for the purposes described in this subsection. This subsection shall not apply to the inhalation of anesthesia or other substances for medical or dental purposes. 
B.  Any person who knowingly violates the provisions of Subsection (A) of this section commits the Class B municipal offense of abusing toxic vapors; except that no person shall receive a sentence to confinement in jail for being convicted of a first offense pursuant to this subsection. Any person convicted of a second or subsequent offense pursuant to this subsection may receive a sentence to confinement in jail. 
C.  For the purposes of this section, the term "toxic vapors" means the following substances or products containing such substances: 
1.  Alcohols, including methyl, isopropyl, propyl, or butyl; 
2.  Aliphatic acetates, including ethyl, methyl, propyl, or methyl cellosolve acetate; 
3.  Acetone; 
4.  Benzene; 
5.  Carbon tetrachloride; 
6.  Cyclohexane; 
7.  Freons, including Freon 11 and Freon 12; 
8.  Hexane; 
9.  Methyl ethyl ketone; 
10.  Methyl isobutyl ketone; 
11.  Naphtha; 
12.  Perchlorethylene; 
13.  Toluene; 
14.  Trichloroethane; or 
15.  Xylene. 
D.  In a prosecution for a violation of this section, evidence that a container lists one or more of the substances described in Subsection (C) of this section as one of its ingredients shall be prima facie evidence that the substance in such container contains toxic vapors and emits the fumes thereof. 
(Code 1972, § 9.15.160; Ord. No. 17, § 3, 2013) 
CHAPTER 9.16. - OFFENSES RELATING TO MORALS 

Section 9.16.010. - Prostitution prohibited. 
A.  Any person who knowingly performs or offers or agrees to perform any act of sexual intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, masturbation, or anal intercourse with any person not his spouse in exchange for money or other things of value commits the Class A municipal offense of prostitution. 
B.  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Anal intercourse means contact between human beings of the genital organs of one and the anus of another. 
    Cunnilingus means any act of oral stimulation of the vulva or clitoris. 
    Fellatio means any act of oral stimulation of the penis. 
    Masturbation means stimulation of the genital organs by manual or other bodily contact exclusive of sexual intercourse. 
(Code 1972, § 9.16.010; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 88, 2001) 
Section 9.16.020. - Soliciting for prostitution. 
    A person commits the Class A municipal offense of soliciting for prostitution if he knowingly: 
A.  Solicits another for the purpose of prostitution; 
B.  Arranges or offers to arrange a meeting of persons for the purpose of prostitution; or 
C.  Directs another to a place knowing such direction is for the purpose of prostitution. 
(Code 1972, § 9.16.020; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 89, 2001) 
Section 9.16.030. - Pandering. 
    Any person who does any of the following for money or other thing of value commits the Class A municipal offense of pandering: 
A.  Inducing a person by menacing or criminal intimidation to commit prostitution; or 
B.  Knowingly arranging or offering to arrange a situation in which a person may practice prostitution. 
(Code 1972, § 9.16.030; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 90, 2001) 
Section 9.16.040. - Keeping a place of prostitution. 
    Any person who has or exercises control over the use of any place which offers seclusion or shelter for the practice of prostitution and who performs any one or more of the following commits the Class A municipal offense of keeping a place of prostitution if he: 
A.  Knowingly grants or permits the use of such place for the purpose of prostitution; or 
B.  Knowingly permits the continued use of such place for the purpose of prostitution after becoming aware of facts or circumstances from which he should reasonably know that the place is being used for purposes of prostitution. 
(Code 1972, § 9.16.040; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 91, 2001) 
Section 9.16.050. - Patronizing a prostitute. 
    Any person who performs any of the following with a person not his spouse commits the Class A municipal offense of patronizing a prostitute: 
A.  Knowingly engages in an act of sexual intercourse or of deviate sexual conduct with a prostitute; or 
B.  Knowingly enters or remains in a place of prostitution with intent to engage in an act of sexual intercourse or deviate sexual conduct. 
(Code 1972, § 9.16.050; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 92, 2001) 
Section 9.16.060. - Prostitute making a display. 
    Any person who knowingly by word, gesture, or action endeavors to further the practice of prostitution in any public place or within public view commits a Class A municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.16.060; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 93, 2001) 
Section 9.16.070. - Public indecency. 
    Any person who knowingly performs any of the following in a public place or where the conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by members of the public commits the Class A municipal offense of public indecency: 
A.  An act of sexual intercourse; 
B.  A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to satisfy the sexual desire of any person; 
C.  A lewd fondling or caress of the body of another person; or 
D.  A knowing exposure of the person's genitals to the view of a person under circumstances in which such conduct is likely to cause affront or alarm to the other person. 
(Code 1972, § 9.16.070; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 94, 2001) 
Section 9.16.080. - Indecent exposure. 
A.  A person commits the Class A municipal offense of indecent exposure if he: 
1.  Knowingly exposes his genitals to the view of any person under circumstances in which such conduct is likely to cause affront or alarm to the other person with the intent to arouse or to satisfy the sexual desire of any person; 
2.  Knowingly performs an act of masturbation in a manner which exposes the act to the view of any person under circumstances in which such conduct is likely to cause affront or alarm to the other person. 
B.  For purposes of this section, the term "masturbation" means the real or simulated touching, rubbing, or otherwise stimulating of a person's own genitals or pubic area for the purpose of sexual gratification or arousal of the person, regardless of whether the genitals or pubic area is exposed or covered 
(Code 1972, § 9.16.075; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 95, 2001) 
Section 9.16.090. - Sale of sexually explicit materials harmful to children-Prohibited. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to sell or loan for monetary consideration to a child: 
1.  Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film, or similar visual representation or image of a person or portion of the human body which depicts sexually explicit nudity, sexual conduct, or sadomasochistic abuse and which, taken as a whole, is harmful to children; or 
2.  Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter however reproduced, or sound recording which contains any matter enumerated in Subsection (A)(1) of this section, or explicit and detailed verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual conduct, or sadomasochistic abuse and which, taken as a whole, is harmful to children. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to sell to a child an admission ticket or pass, or knowingly to admit a child to premises whereon there is exhibited a motion picture, show, or other presentation which, in whole or in part, depicts sexually explicit nudity, sexual conduct, or sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to children or to exhibit any such motion picture at any such premises which are not designed to prevent viewing from any public way of such motion picture by children not admitted to any such premises. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any child to knowingly and falsely represent to any person mentioned in Subsection (A) or (B) of this section, or to his agent, that he is 18 years of age or older, with the intent to procure any material set forth in Subsection (A) of this section, or with the intent to procure his admission to any motion picture, show, or other presentation, as set forth in Subsection (B) of this section. 
D.  It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to make a false representation to any person mentioned in Subsection (A) or (B) of this section, or to his agent, that he is the parent or guardian of any juvenile, or that any child is 18 years of age or older, with the intent to procure any material set forth in Subsection (A) of this section, or with the intent to procure any child's admission to any motion picture, show, or other presentation, as set forth in Subsection (B) of this section. 
E.  It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to exhibit, expose, or display in public at newsstands or any other business or commercial establishment frequented by children or where children are or may be invited as part of the general public: 
1.  Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film, or similar visual representation or image of a person or portion of the human body which depicts sexually explicit nudity, sexual conduct, or sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to children; or 
2.  Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter however reproduced, or sound recording which contains any matter enumerated in Subsection (E)(1) of this section, or explicit verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual conduct, or sadomasochistic abuse and which, taken as a whole, is harmful to children. 
F.  Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this section commits a Class A municipal offense. Each day during which the violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.16.080; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 96, 2001) 
Section 9.16.100. - Same-Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in Section 9.16.090, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Child means a person under the age of 18 years. 
    Harmful to children means that quality of any description or representation, in whatever form, of sexually explicit nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sadomasochistic abuse, when it: 
A.  Taken as a whole, predominantly appeals to the prurient interest in sex of children; and 
B.  Taken as a whole, is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community within the Town with respect to what is suitable material for children; and 
C.  Is, when taken as a whole, lacking in serious literary, artistic, political and scientific value for children. 
    Knowingly means having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or grounds for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry, or both, of: 
A.  The character and content of any material described herein which is reasonably susceptible of examination; and 
B.  The age of the child; however, an honest mistake shall constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if a reasonable bona fide attempt is made to ascertain the true age of such child. 
    Sadomasochistic abuse means actual or explicitly simulated flagellation or torture by or upon a person who is nude or clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed. 
    Sexual conduct means actual or explicitly simulated acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual intercourse, sodomy, or physical contact in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if such is female, breast. 
    Sexual excitement means the condition of human male or female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
    Sexually explicit nudity means a state of undress so as to expose the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the areola, or the depiction of covered or uncovered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
(Code 1972, § 9.16.090) 
Section 9.16.110. - Same-Applicability. 
    Nothing contained within Section 9.16.090 or 9.16.100 shall be construed to apply to: 
A.  The purchase, distribution, exhibition, or loan of any work of art, book, magazine, or other printed or manuscript material by any accredited museum, library, school, or institution of higher education; 
B.  The exhibition or performance of any play, drama, tableau, or motion picture by any theater, museum, school, or institution of higher education, either supported by public appropriation or which is an accredited institution supported by private funds. 
(Code 1972, § 9.16.100) 
CHAPTER 9.18. - OFFENSES RELATING TO GAMBLING 

Section 9.18.010. - Legislative declaration, construction. 
A.  Pursuant to C.R.S. § 31-15-401(1)(g), it is declared to be the policy of the Board of Trustees, recognizing the close relationship between professional gambling and other organized crime, to restrain all persons from seeking profit from gambling activities in this Town; to restrain all persons from patronizing such activities when conducted for the profit of any person; to safeguard the public against the evils induced by common gamblers and common gambling houses; and at the same time to preserve the freedom of the press and to avoid restricting participation by individuals in sport and social pastimes which are not for profit, do not affect the public, and do not breach the peace. 
B.  All the provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed to achieve these ends and administered and enforced with a view to carrying out the declaration of policy stated in Subsection (A) of this section. 
(Code 1972, § 9.18.010) 
Section 9.18.020. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Gain means the direct realization of winnings; "profit" means any other realized or unrealized benefit, direct or indirect, including, without limitation, benefits from proprietorship, management, or unequal advantage in a series of transactions. 
    Gambling means risking any money, credit, deposit, or other thing of value for gain contingent in whole or in part upon lot, chance, the operation of a gambling device, or the happening or outcome of an event, including a sporting event, over which the person taking a risk has no control, but does not include: 
A.  Bona fide contests of skill, speed, strength, or endurance in which awards are made only to entrants or the owners of entries; 
B.  Bona fide business transactions which are valid under the law of contracts; 
C.  Other acts or transactions now or hereafter expressly authorized by law; 
D.  Any game, wager, or transaction which is incidental to a bona fide social relationship, is participated in by natural persons only, and in which no person is participating, directly or indirectly, in professional gambling; or 
E.  Any use of or transaction involving a crane game, as defined in C.R.S. § 12-47.1-103(5.5). 
    Gambling device means any device, machine, paraphernalia, or equipment that is used or usable in the playing phases of any professional gambling activity, whether that activity consists of gambling between persons or gambling by a person involving the playing of a machine; except that the term does not include a crane game, as defined in C.R.S. § 12-47.1-103(5.5). 
    Gambling information means a communication with respect to any wager made in the course of, and any information intended to be used for, professional gambling. In the application of this definition the following shall be presumed to be intended for use in professional gambling: information as to wagers, betting odds, or changes in betting odds. Legitimate news reporting of an event for public dissemination is not gambling information within the meaning of this chapter. 
    Gambling premises means any building, room, enclosure, vehicle, vessel, or other place, whether open or enclosed, used or intended to be used for professional gambling. In the application of this definition, any place where a gambling device is found is presumed to be intended to be used for professional gambling. 
    Gambling proceeds means all money or other things of value at stake or displayed in or in connection with professional gambling. 
    Gambling record means any record, receipt, ticket, certificate, token, slip, or notation given, made, used, or intended to be used in connection with professional gambling. 
    Professional gambling means: 
A.  Aiding or inducing another to engage in gambling, with the intent to derive a profit therefrom; or 
B.  Participating in gambling and having, other than by virtue of skill or luck, a lesser chance of losing or a greater chance of winning than one or more of the other participants. 
(Code 1972, § 9.18.020) 
Section 9.18.030. - Gambling, professional gambling, offenses. 
A.  Any person who knowingly engages in gambling or professional gambling, except as may be authorized by the laws of the State, commits a Class A municipal offense. 
B.  Any person who knowingly engages in gambling, including any wager or game which is incidental to a bona fide social relationship, within any licensed liquor establishment or any licensed fermented malt beverage establishment commits a Class A municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.18.030; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 97(part), 2001) 
Section 9.18.040. - Gambling devices, gambling records, gambling proceeds. 
A.  Except as provided in Subsection (B) of this section, all gambling devices, gambling records, and gambling proceeds are subject to seizure by any peace officer and may be confiscated and destroyed by order of a court. Gambling proceeds shall be forfeited to the Town and shall be transmitted by court order to the general fund of the Town. 
B.  If a gambling device is a vintage slot machine and is not operated for gambling purposes for profit or for business purposes, it shall not be confiscated or destroyed pursuant to Subsection (A) of this section. If a gambling device is confiscated and the owner shows that such gambling device is a vintage slot machine and is not used for gambling purposes, the court acquiring jurisdiction shall order such vintage slot machine returned to the person from whom it was confiscated. 
(Code 1972, § 9.18.040) 
Section 9.18.050. - Possession of a gambling device or a record. 
    A person who owns, manufactures, sells, transports, possesses, or engages in any transaction designated to affect the ownership, custody, or use of a gambling device, except as may be authorized by the laws of the State, commits the Class A municipal offense of possession of a gambling device or record. 
(Code 1972, § 9.18.050; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 98, 2001) 
Section 9.18.060. - Gambling information. 
A.  Whoever knowingly transmits or receives gambling information by telephone, telegraph, radio, or other means or knowingly installs or maintains equipment for the transmission or receipt of gambling information, except as may be authorized by the laws of the State, commits a Class A municipal offense. 
B.  Facilities and equipment furnished by a public utility in the regular course of business, and which remain the property of the utility while so furnished, shall not be seized except in connection with an alleged violation of this chapter by the public utility and shall be forfeited only upon conviction of the public utility therefor. 
(Code 1972, § 9.18.060; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 99, 2001) 
Section 9.18.070. - Gambling premises. 
    Whoever as owner, lessee, agent, employee, operator, or occupant knowingly maintains, aids, or permits the maintaining of gambling premises for professional gambling commits the Class A municipal offense of maintaining gambling premises. 
(Code 1972, § 9.18.070; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 100, 2001) 
CHAPTER 9.20. - OFFENSES RELATING TO GOVERNMENTAL OPERATIONS 

Section 9.20.010. - Obstructing government operations. 
A.  A person commits the Class A municipal offense of obstructing governmental operations if he intentionally obstructs, impairs, or hinders the performance of a governmental function by a public servant, by using or threatening to use violence, force, or physical interference or obstacle. The term "public servant" as used herein, means any officer or employee of the Town, whether elected or appointed, or otherwise performing a governmental function of the Town, but does not include peace officers or witnesses. 
B.  It shall be an affirmative defense that: 
1.  The obstruction, impairment, or hindrance was an unlawful action by a public servant; or 
2.  The obstruction, impairment or hindrance of a governmental function was by lawful activities in connection with a labor dispute with the government. 
(Code 1972, § 9.20.010; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 101, 2001) 
Section 9.20.020. - Resisting or interfering with a peace officer. 
    It is unlawful to resist arrest or interfere with a peace officer. 
A.  Resisting arrest. A person resists arrest if he knowingly prevents or attempts to prevent a peace officer, acting under color of his official authority, from effecting the actor's arrest by: 
1.  Using or threatening to use physical force or violence against the peace officer; or 
2.  Using any other means which creates a risk of physical injury to the peace officer or another. 
B.  Interfering with a peace officer. A person interferes with a peace officer if he knowingly prevents or attempts to prevent a peace officer, acting under color of his official authority, from effecting an arrest or pursuing an investigation, by: 
1.  Using or threatening to use physical force or violence against the peace officer or another; 
2.  Refusing or disobeying a request by the peace officer to withdraw from the immediate area of the peace officer to a reasonable distance from the officer to allow the peace officer to effect the arrest or pursue the investigation; 
3.  Using any other means which create a risk of physical injury to the peace officer or another; 
4.  Disobeying an order or directive of a peace officer to remain in a particular location reasonably communicated to such person, when the peace officer has a reasonable, articulable suspicion of possible criminal activity; 
5.  Fleeing from or hiding from a peace officer, following an order or directive reasonably communicated to such person by the peace officer to stop or come out of hiding, when the peace officer has a reasonable, articulable suspicion of possible criminal activity; or 
6.  Disobeying any lawful order or directive by a peace officer reasonably communicated to such person by the peace officer. 
C.  It is no defense to a prosecution under this section that the peace officer was attempting to make an arrest or pursue an investigation which in fact was unlawful, if he was acting under color of his official authority. A peace officer acts under the color of his official authority when, in the regular course of his assigned duties, he is called upon to make, and does make a judgment in good faith based upon surrounding facts and circumstances that an arrest or investigation should be made by him. 
D.  The term "peace officer," as used in this section, means the Chief of Police or any police officer in uniform or, if out of uniform, one who has identified himself by exhibiting his credentials as the Eagle Chief of Police or a police officer to the actor, or one whom the actor knew was a Town peace officer at the time of the alleged offense. 
E.  Any violation of this section shall constitute a Class A municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.20.020; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 102, 2001; Ord. No. 48-2003, § 2, 2003) 
Section 9.20.030. - Obstructing a peace officer or firefighter. 
A.  A person commits the Class A municipal offense of obstructing a peace officer or firefighter when, by using or threatening to use violence, force, or physical interference, or obstacle, he knowingly obstructs, impairs, or hinders the enforcement of the penal law or the preservation of the peace by a peace officer, acting under color of his official authority, or knowingly obstructs, impairs, or hinders the prevention, control, or abatement of fire by a firefighter, acting under color of his official authority. 
B.  It is no defense to a prosecution under this section that the peace officer was acting in an illegal manner, if he was acting under color of his official authority, as defined in the previous section. 
C.  This section does not apply to the interference with a peace officer making an arrest or pursuing an investigation. 
(Code 1972, § 9.20.030; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 103, 2001) 
Section 9.20.040. - Obedience to fire alarms. 
A.  Upon the sounding of an audible fire alarm within any commercial, lodging or multifamily residential building within the Town, it shall be the duty of every person in such a building to evacuate such building as soon as reasonably possible with due regard for the safety of such person and other persons in the vicinity, unless otherwise directed by Police or Fire Department personnel. Upon evacuating a building where a fire alarm has sounded, a person shall not re-enter such building until Police or Fire Department personnel have directed that it is safe to do so. 
B.  The first or second violation of this section by any person within 12 consecutive months shall constitute a non-criminal municipal offense. Any third or subsequent violation of this section by a person within 12 consecutive months shall constitute a Class B municipal offense. 
C.  The offense created under this section shall be deemed one of strict liability. 
(Code 1972, § 9.20.035; Ord. No. 14-2003, § 1, 2003) 
Section 9.20.050. - Accessory to crime. 
A.  A person is an accessory to crime if, with intent to hinder, delay, or prevent the discovery, detection, apprehension, prosecution, conviction, or punishment of another for the commission of a crime under this Code, he renders assistance to such person. 
B.  The term "render assistance" means to: 
1.  Harbor or conceal the other; 
2.  Harbor or conceal the victim or a witness to the crime; 
3.  Warn such person of impending discovery or apprehension; except that this does not apply to a warning given in an effort to bring such person into compliance with the law; 
4.  Provide such person with money, transportation, weapon, disguise, or other thing to be used in avoiding discovery or apprehension; 
5.  By force, intimidation, or deception, obstruct anyone in the performance of any act which might aid in the discovery, detection, apprehension, prosecution, conviction, or punishment of such person; or 
6.  Conceal, destroy, or alter any physical evidence that might aid in the discovery, detection, apprehension, prosecution, conviction, or punishment of such person. 
C.  Any violation of this section shall constitute a Class B municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.20.040; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 104, 2001) 
Section 9.20.060. - Refusal to permit inspection. 
A.  A person commits a Class B municipal offense if, knowing that a public servant, as defined in Section 9.20.010, is legally authorized to inspect property: 
1.  He refuses to produce or make available the property for inspection at a reasonable hour; or 
2.  If the property is available for inspection he refuses to permit the inspection at a reasonable hour. 
B.  For the purposes of this section, the term "property" means any real or personal property, including books, records, and documents which are owned, possessed, or otherwise subject to the control of the defendant. A "legally authorized inspection" means any lawful search, sampling, testing, or other examination of property, in connection with the regulation of a business or occupation, that is authorized by a Town ordinance or lawful regulatory provision. 
(Code 1972, § 9.20.050; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 105, 2001) 
Section 9.20.070. - Refusing to aid a peace officer. 
    A person, 18 years of age or older, commits a Class A municipal offense when, upon command by a person known to him to be a peace officer, he unreasonably refuses or fails to aid the peace officer in effecting or securing an arrest or preventing the commission by another of any offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.20.060; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 106, 2001) 
Section 9.20.080. - Compounding. 
A.  A person commits the Class A municipal offense of compounding if he accepts or agrees to accept any pecuniary benefit as consideration for: 
1.  Refraining from seeking prosecution of an offender; or 
2.  Refraining from reporting to law enforcement authorities the commission or suspected commission of any municipal offense or information relating to a municipal offense. 
B.  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that the benefit received by the defendant did not exceed an amount which the defendant reasonably believed to be due as restitution or indemnification for harm caused by the offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.20.070; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 107, 2001) 
Section 9.20.090. - False reporting to authorities. 
    A person commits the Class A municipal offense of false reporting to authorities, if: 
A.  He knowingly: 
1.  Causes by any means, including, but not limited to, activation, a false alarm of fire or other emergency or a false emergency exit alarm to sound or to be transmitted to or within an official or volunteer Fire Department, ambulance service, law enforcement agency, or any other government agency which deals with emergencies involving danger to life or property; or 
2.  Prevents by any means, including, but not limited to, deactivation, a legitimate fire alarm, emergency exit alarm, or other emergency alarm from sounding or from being transmitted to or within an official or volunteer Fire Department, ambulance service, law enforcement agency, or any other government agency that deals with emergencies involving danger to life or property; 
B.  He makes a report or knowingly causes the transmission of a report to law enforcement authorities of a crime or other incident within their official concern when he knows that it did not occur; 
C.  He makes a report or knowingly causes the transmission of a report to law enforcement authorities pretending to furnish information relating to an offense or other incident within their official concern when he knows that he has no such information or knows that the information is false; or 
D.  He knowingly provides false identifying information to law enforcement authorities. 
(Code 1972, § 9.20.080; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 108, 2001) 
Section 9.20.100. - Impersonating a public servant. 
A.  A person commits the Class A municipal offense of impersonating a public servant if he knowingly and falsely pretends to be a public servant, as defined in Section 9.20.010, other than a peace officer, and performs any act in that pretended capacity. 
B.  It is no defense to a prosecution under this section that the office the actor pretended to hold did not in fact exist. 
(Code 1972, § 9.20.100; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 110, 2001) 
Section 9.20.110. - Aiding escape. 
A.  Any person who knowingly aids, abets, or assists another person in custody or confinement and charged with, held for, or convicted of a municipal offense, to escape or attempt to escape from custody or confinement commits the Class A municipal offense of aiding escape. 
B.  The term "escape" is deemed to be a continuing activity commencing with the conception of the design to escape and continuing until the escapee is returned to custody or the attempt to escape is thwarted or abandoned. 
C.  The term "assist" includes any activity characterized as "rendering assistance" in Section 9.20.050. 
(Code 1972, § 9.20.110; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 111, 2001) 
Section 9.20.120. - Escapes. 
A.  A person commits a Class A municipal offense if, while being in custody or confinement and held for or charged with a municipal offense, or while being in custody or confinement under a sentence following conviction of a municipal offense, he knowingly escapes from said place of custody or confinement. 
B.  Upon conviction of the offense of escape, said person shall be punished by imprisonment in the county jail for not less than one month nor more than three months. Any sentence imposed following conviction of this offense shall run consecutively and not concurrently with any sentence which the offender was serving at the time of the escape. 
(Code 1972, § 9.20.120; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 112, 2001) 
Section 9.20.130. - Attempt to escape. 
    If a person, while in custody or confinement and held for or charged with a municipal offense, or while in custody or confinement following conviction of a municipal offense, knowingly attempts to escape from said custody or confinement, he is guilty of a Class A municipal offense, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than one month. Any sentence imposed pursuant to this section shall run consecutively with any other sentences being served by the offender. 
(Code 1972, § 9.20.130; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 113, 2001) 
Section 9.20.140. - Failure to appear in court. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to knowingly fail to appear in the Eagle Municipal Court to answer any offense pursuant to a summons and complaint or penalty assessment notice issued to said person at the time and place specified in such summons and complaint or penalty assessment notice, unless said person has paid the penalty assessment as permitted by law; and it is unlawful for such person to knowingly fail to appear for any subsequent proceedings in such case. 
B.  A person who is released on bail bond of whatever kind, and either before, during, or after release is accused by a complaint of any offense contained in this Code arising from the conduct for which he was arrested, commits a criminal offense if he knowingly fails to appear for trial or other proceedings in the Eagle Municipal Court in the case in which the bail bond was filed. 
C.  Any person who violates this section commits a Class A municipal offense. Any such sentence shall be served consecutively to any sentence for the offense on which the person failed to appear or was on bail. 
(Code 1972, § 9.20.140; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 114, 2001) 
CHAPTER 9.22. - OFFENSES RELATING TO JUVENILES 

Section 9.22.010. - Curfew for minors. 
A.  It is unlawful for any child under the age of 18 years to knowingly wander, loiter, idle, or play in or upon any public street, highway, road, alley, or other public ground, public place, or public building, vacant lot, or other unsupervised place subsequent to the hour of 11:00 p.m. or prior to the hour of 5:00 a.m., except for lawful employment, an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the child, or unless such child is accompanied by the parent, guardian, or other person of the age of 21 years, having express permission of the parent or guardian to have temporary custody and care of such child. 
B.  Violation of this section shall constitute a non-criminal municipal offense. Each violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.22.010; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 115, 2001) 
Section 9.22.020. - Responsibility of parents or guardians. 
A.  It is unlawful for a parent, guardian, or other person having care or custody of any child under the age of 18 years to intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly allow or permit any such child to loiter, wander, idle or play in or upon a public street, highway, road, alley, or other public ground, public place, or public building, vacant lot, or other unsupervised place in violation of the provisions of Section 9.22.010. 
B.  The fact that the child is upon the street, highway, road, alley, or other public ground, public place, public building, vacant lot, or other unsupervised place contrary to the provisions of Section 9.22.010 shall be prima facie evidence that the parent, guardian, or other person having custody of the child, is guilty of violating this Title. 
C.  Any violation of this section shall constitute a Class B municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.22.020; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 116, 2001) 
Section 9.22.030. - Aiding or abetting. 
    Any person who knowingly permits any minor child or children to aid, abet, or encourage in, or to approve, encourage, allow, permit, tolerate or consent to the violation by any minor child or children of any provisions of this Title or any other ordinances of the Town, commits a Class B municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.22.030; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 117, 2001) 
CHAPTER 9.24. - PUBLIC NUISANCES 

Section 9.24.010. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Action to abate a public nuisance means any action authorized by this chapter to restrain, remove, terminate, prevent, abate, or perpetually enjoin a public nuisance. 
    Building means any house, office building, store, warehouse, or structure of any kind, whether or not such building is permanently affixed to the ground upon which it is situated, and includes any trailer, semi-trailer, trailer coach, mobile home, manufactured home, or other vehicle designed or used for occupancy by persons for any purposes. 
(Code 1972, § 9.24.010) 
Section 9.24.020. - Public nuisances-Policy. 
    It is the policy of the Town, pursuant to C.R.S. § 31-15-401(c), that every public nuisance shall be restrained, prevented, abated, and perpetually enjoined. It is the duty of the Town Attorney to bring and maintain an action, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, to restrain, prevent, abate, and perpetually enjoin any such public nuisance. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as an amendment or repeal of any of the other criminal offenses of this Town, or the repeal of any of the criminal laws of this State, but the provisions of this chapter, insofar as they relate to those laws, shall be considered a cumulative right of the people in the enforcement of such laws. 
(Code 1972, § 9.24.020) 
Section 9.24.030. - Same-Defined. 
    The following are deemed to be a public nuisance: 
A.  Any place where people congregate, which encourages the disturbance of the peace, or where the conduct of persons in or about that place is such as to annoy or disturb the peace of the occupants of or persons attending such place, or the residents in the vicinity, or the passerby on the public streets or highways; 
B.  Any public or private place or premises which encourages professional gambling, unlawful use of drugs, unlawful sale or distribution of drugs, furnishing or selling intoxicating liquor to minors, furnishing or selling fermented malt beverages to persons under the age of 18, solicitation for prostitution, or trafficking in stolen property; 
C.  Any offensive or unwholesome business or establishment, or any business or establishment carried on in a manner dangerous to the public health, safety, or welfare within the Town or within one mile beyond the outer limits of the Town; 
D.  Any building, fence, structure, or land within the Town, the condition of which presents a substantial danger or hazard to public health or safety; 
E.  Any dilapidated building of whatever kind which is unused by the owner, or uninhabited because of deterioration or decay, which condition constitutes a fire hazard or subjects adjoining property to danger of damage by storm, soil erosion, or rodent infestation, or which becomes a place frequented by trespassers and transients seeking a temporary hideout or shelter; 
F.  Any unlawful pollution or contamination of any surface or subsurface waters in this Town or of the air, or any water, substance or material intended for human consumption, but no action shall be brought under this subsection if the State Department of Health or any other agency of the State charged by and acting pursuant to statute or duly adopted regulation has assumed jurisdiction by the institution of proceedings on that pollution or contamination; 
G.  Any cellar, vault, sewer, drain, place, property, or premises within the Town which is damp, unwholesome, nauseous, offensive, or filthy, or which is covered for any portion of the year with stagnant or impure water, or which is in such condition so as to produce unwholesome or offensive odors, or which is injurious to the public health; 
H.  Permitting any garbage container to remain on a premises when it has become unclean, offensive, or which is injurious to the public health; 
I.  Allowing vegetable or animal waste, garbage, litter, filth or refuse of any nature to accumulate within or upon any private alley, yard, or area except when it is temporarily deposited for immediate removal; 
J.  Permitting the accumulation of manure in any stable, stall, corral, feed yard, yard, or in any other building or area in which any animals are kept; 
K.  Permitting any slaughterhouse, market, meat shop, stable, feed yard, or other place or building wherein any animals are slaughtered, kept, fed, or sold to remain unclean or in any state or condition detrimental to health or creating a nuisance because of odors, or in which flies or rodents breed; 
L.  Discharging or placing any offensive water, liquid waste, or refuge of any kind into any street, alley, sidewalk, gutter, stream, wash, natural watercourse, ditch, canal, or any vacant lot or which as the result of continued discharge will render the place of discharge offensive or likely to become so; 
M.  Keeping or collecting any stale or putrid grease or other offensive matter; 
N.  Having or permitting upon any premises any fly- or mosquito-producing condition; 
O.  Keeping any drinking vessel for public use without providing a method of decontamination between uses; 
P.  Any toilet or sanitary sewer facilities not constructed and maintained in accordance with the ordinances of the Town; 
Q.  Neglecting or refusing to discontinue use of, clean out, disinfect, and fill up all privy vaults, septic tanks and cesspools or other individual wastewater disposal systems within 20 days after notice from any enforcement officer or official of the Town; 
R.  Obstructing or tending to obstruct or interfere with or render dangerous for passage any street or sidewalk, lake, stream, drainage, canal or basin, or any public park without first obtaining the written permission of the Town; 
S.  The maintenance of any drainage system, canal, ditch, conduit or other watercourse of any kind or nature, natural or artificial, in a manner so as to become so obstructed so as to cause the water to backup and overflow therefrom, or to become unsanitary; 
T.  Any use of premises or of building exteriors which are deleterious or injurious, noxious or unsightly, which includes, but is not limited to, keeping or depositing on, or scattering over the premises, lumber, junk, trash, debris, or abandoned, discarded or unused objects or equipment such as furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans or containers; 
U.  Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped and junked machinery, implements, or personal property of any kind which is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured, for a period of 30 days or more (except in licensed junkyards) within the Town; 
V.  Any building, land, premises, or business, occupation or activity, operation, or condition which, after being ordered abated, corrected, or discontinued by lawful order of the Town or any officer thereof, continues to be conducted or continues to exist in violation of: 
1.  Any ordinance of this Town; 
2.  Any regulation enacted pursuant to the authority of an ordinance of this Town; or 
W.  Those offenses which are known to the common law of the land and the statutes of the State as nuisances when the same exist within the Town limits or within a mile thereof. 
(Code 1972, § 9.24.030) 
Section 9.24.040. - Author of nuisance defined. 
    Where a nuisance exists upon property and is the outgrowth of the usual, natural, or necessary use of the property, the owner or his agent, the tenant or his agent, and all other persons having control of the property on which such nuisance exists shall be deemed to be authors thereof and shall be jointly and equally liable and responsible. Where any such nuisance shall arise from the unusual or unnecessary use of such property or from the business thereof conducted, then the occupants and all other persons contributing to the continuance of such nuisance shall be deemed the authors. 
(Code 1972, § 9.24.040) 
Section 9.24.050. - Jurisdiction, parties, process. 
A.  An action to abate a public nuisance shall be brought in Municipal Court. 
B.  Except as otherwise may be provided in this chapter, the practice and procedure in an action to abate a public nuisance shall be governed by the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. 
C.  An action to abate a public nuisance may be brought by the Town Attorney in the name of the people of the State and the Town. 
D.  An action to abate a public nuisance, and any action in which a temporary restraining order, temporary writ of injunction, or preliminary injunction is requested, shall be commenced by the filing of a complaint, which shall be verified or supported by affidavit. A summons shall be issued and served as in civil cases. 
(Code 1972, § 9.24.050) 
Section 9.24.060. - Temporary restraining order, preliminary injunction, when to issue. 
A.  If the existence of a public nuisance is shown in such action to the satisfaction of the Municipal Court or Judge thereof, either by verified complaint or affidavit, the court or Judge may issue a temporary restraining order to abate and prevent the continuance or reoccurrence of the nuisance. Such temporary restraining order may direct the Chief of Police or any police officer to seize and close the public nuisance and to keep the same effectually closed against its use for any purpose, until further order of the court. While the temporary restraining order remains in effect, the building or place seized and closed shall remain in the custody of the court. Within ten days following the filing of a motion of any person adversely affected by a temporary restraining order, the court shall conduct a hearing and determine whether the temporary restraining order shall be continued pending final determination of the action. 
B.  The court may, as part of a preliminary injunction, direct the Chief of Police or any police officer to seize and close such public nuisance and to keep the same effectually closed against its use for any purpose, until further order of the court. While the preliminary injunction remains in effect, the building or place seized and closed shall be subject to the orders of the court. Preliminary injunctions may be issued as provided by the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. No bond or security shall be required of the Town Attorney or the people of the State or the Town in any action to abate a public nuisance. 
(Code 1972, § 9.24.060) 
Section 9.24.070. - Judgment, relief. 
A.  The judgment in an action to abate a public nuisance may include a permanent injunction to restrain, abate, and prevent the continuance or reoccurrence of the nuisance. The court may grant declaratory relief, mandatory orders, or any other relief deemed necessary to accomplish the purposes of the injunction and enforce the same, and the court may retain jurisdiction of the case for the purpose of enforcing its order. 
B.  The judgment in an action to abate a public nuisance may include an order directing the Chief of Police or any police officer to seize and close the public nuisance, and to keep the same effectually closed until further order of the court, not to exceed one year. 
C.  The judgment in an action to abate a public nuisance may include, in addition to or in the alternative to other injunctive relief, an order requiring the removal, correction, or other abatement of a public nuisance, in whole or in part, by the Chief of Police or any police officer at the expense of the owner or operator of the public nuisance. 
D.  The judgment in an action to abate a public nuisance may include, in addition to or in the alternative to any other relief authorized by the provisions of this chapter, the imposition of a fine of not more than $300.00, conditioned upon failure or refusal of compliance with the orders of the court within any time limits therein fixed. 
(Code 1972, § 9.24.070) 
Section 9.24.080. - Redelivery of seized premises. 
    If the owner or operator of a building or place seized and closed as a public nuisance has not been guilty of any contempt of court in the proceedings, and demonstrates by evidence satisfactory to the court that the public nuisance has been abated and will not reoccur, the court may order the premises delivered to the owner or operator. As a condition of such order, the court may require the posting of bond, in an amount fixed by the order by the court, for the faithful performance of the obligation of the owner or operator thereunder to prevent recurrence or continuance of the public nuisance. 
(Code 1972, § 9.24.080) 
Section 9.24.090. - Violation of injunction. 
    Any violation or disobedience of any injunction or order issued by the Municipal Court in an action to abate a public nuisance shall constitute a Class A municipal offense. The court may treat each day on which the violation or disobedience of an injunction or order continues or recurs as a separate offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.24.090; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 119, 2001) 
Section 9.24.100. - Fees, costs and fines, liens and collection. 
A.  For seizing and closing any building or premises as provided in this chapter, or for performing other duties pursuant to the direction of the court pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the Town shall be entitled to a reasonable sum fixed by the court, in addition to the actual costs incurred or expended. 
B.  All fees and costs allowed by the provisions of this section, the costs of a court action to abate any public nuisance, and all fines levied by the court in contempt proceedings incident to any action to abate a public nuisance shall be a first and prior lien upon any real property seized or closed under the provisions of this chapter, and the same shall be enforceable and collectible by execution issued by order of the court, from the property of any person liable therefore. 
C.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in such a manner as to destroy the validity of a bona fide lien upon real or personal property appearing of record prior to recording of court orders involving real estate as authorized under this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 9.24.100) 
CHAPTER 9.26. - PUBLIC PARKS, RECREATION AND OPEN SPACE AREAS 

Section 9.26.010. - Definitions, applicability and scope. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any park, recreation area or open space area owned, leased or operated, or hereafter owned, leased or operated, by the Town, whether within or without the Town limits. This chapter applies to all persons entering, using, or visiting any such park, recreation area or open space area. 
B.  The term "camping equipment," as the same appears in this chapter, includes not only a tent or vehicle used to accommodate the camper, but also the vehicles used for transport, and any associated camping paraphernalia. 
(Code 1972, § 9.26.010; Amended Ord. No. 48-2003, § 4, 2003) 
Section 9.26.020. - Sanitation. 
A.  The following acts are prohibited in any park, recreation area, open space area: 
1.  Failing to dispose of all garbage, including paper, cans, bottles, waste materials and rubbish, by removal from the site or area, or disposal at places provided by the Town for rubbish removal; 
2.  Draining or dumping refuse or waste from any trailer or other vehicle except in places or receptacles provided for such uses; 
3.  Cleaning fish or food, or washing clothes or articles of household use at any water faucets, restrooms or water hydrants; 
4.  Polluting or contaminating water supplies or water used for human consumption, or any creeks or rivers; 
5.  Depositing, except into receptacles provided for that purpose, any body waste in or on any portion of any restroom facility or any other public structure, or depositing any bottles, cans, cloths, rags, metal, wood, stone, or any other damaging substance in any of the fixtures in such stations or structures; 
6.  Using refuse containers or other refuse facilities for dumping household or commercial garbage or trash brought as such from private property. 
B.  Violation of Subsections (A)(1) through (3), (5) and (6) of this section shall constitute a non-criminal municipal offense. Violation of Subsection (A)(4) of this section shall constitute a Class A municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.26.020; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 120, 2001; Amended Ord. No. 48, § 5, 2003) 
Section 9.26.030. - Public behavior and preservation of public property and resources. 
A.  The following acts are prohibited within any park, recreation area or open space area: 
1.  Any act forbidden by any other section of this Title; 
2.  Inciting or participating in riots, or indulging in boisterous or abusive, threatening, or indecent conduct; 
3.  Destroying, defacing, or removing any natural feature or plant; 
4.  Destroying, injuring, defacing, removing, or disturbing in any manner any public building, sign, equipment, marker, or other structure or property; 
5.  Selling or offering for sale any merchandise without the prior written consent of the Town Manager; 
6.  Distributing any handbills or circulars or posting, placing or erecting any bills, notices, paper, or advertising devices or matter of any kind without the prior written permission of the Town Manager; 
7.  Discharging firearms, firecrackers, rockets, or any other fireworks; 
8.  Operating or using any audio devices, including radios, televisions or musical instruments, or any other noise-producing devices such as an electrical generating plant in such a manner and at such times so as to disturb other persons using the recreation area or park; 
9.  Operating or using public address systems, whether fixed or portable, except with the prior written permission of the Town Manager; 
10.  Installing any other arterial or special radio or telephone or television equipment unless previously approved by the Town Manager in writing. 
B.  Violation of Subsections (A)(5), (6) and (8) through (10) of this section shall constitute a non-criminal municipal offense. Violation of Subsection (A)(2) of this section shall constitute a Class B municipal offense. Violation of Subsections (A)(4) and (7) of this section shall constitute a Class A municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.26.030; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 121, 2001; Amended Ord. No. 48-2003, § 6, 2003) 
Section 9.26.040. - Occupancy of parks, recreation and open space areas. 
A.  The following acts are prohibited within any park, recreation area, or open space area: 
1.  Occupying a recreation site for other than primarily recreational purposes; 
2.  Entering or using a recreation site, recreation area or open space area, or a portion of a recreation site, recreation area or open space area, which is closed to public use, as established by notices which shall be posted in such locations as will reasonably bring them to the attention of the public; 
3.  Occupying a site with camping equipment which is prohibited by the Town Manager. Notices establishing limitation on the kind or type of camping equipment shall be posted in such locations as will reasonably bring them to the attention of the public; 
4.  Building a fire outside of stoves, grills, fireplaces, or outside of fire rings provided for such purposes, or leaving unattended any fire, or failing to extinguish a fire when leaving the park; 
5.  Camping overnight in places restricted to day use only; 
6.  Failing to remove camping equipment, or to clean rubbish and trash before departure; 
7.  Pitching tents or parking trailers or other camping equipment except in places specifically provided for such purposes; 
8.  Camping overnight within a campground for a longer period than 14 days in any 30-day period; 
9.  Leaving a camping unit unoccupied during the first night after camping equipment has been set up, or leaving unattended camping equipment for more than 24 hours, without written permission of the Town Manager. Unattended camping equipment which is not removed within the prescribed time limit is subject to impoundment and removal by Town authorities; 
10.  Failing to maintain quiet in campgrounds between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.; 
11.  Entering or remaining in campgrounds during darkness, except for those persons who occupy the campground for camping purposes or other person visiting those campers; 
12.  Bringing a dog into any recreation area or site or park located within the Town limits, except into an area specifically set apart and designated by signs for dog runs; 
13.  Hiking within an open space area, or part thereof, which is closed for such specific use, as established by notices which shall be posted in such locations as will reasonably bring the closure to the attention of the public. 
B.  Violation of Subsections (A)(1) through (3) and (5) through (13) of this section shall constitute a non-criminal municipal offense. Violation of Subsection (A)(4) of this section shall constitute a Class B municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.26.040; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 122, 2001; Amended Ord. No. 48-2003, §§ 8-10, 2003) 
Section 9.26.050. - Regulation of vehicles. 
A.  The provisions of the Model Traffic Code, as adopted by reference by the Town, shall apply within the limits of any park, recreation area or open space area. In addition, the following acts shall be prohibited within any park, recreation area or open space area: 
1.  Driving motor vehicles in excess of 20 miles per hour; 
2.  Driving or parking any vehicle or trailer except in places developed for that purpose; 
3.  Operating motor vehicles, bicycles, motor bikes, motorcycles, or other off-highway vehicles (OHV) off of established roadways or onto trails, unless such trails have been specifically marked for off-road vehicle use; 
4.  Operating any motor vehicle or snowmobile in such a manner as will annoy or disturb other users of the park, recreation area or open space area; 
5.  Operating any motor vehicle, bicycle, motor bike, motorcycle, snowmobile or other off-highway vehicle (OHV) in any park or recreation area when the same has been closed to traffic. The Town Manager or Police Chief shall have the authority to close any park, recreation area or open space area for health or safety reasons or for the protection of wildlife at any time, and such closing shall become effective when signs giving notice thereof are erected at prominent locations within the park, recreation area or open space area; 
6.  Operating any bicycle, motor vehicle, motor bike, motorcycle, snowmobile or other off-highway vehicle (OHV) in any open space area unless such area has been specifically signed and/or designated for such specific uses; 
7.  Operating or parking any motor vehicle, off-highway vehicle (OHV) or snowmobile in any public park, recreation area or open space area that does not have a current vehicle registration displayed. The registration shall either be in the form of license plates issued by a State Department of Motor Vehicles or an off-highway vehicle (OHV) registration from an appropriate State agency. All motor vehicles shall be operated under State rules and regulations. 
B.  Violation of Subsections (A)(1), (2), (4) and (7) of this section shall constitute a non-criminal municipal offense. The first violation of Subsections (A)(3), (5) and (6) of this section within 12 consecutive months shall also constitute a non-criminal municipal offense. The second or subsequent violation of Subsections (A)(3), (5) and (6) of this section within 12 consecutive months shall constitute a Class A municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.26.050; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 123, 2001; Amended Ord. No. 48-2003, § 11, 2003) 
Section 9.26.060. - Seizure of vehicles. 
    In the event a person is issued a summons and complaint alleging a Class A municipal offense under Section 9.26.050, the officer issuing said summons and complaint may seize and impound the vehicle involved in the alleged violation which shall be held as evidence pending trial or other disposition of the charges. In the even such person is found guilty of a Class A municipal offense pursuant to Section 9.26.050, the defendant shall be assessed the Town's costs for towing or otherwise removing such vehicle, together with applicable charges for storage. No vehicle seized or impounded pursuant to this section shall be released to the owner until such charges have been paid. 
(Code 1972, § 9.26.055; Ord. No. 48-2003, § 12, 2003) 
Section 9.26.070. - Daily or seasonal use restrictions. 
    The Town Manager is hereby authorized to designate certain parks, recreation areas or open space areas, or parts thereof, which are subject to daily or seasonal use restrictions or closures. Any such daily or seasonal use restrictions or closures shall be posted in such locations as will reasonably bring them to the attention of the public. The first violation of such daily or seasonal use restrictions or closures within 12 consecutive months shall constitute a non-criminal municipal offense. The second or subsequent violation of such daily or seasonal use restrictions or closures within 12 consecutive months shall constitute a Class A municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.26.060; Ord. No. 48-2003, § 13, 2003) 
Section 9.26.080. - Promulgation of rules and regulations; effect. 
    The Town Manager is hereby authorized to promulgate the rules and regulations governing conduct and activities within all public recreation areas, recreation sites and parks which are subject to the jurisdiction of the Town, pursuant to Section 9.26.010. Such regulations shall be designed or the purpose of ensuring the public health, safety and welfare, by providing for proper recreational use by all users of the Town's public recreation sites and parks, and minimizing the ecological damage to such sites and parks and annoyance to other park and recreation site users. Such regulations may include, but shall not be limited to, restrictions on use of various areas for specific recreational purposes; restrictions on the use of wheeled or motorized vehicles; restrictions on the number and location of overnight camping facilities; restrictions on the hours of use; and other similar regulations. The Town Manager shall promulgate such regulations by submitting them in written form to the Board of Trustees. If the Board approves the regulations, they shall become effective when signs are in place within the public park, reasonably calculated to give notice to the public of such regulations. Any violation of any regulation duly promulgated and posted as required by this chapter shall constitute a non-criminal municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.26.070; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 124, 2001; Amended Ord. No. 48-2003, § 14, 2003) 
CHAPTER 9.28. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Section 9.28.010. - Ditches, construction, supervision. 
    Any person who constructs any ditch or flume or waterway along or across any public street or alley of the Town, except under the direction and supervision of the Public Works Director, commits a Class A municipal offense. It shall be the duty of the Public Works Director upon reasonable request to direct and supervise the construction of such waterway wherever it is necessary to convey water for irrigation or domestic purposes. 
(Code 1972, § 9.28.010; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 126, 2001) 
Section 9.28.020. - Ditches-Obstruction prohibited. 
    Any person who places any obstruction in any ditch or waterway or cuts or digs the bank thereof in such a manner as to cause the water to flow into any public street or alley of the Town, without receiving a permit therefor, commits a Class B municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.28.020; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 127, 2001) 
Section 9.28.030. - Same-Littering. 
    Any person who throws or deposits or causes to be conducted into any ditch or watercourse within the Town any litter, filth or harmful substance commits a Class A municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.28.030; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 128, 2001) 
Section 9.28.040. - Weeds, accumulation, abatement. 
A.  Growth and accumulation on-premises and adjoining sidewalks and alleys prohibited. No owner of any lot, block or parcel of ground within the Town, nor any tenant or agent in charge thereof, shall allow or permit weeds to grow, or remain when grown, on such lot, block or parcel of ground, or on or along any sidewalk adjoining the same, or in the alley behind the same, but such weeds shall be cut close to the ground and kept so cut. 
B.  Abatement by Town. If any owner, tenant or agent in charge shall fail to cut weeds, as required by this section, within five days after being notified to do so by the Town Clerk, by registered or certified mail, the Board may direct that the weeds be cut by an employee of the Town and charge the cost thereof to such owner, tenant or agent in charge, together with five percent additional for inspection and other incidentals. 
C.  Collection costs of abatement by Town. 
1.  In the event the weeds on any lot, block or parcel of ground, or along the sidewalk adjoining the same or the alley behind the same, are cut by order of the Board, the whole cost of cutting such weeds, together with five percent for inspection and other incidentals, shall be paid to the Town Clerk within 30 days after mailing by the Town Clerk to the owner of such lot, block or parcel of ground, by registered or certified mail, notice of the assessment of such cost. 
2.  Failure to pay such assessment within such period of 30 days shall cause such assessment to become a lien against such lot, block or parcel of land and shall have priority over all liens, except general taxes and prior special assessments, and the same may be certified at any time, after such failure to so pay the same, within 30 days, by the Town Clerk to the County Treasurer to be placed upon the tax list for the current year and to be collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected, with ten percent penalty to defray the cost of collection. 
(Code 1972, § 9.28.040) 
Section 9.28.050. - Duty to keep sidewalks safe and clean. 
    The owner, occupant, or agent of the owner of any real property, including buildings or vacant lots, within the Town is required to keep and maintain, at its sole cost and expense, the sidewalks, gutters, curbs and curb walks on or adjacent to such real property in a clean and safe condition free and clear of mud, dirt, rubbish, filth and other debris and obstructions. Any person who violates this section commits a non-criminal municipal offense. Any offense under this section shall be one of strict liability. 
(Code 1972, § 9.28.050; Amended Ord. No. 4-2009, § 1, 2009) 
Section 9.28.060. - Removal of snow. 
A.  Shoveling of public sidewalks required. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any lot, block or parcel of real property within the Town, or for any agent in charge of such property, to allow any snow or ice to accumulate or remain upon the entire width of any sidewalk in the public right-of-way abutting such property longer than 24 hours from the time of the last accumulation of such snow or ice. 
B.  Depositing snow in right-of-way prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove snow or ice from any private property or public sidewalks and deposit such snow or ice upon any public street, sidewalk, alley or other public property within the Town. 
C.  Obstructing and endangering public right-of-way prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to plow, shovel, blow or otherwise move snow or ice in or upon any public street, sidewalk, alley or other public property within the Town in a manner which: 
1.  Obstructs vehicular or pedestrian traffic upon the public right-of-way; 
2.  Increases hazards to vehicles and pedestrians traveling upon the public right-of-way; 
3.  Interferes with the maintenance of the public right-of-way by the Town; or 
4.  Obstructs clear vision at intersections. 
D.  Exception for public crews. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit or regulate the manner in which persons working for or on behalf of the Town clear or remove snow or ice from the public streets or other public places within the Town. 
E.  Penalties. Any offense under this section shall be deemed one of strict liability. Upon the first or second violation of this section within a consecutive 12-month period, the owner, occupant or agent shall be deemed to have committed a non-criminal municipal offense. Upon the third or subsequent violation of this section within 12 consecutive months, the occupant, owner or agent shall be deemed to have committed a Class B municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.28.055; Amended Ord. No. 4-2009, § 2, 2009) 
Section 9.28.070. - Encroachments. 
A.  Uses prohibited without encroachment permit. 
1.  No person shall conduct any activity or enterprise that involves placement of a cart, vendor/craft booth, tent, sign, table, fencing, structural improvement associated with landscaping, stage or other structure or equipment in the public right-of-way without a valid encroachment permit issued under this Section, unless specifically permitted and provided for in this Code. 
2.  No person shall install or construct any structure, awning, sign, balcony, occupied colonnade or stoop over or upon the public right-of-way without a valid encroachment permit issued under this Section. 
3.  Landscaping within the public right-of-way shall not be a violation of this Section; provided, however, that no vested right to continue such landscaping shall arise and said landscaping shall comply with other requirements and provisions of this Code. 
4.  The penalty for failing to comply with this Section shall be as set forth in Chapter 9, Section 9.28.090 of this Code. 
B.  Encroachment permit required. 
1.  Any person who wishes to encroach over or upon the public right-of-way shall apply for and obtain an encroachment permit from the Town Planner according to the application process established by the Town Planner. Encroachment permits shall be revocable and may be subject to a term as determined by the Town Planner to ensure that the encroachment remains appropriate for its setting and compliant with the terms of the permit. Encroachment permits shall provide, and it shall be agreed by the person requesting the permit, that any such improvements which either exist upon or are placed upon Town property shall be placed there at the sufferance of the Town and shall be removed by the property owner responsible for the improvements upon receipt of a written notice from the Town to remove the improvements in the time frame set forth in the notice. All encroachments shall comply with all building codes as applicable, and permits shall contain such restrictions as the Town Planner deems appropriate. All encroachment permits shall be kept on the premises. 
2.  The Town Planner may establish review guidelines and application submittal requirements and may also impose conditions on any permit to ensure that permitted encroachments comply with this Code and enhance the proposed location. 
3.  The Town Planner shall impose a reasonable fee for an application for an encroachment permit to cover the Town's costs associated with processing and monitoring such permit, which fee may be amended from time to time. In addition, the applicant shall be responsible for the payment of any and all consultant fees associated with processing the permit. 
4.  Once an application is deemed complete, the Town Planner shall render a decision on the permit application within 15 business days unless the Town Planner, at his or her discretion, refers the application to the Town Planning & Zoning Commission; in which case, the application shall be placed on the next available agenda. 
5.  Whenever any permittee desires to change the use or location of the encroachment authorized by the permit, the permittee shall follow the review and approval process required of a new applicant. 
C.  Mandatory insurance. 
1.  All permittees shall provide proof of adequate insurance to the Town Planner before a permit may be issued and shall maintain during the period of the permit comprehensive general public liability and property damage insurance naming the Town, its officers, employees and agents as insureds in an amount equal to the limits under the Colorado Governmental Immunity Act, C.R.S. § 24-10-101, et seq., as amended, plus the costs of defense, provided that the insurance is primary insurance and that no other insurance maintained by the Town will be called upon to contribute to loss covered by the policy and providing for 30 days notice of cancellation or material change to the Town. 
2.  The Town Planner may waive the mandatory insurance requirement for encroachments of a minor nature or short duration of time. 
3.  The Town Planner has discretion to increase insurance limits for major encroachments. 
D.  Indemnification. The holder of an encroachment permit issued under this Section shall indemnify and hold harmless the Town, its officers, employees and agents against any and all claims arising from any occurrence occasioned by the permitted use. 
(Code 1972, § 9.28.060; Ord. No. 30-2018 , § 1, 9-11-2018) 
Section 9.28.080. - Notice of removal of encroachments and debris. 
    Whenever any encroachment, obstruction or unsafe condition, including snow, ice, mud, dirt, debris, rubbish or filth, is made, placed, permitted or maintained contrary to the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the Town Manager, Code Enforcement Officer, or municipal law enforcement officers shall give notice to the party responsible for the unsafe condition, and/or to the owner or party in control of the real property involved, directing such person to remove or alleviate such encroachment, obstruction or unsafe condition within a time which is reasonable in light of the time required to effect the action, and the safety or persons and property. In the event such direction is not complied with, or if the party to whom notice is due cannot be given such notice, then the Town may effect such action, and the cost thereof may be assessed against the responsible party. Any such assessment may be made a lien on the real property involved, by recording a statement to that effect in the records of the County Clerk and Recorder and by mailing or delivering a copy of such statement to the owner and the party in control of such real property. 
(Code 1972, § 9.28.070; Ord. No. 30-2018 , § 2, 9-11-2018) 
Section 9.28.090. - Penalties. 
    Unless otherwise provided herein, any violation of this chapter shall constitute a non-criminal municipal offense. Each day upon which a violation of this chapter occurs shall be deemed to be a separate offense. 
(Code 1972, § 9.28.080; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 129, 2001; Ord. No. 30-2018 , § 3, 9-11-2018) 
Title 11 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Vehicles and traffic in general, C.R.S. § 42-1-101 et seq.; municipal authority to adopt Model Traffic Code by reference, C.R.S. § 42-4-110(1); general power of municipality authority to adopt any code by reference, C.R.S. § 31-16-202. 

CHAPTER 11.04. - TRAFFIC CODE 

Section 11.04.010. - Adoption by reference. 
    Pursuant to Parts 1 and 2 of Article 16 of Title 31, C.R.S., as amended, there is hereby adopted by reference the 2010 Edition of the Model Traffic Code for Colorado (Model Traffic Code), and appendices thereto, promulgated and published as such by the Colorado Department of Transportation, Safety and Traffic Engineering Branch, 4201 E. Arkansas Avenue, Denver, Colorado 80222. The subject matter of the Model Traffic Code relates primarily to comprehensive traffic and vehicle control regulations for the Town. The purpose of this chapter and the Model Traffic Code adopted herein is to provide a system of uniform traffic regulations generally consistent with State law, and generally conforming to similar regulations throughout the State and the nation. 
(Code 1972, § 11.04.010) 
Section 11.04.020. - Deletions. 
    The following articles, sections and/or subsections of the Model Traffic Code for Colorado, 2010 Edition, are inapplicable to the Town and are therefore deleted: 
A.  Part 1, "Traffic regulation-generally," Sections 101, short title, and 102, legislative declaration; 
B.  Part 1, "Traffic regulation-generally," Subsection (3) of Section 116 concerning restrictions for minor drivers; 
C.  Part 2, "Equipment," Section 240, low speed electric vehicle equipment requirements; 
D.  Part 10, "Driving-overtaking-passing," Section 1011, use of runaway vehicle ramps, and Section 1012, high occupancy vehicle (HOV) and high occupancy toll (HOT) lanes; 
E.  Part 11, "Speed regulation," Sections 1105(5), 1105(6), 1105(7), 1105(8), and 1105(9) concerning penalties for speed contests and exhibitions; 
F.  Part 12, "Parking," Subsection (9) of Section 1208, parking privileges for persons with disabilities; 
G.  Part 12, "Parking," Section 1210, designated areas on private property for authorized vehicles; 
H.  Part 14, "Other offenses," Subsection (4) of Section 1409, compulsory insurance-penalty-legislative intent; 
I.  Part 14, "Other offenses," Subsection (9) of Section 1409, compulsory insurance-penalty-legislative intent; 
J.  Part 17, "Penalties and procedure," is deleted in its entirety; 
K.  Part 18, "Vehicles abandoned on public property," is deleted in its entirety; 
L.  Part 19, "School buses," Section 1904, regulations for school buses; and 
M.  All subsections of the 2010 Edition of the Model Traffic Code that categorize violations into classes of traffic infractions, traffic offenses, misdemeanors, or which set forth a specific penalty for a violation, whether monetary or otherwise, are hereby deleted. 
(Code 1972, § 11.04.030; Ord. No. 2017-6, § 1, 2-28-2017) 
Section 11.04.030. - Additions and modifications. 
    The adopted Model Traffic Code is subject to the additions or modifications set forth below. All sections not deleted, added to, or modified remain as if set out at length in the original form. 
A.  Subsection 9 of Section 109 of Part 1 of the Model Traffic Code, concerning skateboards, skis, skates, and toy vehicles in rights-of-way, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
109. Low-powered scooters, animals, skis, skates and toy vehicles on highways. 
(9)  No person shall use the highways for traveling on skis, toboggans, coasting on sleds, skates, skateboards, motorized skateboards, or similar devices. It is unlawful for any person to use any roadway of this municipality as a sled or ski course for the purpose of coasting on sleds, skis, or similar devices. It is also unlawful for any person upon roller skates, a skateboard, a motorized skateboard, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device to go upon any roadway except while crossing a highway in a crosswalk and in so crossing such person shall be granted all of the rights subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This subsection does not apply to any public way which is set aside by proper authority as a play street and which is adequately roped off or otherwise marked for such purpose. 
B.  Subsection (3) of Section 114 of Part 1 of the Model Traffic Code, concerning traffic hazards, is amended to read as follows: 
114. Removal of traffic hazards. 
(3)  In the event that any property owner fails or neglects to trim or remove any such tree limb or any such shrub, vine, hedge or other plant within ten days after receipt of written notice from the Town to do so, the Town may do or cause to be done the necessary work incident thereto, and said property owner shall reimburse the Town for the cost of the work performed. Such costs, from the time the same shall become due and payable, shall become and remain a lien on the premises until such costs have been paid to the Town. This lien on the premises may be foreclosed by an action at law or in equity in the name of the Town and in the court having jurisdiction thereof. If the Town must resort to court action for collection of amounts due, the Town shall be entitled to its reasonable Attorney's fees and other expenses incurred in such action if the Town prevails. In the event such costs are not paid by the property owner when due, the Town Treasurer may certify the amount of the same to the County Treasurer, to be placed on the tax list for the current year, and to be collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected with ten percent added thereto to defray the costs of collection, pursuant to C.R.S. § 31-20-105. 
C.  Subsection (5) of Section 116 of Part 1 of the Model Traffic Code, concerning restrictions for minor drivers, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
116. Restrictions for minor drivers-definitions. 
(5)  No driver in a motor vehicle shall be cited for a violation of this section unless such driver was stopped by a law enforcement officer for an alleged violation of the Model Traffic Code other than a violation of this section. 
D.  Subsection (3) of Section 117 of Part 1 of the Model Traffic Code, concerning limitations on use of EPAMDs, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
117. Personal mobility devices. 
(3)  An EPAMD shall not be operated: 
(a)  On a limited-access highway; or 
(b)  At a speed greater than 121/2 miles per hour. 
E.  Subsection (3) of Section 223 of Part 2 of the Model Traffic Code, concerning brakes, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
223. Brakes. 
(3)  No operator of a truck or truck tractor shall use or apply engine compression brakes equipped on such vehicle while traveling within this municipality. 
F.  Subsection (4) of Section 229 of Part 2 of the Model Traffic Code, concerning safety glazing material, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
229. Safety glazing material in motor vehicles. 
(4)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any highway within this municipality unless such vehicle is equipped with a front windshield as provided in this section, except as provided in Section 232(1) and except for motor vehicles registered as collector's items under C.R.S. § 42-12-301. 
G.  Section 235 of Part 2 of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
235. Minimum standards for commercial vehicles-spot inspections. 
(1)  A police officer may, at any time, require the driver of any commercial vehicle, as defined in Subsection (3) of this section, to stop so that the officer may inspect the vehicle and all required documents for compliance with the rules and regulations promulgated by the Colorado Department of Public Safety, Colorado Code of Regulations Volume 8, 1507-1 "Minimum Standards for the Operation of Commercial Vehicles." 
(2)  A police officer may immobilize, impound or otherwise direct the disposition of a commercial vehicle when it is determined that the motor vehicle or operation thereof is unsafe and when such immobilization, impoundment, or disposition is appropriate under the rules and regulations promulgated by the Colorado Department of Public Safety, Colorado Code of Regulations Volume 8, 1507-1 "Minimum Standards for the Operation of Commercial Vehicles." 
(3)  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires, the term "commercial vehicle" means: 
(a)  Any self-propelled or towed vehicle bearing an apportioned plate or having a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating or gross combination rating of 10,001 pounds or more, which vehicle is used in commerce on public highways of this State or is designed to transport 16 or more passengers, including the driver, unless such vehicle is a school bus regulated pursuant to Section 1904 or any vehicle that does not have a gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 or more pounds and that is owned or operated by a school district so long as such school district does not receive remuneration for the use of such vehicle, not including reimbursement for the use of such vehicle; 
(b)  Any motor vehicle designed or equipped to transport other motor vehicles from place to place by means of winches, cables, pulleys, or other equipment for towing, pulling, or lifting, when such motor vehicle is used in commerce on public highways of this State; and 
(c)  A motor vehicle that is used on the public highways and transports materials determined by the secretary of transportation to be hazardous under 49 USC 5103 in such quantities as to require placarding under 49 CFR 172 and 173. 
H.  Part 2 of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended to include the following additional section: 
241. Use of tire chains on commercial vehicles prohibited. 
    No person shall drive any commercial vehicle, including a motor vehicle, truck, truck tractor, trailer or semi-trailer used in the business of transporting persons or property over the public highways for profit, hire or otherwise in any business or commercial enterprise, equipped with tire chains within the corporate limits of the Town. 
I.  Section 501 of Part 5 of the Model Traffic Code, concerning size and weight limitations, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
501. Size and weight violations-penalty. 
    Except as provided in Section 509, it is a traffic offense for any person to drive or move or for the owner to cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved on any highway any vehicle or vehicles of a size or weight exceeding the limitations stated in Sections 502 to 513 or otherwise in violation of said sections or Section 1407, except as permitted in Section 510. 
J.  Part 5 of the Model Traffic Code, concerning size, weight and load of vehicles, is hereby amended to include the following additional section: 
513. Weight limits on certain streets or parts thereof. 
    When official signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any vehicle with a weight limit in excess of the amount specified on such signs at any time upon any of the streets. 
K.  Section 614 of Part 6 of the Model Traffic Code is amended to read as follows: 
614. Designation of highway maintenance, repair, or construction zones-signs-increase in penalties for speeding violations. 
(1)  If maintenance, repair, or construction activities are occurring or will be occurring within four hours on a local street or State highway, local authorities within their jurisdiction may designate such portion of the highway as a highway maintenance, repair, or construction zone. Any person who commits a speeding violation in a maintenance, repair or construction zone shall be subject to double the fine normally imposed for the applicable speeding violation. 
(2)  Local authorities, within their jurisdiction, shall designate by appropriate signs that maintenance, repair or construction activity is taking place or will be taking place within four hours. Such signs shall notify the public that increased penalties for speeding violations are in effect in such zone. Local authorities shall erect or place a second sign after such zone indicating that increased penalties for speeding violations are no longer in effect. A maintenance, repair or construction zone begins at the location of the sign indicating that increased penalties are in effect and ends at the location of the sign indicating that the increased penalties are no longer in effect. 
(3)  Signs used for designating the beginning and end of a maintenance, repair or construction zone shall conform to the State Department of Transportation requirements. Local authorities may display such signs on a fixed, variable or movable stand. Local authorities may place such sign on a moving vehicle if required for certain activities, including, but not limited to, highway painting work. 
L.  Subsection (1) of Section 615 of Part 6 of the Model Traffic Code, concerning schools zones, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
615. School zones-increase in penalties for moving traffic violations. 
(1)  Any person who commits a moving traffic violation in a school zone is subject to double the fine normally imposed for any moving violation, whether a criminal traffic offense or a non-criminal traffic offense, that occurs in a school zone. 
M.  Part 6 of the Model Traffic Code, concerning signals, signs and markings, is amended to include the following additional section: 
616. Barricades. 
    Whenever barricades are erected to close off part or all of a highway, as authorized by C.R.S. § 42-4-111, no person shall drive around, through, or between such barricades or into the barricaded area except as directed or permitted by official signs or in compliance with the directions of a law enforcement officer or other authorized person. 
N.  Section 702 of Part 7 of the Model Traffic Code is amended to read as follows: 
702. Vehicle turning left. 
    Unless there is an official traffic control arrow signal regulating the left turn, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left within an intersection, or into an alley, private road, or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
O.  Subsection (3) of Section 703 of Part 7 of the Model Traffic Code, concerning entering through highway at stop or yield intersection, is amended to read as follows: 
703. Entering through highway-stop or yield intersection. 
(3)  Except when directed to proceed by a law enforcement officer, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop sign, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when such driver is moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways, except that if the driver is involved in a collision with a vehicle, after driving past a stop sign, such collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of his failure to yield the right-of-way. 
P.  Subsection (2) of Section 707 of Part 7 of the Model Traffic Code, concerning certain vehicles must stop at railroad grade crossings, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
707. Certain vehicles must stop at railroad grade crossings. 
(2)  This section shall not apply at street railway grade crossings within a business or residential district. 
Q.  Subsection (3) of Section 710 of Part 7 of the Model Traffic Code, concerning emerging from or entering alley, driveway, or building, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
710. Emerging from or entering alley, driveway or building. 
(3)  No person shall drive any vehicle other than a bicycle or EPAMD, if such person is disabled, upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area, except upon permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway. 
R.  Subsection (3) of Section 712 of Part 7 of the Model Traffic Code, concerning driving in highway work areas, is amended to read as follows: 
712. Driving in highway work areas. 
(3)  Local road authorities, in cooperation with law enforcement agencies, may train and appoint adult civilian personnel for special traffic duty as highway flag-persons within any highway maintenance or construction work area. Whenever such duly authorized flag-persons are wearing the badge, insignia, or uniform of their office, or engaged in the performance of their respective duties, and are displaying any official hand signal device of any type and in the manner prescribed in the adopted State Traffic Control Manual, or supplement thereto, for signaling traffic in such areas to stop or proceed, no person shall willfully fail or refuse to obey the visible instructions or signals so displayed by such flag-person. Any alleged willful failure or refusal of the driver to comply with such instructions or signals, including information as to the identity of the driver and license plate number of the vehicle alleged to have been driven in violation, shall be reported by the work area supervisor in charge at the location to the municipal prosecutor or district Attorney for appropriate penalizing action in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
S.  Section 1101 of Part 11 of the Model Traffic Code, concerning speed limits, is amended to read as follows: 
1101. Speed limits. 
(1)  No person shall drive a vehicle on a traveled roadway or highway within this municipality at a speed greater than the posted speed limit, and in no event greater than 75 miles per hour, or if there is no posted speed limit, greater than the applicable speed set forth in Subsection (2) of this section. 
(2)  Except when a special hazard exists that requires a lower speed limit, the following speeds shall be lawful: 
(a)  25 miles per hour in any business district, as defined in C.R.S. § 42-1-102(11); 
(b)  25 miles per hour in any residence district, as defined in C.R.S. § 42-1-101(80); 
(c)  20 miles per hour in any alley; and 
(d)  Any speed not in excess of the speed limit designated by official traffic control devices. 
(3)  No driver of a vehicle shall fail to decrease the speed of such vehicle from an otherwise lawful speed to reasonable and prudent speed when a special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions. 
(4)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no person shall drive a low-power scooter on a roadway at a speed in excess of 40 miles per hour. 
(5)  It shall not be a defense to prosecution for a violation of this section that: 
(a)  The defendant's conduct was not performed intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence; or 
(b)  The defendant's conduct was performed under a mistaken belief of fact, including, but not limited to, a mistaken belief of the defendant regarding the speed of the defendant's vehicle; 
(c)  The defendant's vehicle has a greater operating or fuel-conserving efficiency at speeds greater than the maximum lawful speed limit. 
(6)  The conduct of a driver of a vehicle which would otherwise constitute a violation of this section is justifiable and not unlawful when: 
(a)  It is necessary as an emergency measure to avoid an imminent or public or private injury which is about to occur by reason of a situation occasioned or developed through no conduct of said driver and which is of sufficient gravity that, according to ordinary standards of intelligence and morality, the desirability and urgency of avoiding the injury clearly outweigh the desirability of avoiding the consequences sought to be prevented by this section; or 
(b)  With respect to authorized emergency vehicles, the applicable conditions for exemption, as set forth in Section 108, exist. 
(7)  The provisions of this section shall not be construed to relieve the party alleging negligence under this section in any civil action for damages from the burden of proof proving that such negligence was the proximate cause of an accident. 
T.  Section 1201 of Part 12 of the Model Traffic Code, concerning parking of vehicles, is amended to read as follows: 
1201. Moving a parked vehicle. 
    No person shall move a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or parked unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. 
U.  Section 1202 of Part 12 of the Model Traffic Code, concerning parking of vehicles, is amended to read as follows: 
1202. Parking or abandonment of vehicles. 
    No person shall stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle, either attended or unattended, upon the paved or improved main-traveled part of the highway. Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the driver of any vehicle which is disabled while on the paved or improved main-traveled portion of a highway in such a manner and to such extent that is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving such disabled vehicle in such position, subject, when applicable, to emergency lighting requirements set forth in Section 230. 
V.  Section 1203 of Part 12 of the Model Traffic Code is amended to read as follows: 
1203. Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
    No person shall park a vehicle upon a roadway for the principle purpose of: 
(a)  Displaying such vehicle for sale; 
(b)  Washing, greasing, painting or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency; 
(c)  Displaying advertising; 
(d)  Selling from such vehicle or storing merchandise for sale or for any other commercial use of any kind or nature, except as specifically allowed by this Code. 
W.  Subsection (1) of Section 1204 of Part 12 of the Model Traffic Code, concerning parking of vehicles, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
1204. Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited in specified places. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in Subsection (4) of this section, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or an official traffic control device, in any of the following places: 
(a)  On a sidewalk; 
(b)  Within an intersection; 
(c)  On a crosswalk; 
(d)  Between a safety zone and an adjacent curve or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of the safety zone unless the traffic authority indicates a different length by signs or markings; 
(e)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic; 
(f)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of the street; 
(g)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel; 
(h)  On any railroad tracks; 
(i)  Within an alley, except during any expeditious loading and unloading of merchandise or freight and in no case shall a stop for loading or unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes; 
(j)  On a controlled access highway; 
(k)  In any alley, if standing or parking would obstruct through traffic, except for the timely loading and unloading of vehicles; 
(l)  At any other place where official signs prohibit stopping. 
X.  Section 1204 of Part 12 of the Model Traffic Code, concerning parking of vehicles, is further amended to add a new Subsection (7) to read as follows: 
(7)  At any place within this municipality where clearly marked signs or markings are posted by the owner, or lessee, of private property, giving notice of any stopping, standing or parking restrictions or prohibitions, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any manner in violation of the provisions contained on such sign or signs. Any violation thereof shall be punished as in other cases of unlawful parking; provided, however, that the Police Department shall require the owner or lessee of the property to sign a complaint prior to taking action. 
Y.  Section 1205 of Part 12 of the Model Traffic Code, concerning parking of vehicles, is amended to read as follows: 
1205. Parking at curb or edge of roadway. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a two-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels parallel to and within 12 inches of the right-hand curb or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder. 
(2)  Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a one-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway in the direction of authorized traffic movement, with its right-hand wheels within 12 inches of the right-hand curb or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder or with its left-hand wheels within 12 inches of the left-hand curb or as close as practicable to the edge of the left-hand shoulder. 
(3)  On those streets which have been approved and signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than at an angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. 
Z.  Section 1206 of Part 12 of the Model Traffic Code, concerning unattended motor vehicle, is amended to read as follows: 
1206. Unattended motor vehicle. 
(1)  No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without effectively setting the brake thereon, and, when standing upon any grade, said person shall turn the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway in such a manner as to prevent the vehicle from rolling onto the traveled way. 
(2)  No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall allow a motor vehicle to be left unattended at idle unless all doors and windows are secure and locked to prevent entry into the vehicle. 
(3)  No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall allow a vehicle to idle for more than five minutes in any one-hour period unless: 
(a)  The ambient outside air temperature has been less than 20 degrees Fahrenheit for each hour of the previous 24-hour period; or 
(b)  The latest hourly ambient outside air temperature is less than ten degrees Fahrenheit; and 
(c)  Under no circumstance, unless specifically authorized in writing by the Town Manager or Chief of Police, or as permitted by a special use permit, shall a vehicle be left at idle for longer than 15 minutes. 
(4)  The idling restrictions described in this section shall not apply to emergency vehicles, to vehicles engaged in traffic control operations, to vehicles which are being serviced, to vehicles that must idle to operate auxiliary equipment, including, but not limited to, pumps, compressors or refrigeration units, or to vehicles en route to a destination that are stopped by traffic congestion. 
(5)  The idling restrictions described in this section applies to transportation vehicles, as defined below, except that the time during which transportation vehicles are actively loading or discharging passengers may not be included in the computation of the five minute period described in Subsection (3) of this section. A transportation vehicle shall be defined for purposes of this section to mean motor vehicles designed to transport a minimum of 16 persons. 
AA.  Subsection (1) of Section 1208 of Part 12 of the Model Traffic Code, concerning parking privileges for disabled persons, is amended to read as follows: 
1208. Parking privileges for persons with disabilities-applicability. 
(1)  As used in this section: 
(a)  "License plate or placard" means a license plate or placard issued pursuant to C.R.S. § 42-3-204(3). 
(b)  "Person with a disability" has the meaning provided for such term in C.R.S. § 42-3-204(1). 
BB.  Part 12 of the Model Traffic Code is amended to include the additional Section 1212 to read as follows: 
1212. Parking on emergency snow routes. 
    During a snow event, it shall be unlawful for a person to stand or park a vehicle on the side of a street that constitutes an emergency snow route with even numbered addresses on even numbered calendar days; and the side of the street that constitutes an emergency snow route with odd numbered addresses on odd numbered calendar days from 5:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. For the purposes of this section, a "snow event" shall begin when there are two inches of undrafted snow accumulation and shall remain in effect for 72 hours after the snow fall ends. Vehicles parked in violation of this section shall be subject to being towed pursuant to Section 11.12.010. 
CC.  Section 1401 of Part 14 of the Model Traffic Code is amended to read as follows: 
1401. Reckless driving. 
    Any person who drives any motor vehicle, bicycle, electrical assisted bicycle, or low-power scooter anywhere within this Town in such a manner as to indicate either a willful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property is guilty of reckless driving. A person convicted of reckless driving of a bicycle or electrical assisted bicycle shall not be subject to the provisions of C.R.S. § 42-2-127. 
DD.  Section 1402 of Part 14 of the Model Traffic Code is amended to read as follows: 
1402. Careless driving. 
    Any person who drives any motor vehicle, bicycle, electrical assisted bicycle, or low-power scooter anywhere within this municipality in a careless and imprudent manner without due regard for the width, grade, curves, corners, traffic, and use of the streets and highways and all other attendant circumstances is guilty of careless driving. A person convicted of careless driving of a bicycle or electrical assisted bicycle shall not be subject to the provisions of C.R.S. § 42-2-127. 
EE.  Subsection (3) of Section 1502 of Part 15 of the Model Traffic Code, concerning motorcycles, is amended to read as follows: 
1502. Riding on motorcycles. 
(3)  No person shall operate a motorcycle while carrying packages, bundles or other articles which prevent the person from keeping both hands on the handlebars. 
FF.  The definitions section of the Model Traffic Code is amended as follows: 
Meaning of words. 
    Whenever any words and phrases used are defined in the "definitions" section of the 2010 Model Traffic Code for Colorado, they shall have such meaning ascribed to them. In all cases where the definition or meaning of a word is not set forth and its meaning is not sufficiently apparent in its connection with the subject, the definition given in Webster's Dictionary shall be taken as the true meaning. 
GG.  The definitions section of the Model Traffic Code is amended to add certain definitions as stated below, retaining all other definitions in the Model Traffic Code. 
(7.5)  "Barricade" means a portable or fixed barrier having object markings, including, but not limited to, traffic cones, used to close all or a portion of the right-of-way to vehicular traffic. 
(28.5)  "Electrical assisted bicycle" means a vehicle having two tandem wheels or two parallel wheels and one forward wheel, fully operable pedals, an electric motor not exceeding 750 watts of power, and a top motor speed of 20 miles per hour. 
(28.7)  "Electric personal assistive mobility device" or "EPAMD" means a self-balancing, non-tandem two-wheeled device, designed to transport only one person, that is powered solely by an electric propulsion system producing an average power output of no more than 750 watts. 
(49.5)  "Low-power scooter" means a self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for use on the roadways with not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, no manual clutch, and either of the following: 
(a)  A cylinder capacity not exceeding 50 cubic centimeters if powered by internal combustion; or 
(b)  A wattage not exceeding 4,476 if powered by electricity. 
The term "low-power scooter" shall not include a toy vehicle, bicycle, electrical assisted bicycle, wheelchair, or any device designed to assist mobility-impaired people who use pedestrian rights-of-way. 
(60)(c)  "Motorized skateboard" means any self-propelled device that has a motor or engine, a deck designed to be stood or sat upon by the operator, on which a person may ride, which may or may not have handlebars and has at least two wheels in contact with the ground. However, a wheelchair or other special motorized unit designed for and used by a person(s) physically disabled to assist their mobility shall not be considered a motorized skateboard. 
(Code 1972, § 11.04.040; Ord. No. 29, § 1, 2014; Ord. No. 08-2018, § 1, 3-27-2018) 
Section 11.04.040. - Application. 
    This chapter shall apply to every street, alley, sidewalk area, driveway, park, and to every other public way or public place or public parking area, either within or outside the corporate limits of this municipality, the use of which this municipality has jurisdiction and authority to regulate. The provisions of Sections 1211, 1401, 1402 and 1413 of the adopted Model Traffic Code, respectively, concerning limitations on backing, reckless driving, careless driving, and eluding a police officer, shall apply not only to public places and ways but also throughout this municipality. Pursuant to Section 103 of the Model Traffic Code, all stop sign regulations and speed limits shall be enforced upon any way which is open to travel by the public by motor vehicles and which is privately maintained when appropriated signs giving notice of such enforcement are erected at the entrances to such ways. In addition, as authorized by Section 1204 of the Model Traffic Code, as amended, the owner or lessee of any private property available for public use in the Town may request in writing that specified areas on such property be designated for use only by authorized vehicles or only at specified times, or may prohibit parking entirely, and upon acceptance by motion of the Board of Trustees, these private rights-of-way shall be clearly marked by the owner or lessee with official traffic control devices. It is unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in violation of any such sign or marking. 
(Code 1972, § 11.04.060) 
Section 11.04.050. - Penalties for violation. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided for in this section, any person who violates any provision of the Model Traffic Code shall be deemed to have committed a non-criminal traffic offense. Every person who is convicted of, who admits liability for, or against whom a judgment is entered, for a non-criminal traffic offense shall be penalized by imposition of a fine in an amount not less than $5.00 and not greater than $500.00. The presiding Judge of the Municipal Court shall promulgate a schedule of penalties for all non-criminal traffic offenses contained in the Model Traffic Code. Said schedule shall be prominently posted in the office of the Municipal Court Clerk. 
B.  The following criminal traffic offenses shall constitute Class A and B municipal offenses: 
Class B Municipal Offenses 

(punishable by a maximum fine of $500.00 and/or maximum imprisonment of six months) MTC1101(1) and (2) Speeding (if the alleged violator is accused of exceeding the prima facie speed limit by more than 19 mph); MTC1101(3) Special hazards (if the alleged violation has caused, or contributed to the cause of, an accident resulting in appreciable damage to property of another or an injury or the death to any person); Class A Municipal Offenses 

(punishable by a maximum fine of $2,650.00 and/or maximum imprisonment of 1 year) MTC1105 Speed contest; MTC1401 Reckless driving; MTC1402 Careless driving (if the violation has caused, or contributed to the cause of, an 
accident resulting in appreciable damage to property of another or an injury or death to any person); MTC1409 Compulsory insurance; MTC1413 Eluding or attempting to elude a police officer; MTC1903 Failure to stop for school buses; and Any other offense contained in the Model Traffic Code resulting in an accident 
causing personal injury or substantial property damage.  
(Code 1972, § 11.04.070) 
Section 11.04.060. - Procedure, non-criminal traffic offenses. 
A.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Rule 223(a) and (b) of the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure, or any other provision of law, the right of a jury trial shall not be available at a hearing where the cited person is charged with a non-criminal traffic offense. In addition, no person charged with a non-criminal traffic offense shall be afforded the right of court-appointed counsel. 
B.  The Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure shall apply to any hearing where the cited person is charged with a non-criminal traffic offense, unless any of the rules are clearly inapplicable. The burden of proof shall be upon the people beyond a reasonable doubt. 
C.  An appeal from final judgment on a non-criminal traffic offense shall be made in accordance with Rule 237 of the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure and C.R.S. Title 13, Art. 10. 
D.  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, no person against whom a judgment has been entered for a non-criminal traffic offense shall collaterally attack the validity of that judgment unless such attack is commenced within three months after the date of entry of the judgment. The only exceptions to the time limitations shall be: 
1.  A case in which the court entering judgment did not have jurisdiction over the subject matter of the alleged infraction; 
2.  A case in which the court entering judgment did not have jurisdiction of the person of the violator; 
3.  Where the court finds by a preponderance of the evidence that the failure to seek relief within the applicable time period was caused by an adjudication of incompetence or by commitment of the violator to an institution for treatment as a mentally ill person; or 
4.  Where the court finds that the failure to seek relief within the applicable time period was the result of circumstances amounting to justifiable excuse or excusable neglect. 
E.  At any time that a person is cited for the commission of any non-criminal traffic offense, the citing officer shall give a notice to the person in charge of or operating the motor vehicle involved, which notice shall be in the form of a penalty assessment notice. 
F.  The penalty assessment notice tendered by the citing officer shall contain the name and address of such person, the license number of the vehicle involved, if any, the number of such person's driver's license, the nature of the offense, the amount of the penalty prescribed for such offense, the date of the notice, the time and place and when and where such person shall appear in court in the event such penalty is not paid, and a place for such person to execute a signed acknowledgment of liability and an agreement to pay the penalty prescribed within 20 days as well as such other information as may be required by law to constitute such notice as a summons and complaint to appear in court, should the prescribed penalty not be paid within the time period. 
G.  One copy of the notice shall be given to the violator by the citing officer. 
H.  The time specified in the notice to appear shall be at least 21 days, but not more than 45 days after such citation, unless the person cited shall demand an earlier hearing. 
I.  Whenever the alleged violator refuses to sign or accept the penalty assessment notice, tender of such notice by the citing officer to the alleged violator shall constitute service of a summons and complaint. 
J.  In the event a person who has been cited for a non-criminal traffic offense fails to pay the penalty assessment within the time period specified in the penalty assessment notice, he shall make an appearance and answer the complaint against him. If the alleged violator answers that he is liable, judgment shall be entered against him, and he shall be assessed the appropriate penalty on the complaint, and if he denies liability, a trial shall be held within the time period prescribed in Rule 248 of the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure. If the alleged violator fails to appear for a final hearing, a default judgment shall be entered against him, and he shall be assessed the appropriate penalty and applicable court costs. 
K.  In the event a person who has been cited for a non-criminal traffic offense fails to pay the penalty assessment within the time period specified in the penalty assessment notice and fails to appear at the time and place specified in the notice, a default judgment shall be entered against him, and he shall be assessed the appropriate penalty and court costs. The Clerk of the Municipal Court may proceed to collect this judgment as provided by law, and shall certify the same to the department of revenue as provided in C.R.S. § 42-4-1709(7). 
L.  If the alleged violator is cited for a non-criminal traffic offense, he shall be privileged to answer the complaint made against him in the manner provided in the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure. The maximum penalty which may be imposed shall not exceed the penalty set forth in the penalty assessment notice. 
M.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to violations specified in Subsection (B) of this section, nor shall they apply when it appears that the alleged violator has, in the course of the same transaction, violated one of the provisions referred to in Section 11.04.050(B), and has also violated one or more of the other provisions of the Model Traffic Code. 
N.  If a person receives a penalty assessment notice for a violation under this Chapter 11.04 and such person pays the fine and surcharge for the violation on or before the date the payment is due, the points assessed for the violation are reduced as follows, in the manner and to the extent permitted by. C.R.S. § 42-127(5.5) and (5.6). 
1.  For a violation having an assessment of three or more points, the points are reduced by two points. 
2.  For a violation having an assessment of two points, the points are reduced by one point. 
(Code 1972, § 11.04.080) 
Section 11.04.070. - Procedure for parking violations. 
A.  Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the parking, standing or stopping provisions of the Model Traffic Code, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user and shall conspicuously affix to the vehicle a penalty assessment notice directing the driver to respond and answer the charge at a place and time specified in said notice. 
B.  In any prosecution charging a violation of any provision of this section, proof that the vehicle described in the notice was parked or stopped in violation of such provision, together with proof that the defendant named in the notice was, at the time of such violation, the registered owner of the vehicle, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the registered owner was the person who parked or stopped the vehicle at the time and place of the violation. 
C.  In addition to any other liability provided for in the Model Traffic Code, the owner of a motor vehicle who is engaged in the business of leasing or renting motor vehicles is liable for payment of a parking violation fine unless the owner of the leased or rented motor vehicle can furnish sufficient evidence that the vehicle was, at the time of the parking violation, in the care, custody or control of another person. To avoid liability for payment, the owner of the motor vehicle is required, within a reasonable time after notification of the parking violation, to furnish to the Town prosecutor the name and address of the person or company who leased, rented or otherwise had the care, custody or control of such vehicle. As a condition to avoid liability for payment of a parking violation, any person or company who leases or rents motor vehicles to another person shall attach to the leasing or rental agreement a notice stating that, pursuant to the requirements of this section, the operator has the care, custody or control of the motor vehicle. The notice shall inform the operator that the operator's name and address shall be furnished to the Town prosecutor when a parking violation fine is incurred by the operator. 
D.  Any person charged with a parking, stopping or standing violation under the Model Traffic Code for which a penalty assessment notice may be issued and for which payment of a fine may be made to the Municipal Court shall have the option of paying such fine within the date, time and at the place specified in said notice upon entering a plea of guilty and upon waiving appearance in court; or may have the option of depositing any required lawful bail, and upon a plea of not guilty shall be entitled to a trial to the court before the Municipal Judge. 
E.  Payment of a penalty assessment notice by the person to whom the notice is tendered shall constitute an acknowledgment of guilt by such person of his violation of the offense stated in such notice. 
F.  Payment of the prescribed fine shall be deemed a complete satisfaction for the violation, and the Municipal Court, upon accepting the prescribed fine, shall issue a receipt to the violator acknowledging payment thereof. A check tendered and accepted and on which payment is received shall be deemed sufficient. 
(Code 1972, § 11.04.090) 
Section 11.04.080. - Interpretation. 
    This chapter shall be so interpreted and construed as to effectuate its general purpose to conform with the State's uniform system for the regulation of vehicles and traffic. Article and section headings of this chapter and the adopted Model Traffic Code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or extent of the provisions of any article or section thereof. 
(Code 1972, § 11.04.100) 
Section 11.04.090. - Copies on file and available for sale. 
    At least one copy of the Model Traffic Code for Colorado, 2010 Edition, together with one copy of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk, or in the office of the Police Department as provided by C.R.S. § 31-16-206. The Clerk shall at all times maintain a reasonable supply of copies of the Model Traffic Code for Colorado, 2010 Edition, available for purchase by the public at a moderate price. 
(Code 1972, § 11.04.110; Ord. No. 18, § 1, 2013) 
CHAPTER 11.08. - SNOWMOBILES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C.R.S. § 33-14-101 et seq. 

Section 11.08.010. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Operate means to ride in or on and control the operation of a snowmobile. 
    Operator means every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a snowmobile. 
    Owner means a person, other than a lienholder, having the property in or title to a snowmobile and entitled to the use or possession thereof. 
    Snowmobile means a self-propelled vehicle primarily designed for travel on snow or ice or on natural terrain, and steered or supported in part by skis, belts, wheels, runners or cleats. 
    Street, road, or highway means the entire right-of-way between boundary lines of any of such public ways when any part thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter of right for the purpose of motor vehicle travel. 
(Code 1972, § 11.08.010; Ord. No. 156, § 1, 1972) 
Section 11.08.020. - Use. 
    It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile: 
A.  On the private property of any person without the express permission of the owner of said property. 
B.  On publicly owned land, including school property, park property, playgrounds, and recreation areas, except where otherwise permitted herein. 
C.  On the streets, roads, highways or alleys of the municipality, except that a person may operate a snowmobile upon such streets, roads, highways or alleys solely for the limited purpose of obtaining access to and from the Town limits. 
D.  In any manner so as to create loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which disturbs, annoys or interferes with the peace and quiet of other persons. 
(Code 1972, § 11.08.020; Ord. No. 156, § 2, 1972) 
Section 11.08.030. - Regulations. 
    The operator of a snowmobile, when legally operating the same as provided in Section 11.08.020(C), shall conform to and abide by all State statutes and regulations and municipal regulations and ordinances governing the movement of motor vehicle traffic and the operation of motor vehicles within the Town, and such operator shall expressly comply with the Model Traffic Code for Colorado Municipalities currently in effect in the Town. 
(Code 1972, § 11.08.030; Ord. No. 156, § 3, 1972) 
Section 11.08.040. - State law. 
    All snowmobile owners and operators shall strictly comply with all State statutes governing the registration, ownership, and operation of snowmobiles, including, but not by law of limitation, C.R.S. § 33-14-101 et seq. 
(Code 1972, § 11.08.040; Ord. No. 156, § 4, 1972) 
Section 11.08.050. - Public areas. 
    The other provisions of this chapter notwithstanding, the Board of Trustees shall have the authority to designate public areas that may be available for snowmobile use, and shall have the authority to supervise and regulate the use and operation of snowmobiles on said public areas. 
(Code 1972, § 11.08.050; Ord. No. 156, § 5, 1972) 
CHAPTER 11.09. - OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLES 

Section 11.09.010. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall have the meanings hereinafter designated unless such meaning is excluded by an express provision. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Off-highway vehicle means any self-propelled vehicle which is designed to travel on wheels in contact with the ground, which is designed primarily for use off of the public highways, and which is generally and commonly used to transport persons for recreational purposes, as further defined in C.R.S. Title 33, Art. 14.5 
    Off-highway vehicle route means any road, trail, or other public way owned or managed by the Town and designated for off-highway vehicle travel. 
(Code 1972, § 11.09.010) 
Section 11.09.020. - Off-highway vehicle routes designated. 
    In accordance with C.R.S. § 33-14.5-108, all Town streets, roads, and alleys, except any street or road which is part of the State Highway System, within the Town are hereby designated as limited off-highway vehicle routes. Off-highway vehicles shall be permitted on such routes for the limited purpose of traveling to or from the owner's or operator's residence or place of storage directly to or from a recreational site that allows the use of such vehicles. 
(Code 1972, § 11.09.020) 
Section 11.09.030. - Regulations concerning the operation of off-highway vehicles within the Town. 
    No off-highway vehicle shall be operated on the public streets, roads, and alleys within the Town except in accordance with the following: 
A.  Every off-highway vehicle operated on the Town's streets, roads and alleys shall be currently registered with the State Division of Parks and Wildlife. 
B.  No owner of an off-highway vehicle shall operate such vehicle, or permit it to be operated, on the Town's streets, roads and alleys when the owner has failed to have an insurance policy complying with the requirements for motor vehicles or a certificate of self-insurance in full force and effect. When an accident occurs, or when requested to do so following any lawful traffic contact, or during an investigation by a peace officer, no owner or operator of an off-highway vehicle shall fail to present to the requesting officer immediate evidence of a complying policy or certificate of self-insurance in full force and effect as required by law. 
C.  No person shall operate an off-highway vehicle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then-existing, and in no event greater than 15 miles per hour. 
D.  Any person who drives an off-highway vehicle in such a manner as to indicate either a wanton or willful disregard for the safety of persons or property shall be deemed guilty of reckless operation of an off-highway vehicle. 
E.  Any person who operates an off-highway vehicle in a careless and imprudent manner, without due regard for the width, grade, curves, corners, traffic, pedestrians and use of the streets, and all other attendant circumstances, shall be deemed guilty of careless operation of an off-highway vehicle. 
F.  A person operating an off-highway vehicle on any street or alley shall observe all official traffic control devices, including signs and signals, as set forth in the Model Traffic Code for Colorado Municipalities, as adopted by reference by the Town, and shall further operate such off-highway vehicle in the manner required for vehicles under the Model Traffic Code for Colorado Municipalities, as adopted by reference by the Town, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
G.  No off-highway vehicle shall be operated on any public street, road, or alley between the hours of sunset and sunrise unless such off-highway vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted headlamp and one lighted taillamp, each having the minimum candlepower prescribed by the regulations of the State. 
H.  No off-highway vehicle shall be operated on any public street, road, or alley unless such off-highway vehicle is equipped with brakes and a muffler and spark arrester which conform to the standards prescribed by the regulations of the State. 
I.  No person, shall operate an off-highway vehicle within the Town unless such person has a current valid driver's license and is at least 16 years of age. 
J.  Any operator of an off-highway vehicle on Town streets and alleys that is under the age of 18 years shall wear a safety helmet. In the case of dune buggies, any person under the age of 16 years shall have the proper safety restraints as required by C.R.S. § 42-4-237 while such vehicle is operated on Town streets and alleys. 
K.  An off-highway vehicle operated within the Town shall not carry more people than such vehicle is designed to carry. 
L.  An off-highway vehicle operated on Town streets and alleys shall not tow objects or people behind such vehicle. 
M.  No off-highway vehicle shall be operated on sidewalks within the Town. 
N.  Operators of off-highway vehicles on Town streets and alleys shall use proper hand signals to warn other drivers of their intentions such as to turn or stop. 
O.  All operators of off-highway vehicles within the Town shall wear proper eye protection. 
(Code 1972, § 11.09.030) 
Section 11.09.040. - Penalties. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person who violates any of the provisions of Sections 11.09.020 and 11.09.030(A), (B) and (D) commits a Class B municipal offense. Any person who violates any other provision of this chapter, not resulting in appreciable damage to the property of another or any injury or death to any person, commits a non-criminal municipal offense. Any violation of this chapter which does result in appreciable damage to the property of another or an injury or death to any person shall be deemed a Class B municipal offense. The Municipal Judge is hereby authorized to promulgate a penalty assessment schedule for violations of this chapter in accordance with Rule 210(b)(5) of the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure. 
(Code 1972, § 11.09.040; Ord. No. 16, § 1, 2014) 
CHAPTER 11.10. - ABANDONED AND JUNKED VEHICLES 

Section 11.10.010. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned motor vehicle means: 
A.  Any motor vehicle left unattended on private property for a period of 72 hours or longer without the consent of the owner or lessee of such property or his legally authorized agent; 
B.  Any motor vehicle left unattended on public property, including any portion of a public right-of-way, within the Town for a period of 24 hours or longer; or 
C.  Any motor vehicle stored in an impound lot at the request of its owner or the owner's agent or the Eagle Police Department and not removed from the impound lot according to the agreement with the owner or agent or within 72 hours of the time the Eagle Police Department notifies the owner or agent that the vehicle is available for release upon payment of any applicable charges or fees. If the Eagle Police Department requested the storage, the provisions governing public tows as contained in Section 11.10.040 shall apply as of the time of abandonment. Otherwise, the private tow provisions contained in Section 11.10.060 shall apply as of the time of abandonment. 
    Disabled motor vehicle means any motor vehicle which is stopped or parked, either tended or unattended, upon a public right-of-way and which is, due to any mechanical failure or any inoperability because of collision, fire, or other such injury, temporarily inoperable under its own power. 
    Junked motor vehicle means: 
A.  Any motor vehicle three years old or older; and 
B.  Extensively damaged, such damage including, but not limited to, any of the following: a broken window, windshield, or both; missing wheels, tires, motor or transmission; and 
C.  Apparently inoperable. 
    Operator means a person or a firm licensed by the Public Utilities Commission as a towing carrier. 
    Private property means any real property which is not public property. 
    Private tow means any tow of an abandoned or junked motor vehicle not requested by the Eagle Police Department. 
    Public property means any real property having its title, ownership, use, or possession held by the Federal government, the State, any county or municipality, or other governmental entity of this State. 
    Public tow means any tow of an abandoned or junked motor vehicle requested by the Eagle Police Department. 
(Code 1972, § 11.10.010; Ord. No. 12, § 1, 2008) 
Section 11.10.020. - Abandonment of motor vehicles prohibited. 
    No person shall knowingly abandon any motor vehicle upon public property or upon private property other than his own. Violation of this section shall constitute a Class B municipal offense. Each separate day or portion thereof, during which said violation continues, shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1972, § 11.10.020; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 132, 2001) 
Section 11.10.030. - Junked vehicles prohibited. 
A.  No person shall knowingly leave any partially dismantled, wrecked, discarded, junked or unlicensed vehicle on any public property within the Town. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person who is the owner of any vehicle or any person who is in the charge or control of any property within the Town, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, to knowingly permit or allow a wrecked, junked, unlicensed or discarded vehicle to remain on such property longer than 30 days; provided that this subsection shall not apply with regard to a vehicle in an enclosed building; a vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise; or a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained for impounded vehicles by the Town. 
C.  Any person violating the provisions of this section commits a Class B municipal offense. Each separate day or any portion thereof, during which said violation continues, shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1972, § 11.10.030; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 133, 2001) 
Section 11.10.040. - Abandoned and junked motor vehicles, public tow. 
A.  Any police officer who finds a motor vehicle which he has reasonable grounds to believe has been abandoned or junked shall require such motor vehicle to be removed or cause the same to be removed and placed in storage in any impound lot designed or maintained by the Eagle Police Department. 
B.  Upon having an abandoned or junked motor vehicle towed, the Eagle Police Department shall ascertain, if possible, whether or not the motor vehicle has been reported stolen and, if so reported, the Police Department shall recover and secure the motor vehicle and notify its rightful owner. The Eagle Police Department shall have the right to recover from the owner its reasonable costs to recover and secure the motor vehicle. 
C.  As soon as possible, but in no event later than three working days after having an abandoned or junked motor vehicle towed, the Eagle Police Department shall report the same to the department of motor vehicles by first class or certified mail or by personal delivery, which report shall be on a form prescribed and supplied by the department of motor vehicles. The report shall contain the information required in C.R.S. § 42-4-1804(1)(c). 
D.  The Eagle Police Department, upon receipt of an ownership report from the department of motor vehicles, shall determine, from all available information and after reasonable inquiries, whether or not the abandoned or junked motor vehicle has been reported stolen and, if so reported, the Eagle Police Department shall recover and secure the motor vehicle and notify its rightful owner. The Eagle Police Department shall have the right to recover from the owner its reasonable costs to recover and secure the motor vehicle. 
E.  The Eagle Police Department, within five working days of the receipt of the ownership report from the department of motor vehicles, shall notify, by certified mail, the owner of record, if ascertained, and any lienholder, if ascertained, of the fact of such report and the claim, if any, of a lien under C.R.S. § 42-4-1806, and shall send a copy of such notice to the towing operator. The notice shall contain information that the motor vehicle has been reported abandoned or junked to the department of motor vehicles, the location of the motor vehicle, and the location from which it was towed; and that, unless claimed within 30 calendar days from the date the notice was sent as determined from the postmark on the notice, the motor vehicle is subject to sale. Such notice shall also inform the owner of record of his opportunity to request a hearing concerning the legality of the towing of his abandoned or junked motor vehicle, and that the Eagle Police Department may be contacted for that purpose. A request for hearing shall be made in writing to the Eagle Police Department within ten days of the postmark date of sending such notice. Such hearing, if requested, shall be conducted pursuant to Section 11.10.050. 
(Code 1972, § 11.10.040) 
Section 11.10.050. - Post-storage hearing. 
A.  Upon request, a hearing shall be conducted before the Eagle Municipal Court Judge within 72 hours after the receipt of the owner's request, excluding weekends and holidays. The failure of the owner to request or to attend a scheduled hearing shall satisfy the hearing requirement of this section. The sole issue before the Municipal Judge shall be whether there was probable cause to impound the vehicle in question. The burden of proof shall be on the Eagle Police Department to establish probable cause for the impoundment. 
B.  The term "probable cause to impound" shall mean such a state of facts as would lead a person of ordinary care and prudence to believe there was sufficient violation of this Code to grant legal authority for the removal of the vehicle. 
C.  The Municipal Judge shall conduct the hearing in an informal manner and shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence. The person demanding the hearing shall have the burden of establishing that such person has the right to the possession of the vehicle. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Municipal Judge shall prepare a written decision. A copy of such decision shall be provided to the person demanding the hearing and the registered owner of the vehicle (if not the person requesting the hearing). The Municipal Judge's decision shall in no way effect any criminal proceeding in connection with the impound in question, and any criminal charges in such proceeding may only be challenged in a court of competent jurisdiction. The decision of the Municipal Judge shall be final. 
D.  The Municipal Judge shall only determine that as to the vehicle in issue either: 
1.  There was probable cause to impound the vehicle; or 
2.  There was no such probable cause. 
Upon a finding of no probable cause, the motor vehicle shall be released to its owner and all towing and storage fees shall be paid by the Town. If the owner fails to present the decision of the Municipal Judge to the operator having custody of the vehicle within 24 hours of its receipt, excluding such days when the operator is not open for business, the owner shall assume liability for all subsequent storage charges. 
(Code 1972, § 11.10.050) 
Section 11.10.060. - Abandoned and junked motor vehicles, private tow. 
A.  Any owner or lessee, or his agent authorized in writing, may have an abandoned or junked motor vehicle removed from his property by having it towed and impounded by an operator. 
B.  Any operator having in his possession an abandoned or junked motor vehicle from a private tow shall immediately notify the Eagle Police Department as to the name of the operator and the location of the impound lot where the vehicle is located and a description of the abandoned or junked motor vehicle, including the make, model, color, and year, the number, issuing state, and expiration date of the license plate, and the vehicle identification number. Upon such notification, the Eagle Police Department shall ascertain, if possible, whether or not the vehicle has been reported stolen and, if so reported, the Police Department shall recover and secure the motor vehicle and notify its rightful owner. The Eagle Police Department shall have the right to recover from the owner its reasonable costs to recover and secure the vehicle. 
C.  Any operator shall, as soon as possible, but in no event later than 72 hours after receipt of the determination that such motor vehicle has not been reported stolen, report the same to the department of motor vehicles by first class or certified mail or by personal delivery, which report shall be on a form prescribed and supplied by the department of motor vehicles. The report shall contain the information required in C.R.S. § 42-4-2103(3)(b). 
D.  Within five working days of the receipt of an ownership report from the department of motor vehicles, the operator shall notify by certified mail or by personal delivery the owner of record and any lienholder. The operator shall send a copy of the notice by certified mail or by personal delivery to the Eagle Police Department. Such notice shall contain the following information: 
1.  That the identified motor vehicle has been reported abandoned or junked to the department of motor vehicles; 
2.  The claim, if any, of a lien under C.R.S. § 42-4-2105; 
3.  The location of the motor vehicle and the location from which it was towed; and 
4.  That, unless claimed within 30 calendar days from the date the notice was sent as determined from the postmark on the notice, the motor vehicle is subject to sale. 
(Code 1972, § 11.10.060) 
Section 11.10.070. - Towing and impoundment fees. 
    No motor vehicle towed, stored or impounded at the request of the Eagle Police Department, as provided in this chapter, shall be released until the charge for towing or otherwise removing such motor vehicle, together with the charge for storage for the same, as hereinafter set forth, are paid. The charge for towing an abandoned or junked motor vehicle shall not exceed the maximum amount set by the State Public Utilities Commission for such services. The charge for the storage of an abandoned or junked motor vehicle shall not exceed the maximum rate set by the Public Utilities Commission for vehicles impounded at the request of the Eagle Police Department. The maximum rates that may be charged for motor vehicles towed, stored or impounded at the request of the Eagle Police Department shall be fees and rates that are in compliance with said schedules posted by the Public Utilities Commission each year. 
(Code 1972, § 11.10.070; Amended Ord. No. 8-2013, § 3) 
Section 11.10.080. - Disposition of unclaimed vehicles. 
    Motor vehicles removed from public or private property at the request of the Eagle Police Department shall be placed in storage and shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of C.R.S. § 42-4-1805. 
(Code 1972, § 11.10.080) 
Section 11.10.090. - Entry upon private property. 
    The Chief of Police of the Eagle Police Department or any police officer is hereby authorized to go on private property for the purpose of making an investigation of any violation of this chapter and for the purpose of determining ownership and condition of any motor vehicle reasonably appearing to be in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 11.10.090) 
Section 11.10.100. - Waiver of liability. 
    Neither the Chief of Police, the Town Manager, any police officer, their designees, or any person acting under their direction or control shall be liable or responsible in any manner to the owner of the vehicle, the person claiming to be the owner of a motor vehicle, or any other person, for or on account of any damage to the motor vehicle or other property, or the loss or damage of or to any property which may be contained within the motor vehicle as a result of towing, storing or disposing of said motor vehicle pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 11.10.100; Amended Ord. No. 12-2004, § 9(part), 2004) 
CHAPTER 11.12. - EMERGENCY TOWING OF MOTOR VEHICLES 

Section 11.12.010. - Authority for immediate towing. 
    The Chief of Police of the Town or any police officer is hereby authorized to remove immediately, without prior notice to the owner or occupant, any motor vehicle from any public or private property under any of the circumstances hereinafter enumerated; the Board of Trustees hereby finding and determining that such vehicles under such circumstances constitute obstructions to traffic or public nuisances. 
A.  When a vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct, or when such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic; 
B.  When a vehicle upon a public way is so disabled so as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal; 
C.  When any vehicle is left unattended upon any street or parked illegally so as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic or left unattended upon any public street with engine running or with keys in the ignition switch or lock; 
D.  When any vehicle is parked or left standing upon any area or portion of a public street in violation of or contrary to a parking limitation or prohibition established by the traffic engineer, provided such area or portion of said public street has been posted with an official sign or signs giving notice both of the limitation and prohibition and of the fact that such area or portion of such street is a "tow away" area; 
E.  When a vehicle is parked in violation of any traffic ordinance and is an obstruction or hazard or potential obstruction or hazard to any lawful function or limits the normal access to a use of any public or private property; 
F.  When a driver of such vehicle is taken into custody by a police officer and the vehicle would thereby be left unattended upon a street, highway or restricted parking area or other public way; 
G.  When the driver of a vehicle is reasonably suspected of using license plates or a license permit unlawfully, misusing the license plates or license permit issued to him, or a vehicle is driven without proper license plates or license permit, or with no license plates or license permit, or driven with an invalid or expired license permit; 
H.  When the driver of a vehicle is driving without an operator's license or chauffeur's license which is current and valid, or who does not have such license in his immediate possession, or who drives a vehicle contrary to restrictions imposed upon his license, or who drives a vehicle while his operator's or chauffeur's license is denied, suspended, canceled or revoked by the State; 
I.  Where a vehicle is found parked on or near to any railroad tracts so as to block the same in any manner, or when any truck tractor or semi-trailer is parked in any parking metered space; 
J.  When a driver of any vehicle or the vehicle which he is driving is reasonably suspected of having been in any hit-and-run accident; 
K.  When any vehicle is reasonably suspected of being stolen or parts thereof to be stolen; or 
L.  When the driver of any vehicle is taken into custody for a suspected felony or misdemeanor, or when the vehicle is suspected of containing stolen goods or other contraband. 
(Code 1972, § 11.12.010) 
Section 11.12.020. - Impoundment. 
    Whenever, as authorized in this chapter, an officer or employee of the Town removes a vehicle from the place where it was left, the officer or employee shall give a notice in writing of such impoundment, as required in Section 11.10.040(E). Impoundment fees shall be as provided in Section 11.10.070. 
(Code 1972, § 11.12.020) 
Section 11.12.030. - Post-storage hearing. 
    Upon request, the owner of a motor vehicle removed pursuant to this chapter shall be entitled to a hearing as provided in Section 11.10.050. 
(Code 1972, § 11.12.030) 
Section 11.12.040. - Disposition of unclaimed vehicles. 
    Vehicles removed pursuant to this chapter shall be disposed of in a manner provided for in Section 11.10.080. 
(Code 1972, § 11.12.040) 
CHAPTER 11.14. - RESERVED 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 12-2019 , § 1, adopted May 14, 2019, repealed Ch. 11.14, §§ 11.14.010-11.14.160, which pertained to special events, parades and demonstrations and derived from Code 1972, §§ 11.14.010-11.14.160; Ord. No. 19, § 1, adopted 2004. 
Title 12 - WATER AND WASTEWATER COLLECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal utilities, C.R.S. § 31-15-707; water and water systems, C.R.S. § 31-15-708; sewer and sewer systems, C.R.S. § 31-15-709. 

I. - WATER SYSTEM 
CHAPTER 12.04. - DEFINITIONS 

Section 12.04.010. - Generally. 
    For the purpose of this Title, certain words, terms and phrases are defined and shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this chapter, unless otherwise more specifically defined or it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended. 
    Director means the Director of Public Works or Engineer of the Town, or his authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    Plant investment fee means tap fee, and the terms may be used interchangeably. 
    Service area means the corporate limits of the Town, the boundaries and limits of a water district served by the Town's water system, and any extension of the water system to serve structures or improvements which is approved by the Town Board. 
    Water main means a water line in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority. 
    Water service line means that part of the water system from the main line to and on any premises. 
    Water system means all facilities for appropriating, transporting, storing, pumping, treating and dispersing of water, whether privately or publicly owned. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
    Waterworks means all of the water system owned and operated by the Town. 
(Code 1972, §§ 12.04.010-12.04.140) 
CHAPTER 12.06. - WATER SYSTEM - GENERALLY 

Section 12.06.010. - Operation and control. 
    The operation and management of the water system shall be under the control of the Town Manager, who shall direct the construction of additions thereto, and the maintenance and operation thereof, and in all cases, not particularly provided for by this Title or other provisions of this Code, shall determine in what manner and upon what terms water may be taken from the water system by any property owner or water consumer and the character of the connections and appliances which may be made or used therefor. 
(Code 1972, § 12.06.010) 
Section 12.06.020. - Powers and duties generally of director. 
A.  The director shall, under the direction of the Town Manager, have charge of all facilities of the water system, and it shall be his duty to supervise the water system, and maintain and control the same as directed by the Town Manager and as provided in this Title. 
B.  The director shall have control of the laying of all water lines. The director shall have the general supervision of the installation of all taps, and water service lines or other connections with the water system and the regulation of the water supply to all consumers of water. He shall also have charge of and be responsible for all the tools, machinery, pipes, meters, fixtures, plumbing material, and all other apparatus and appliances owned by the Town or used by it in the maintenance and operation of the water system, and shall keep account of all such material and the manner in which the same is used, kept or disposed of. 
C.  The director may grant permission to any person employed by the Town to sprinkle the streets, or to any other person the Town Manager may authorize to draw water from the fire hydrants. 
(Code 1972, § 12.06.020) 
Section 12.06.030. - Repair of fire hydrants, unauthorized access. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the director to keep all fire hydrants in good repair and to test the same periodically to see if the same are in order, and he may let water from the hydrants, whenever it is necessary for the testing of the condition of the water system, or for purifying the water, or for the repairing of the water system, or for watering the trees in extreme need. 
B.  The members of the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District under the orders of the fire chief, or other officer in charge, shall at all times have free access to the fire hydrants in case of fire and for the purpose of cleaning, washing, or testing their pumping equipment or other apparatus. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person not authorized by the Town to open or operate any fire hydrant or draw water therefrom, or obstruct the approach thereto. 
(Code 1972, § 12.06.030) 
Section 12.06.040. - Vacant buildings, shutting off water. 
    Whenever any building or premises is vacated, it shall be the duty of the owner or owners, agent or agents thereof, to notify the director of such fact, so that water may be shut off; and all such buildings and premises shall be deemed to be occupied and water rents collected thereon unless such notice has been given. 
(Code 1972, § 12.06.040) 
Section 12.06.050. - Removal of corporation stop, curb stop, curb box or meter. 
    In case any owner of the premises on which water is used ceases to use water, and desires to disconnect his premises, he shall not be permitted to remove the corporation stop, curb stop, curb box or meter and appurtenances. Such devices are the property of the Town and shall be removed only by the order of the director. 
(Code 1972, § 12.06.050) 
Section 12.06.060. - Specifications for material, manner of construction. 
    Specifications for all labor, materials and equipment, manner of construction, and services required for the installation of all water distribution systems shall be as provided by this Title. 
(Code 1972, § 12.06.060) 
CHAPTER 12.07. - WATER IRRIGATION CONSERVATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 23-2018 , § 1, adopted July 24, 2018, repealed the former Ch. 12.07, §§ 12.07.010-12.07.070, and enacted a new Ch. 12.07 as set out herein. The former Ch. 12.07 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 21-2018 , § 1, adopted June 12, 2018. 

Section 12.07.010. - Purpose; adoption of regulations. 
    The Town desires to conserve water for the protection of the Town's municipal water supply system and to protect the health and quality of nearby Brush Creek, the Town's primary source of its potable water supply. In addition, prudent water conservation measures have been shown to extend the life of existing water supply infrastructure by minimizing the stress on the system caused by peak water demand. Therefore, the Public Works Director is authorized and directed to promulgate from time to time water conservation policies and regulations concerning the use of water from the Town's municipal water supply system or the diversion of water under water rights owned and/or controlled by the Town. 
(Ord. No. 23-2018 , § 1, 7-24-2018) 
Section 12.07.020. - Violations and penalties. 
A.  Any person or entity violating any of the provisions contained in the policies and regulations promulgated by the Board of Trustees concerning water irrigation conservation shall be subject to the following citations and fines: 
Offense Citation Municipal
Offense Maximum
Fine Maximum
Imprisonment 1 Door hanger and phone call 2 Door hanger, phone call, and warning letter $100.00 3 Warning letter and site visit Non- 
criminal $500.00 None 4 Class A $2,650.00 One year  
B.  Each day, or part thereof, during which a violation occurs, shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
C.  In the event any person or entity violates any of the provisions contained in the Town's water conservation policies and regulations, the Town shall have the right to enforce compliance with the same by an action in equity for any equitable remedy, including injunction and/or specific performance in the Eagle County District Court. 
(Ord. No. 23-2018 , § 1, 7-24-2018) 
CHAPTER 12.08. - WATER WORKS SYSTEM - CONSTRUCTION - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 12.08.010. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Contractor means any qualified person, persons or company duly authorized to do work. 
    Engineer, project, means an individual or firm authorized by the Town to design, inspect and act for it in matters pertaining to the construction of water lines. 
    Engineer, Town , means the Town Engineer, the Town Public Works Director or their authorized agents. 
(Code 1972, § 12.08.010) 
Section 12.08.020. - Water main extensions. 
    All construction, extension or enlargement of distribution mains to supply and distribute water to and throughout areas or additions shall be extended by the owner or developer of premises to be served by such lines from the existing distribution main to the point or points of the property line farthest from the existing distribution main. Application for said extension shall be made in writing and shall require the written consent of the Town Board. Such application shall include a map or plat of the right-of-way and map of proposed extension or enlargement prepared by a licensed land surveyor or civil engineer. All such extensions and enlargements shall be constructed by the prospective developer in accordance with the Town specifications contained in this Title. The sole cost and expense of such extensions and enlargements shall be the expense of the applicant unless otherwise specified in writing by the Town Board. 
(Code 1972, § 12.08.020) 
Section 12.08.030. - Construction, road cut permit, required when. 
    Prior to any excavation or trenching in dedicated Town streets or rights-of-way, a road cut permit shall be obtained from the Town in compliance with Chapter 13.17. 
(Code 1972, § 12.08.030) 
Section 12.08.040. - Protection of rivers and streams. 
    Any river or major stream crossing by a water line shall be fully encased with concrete and reinforced. The minimum dimension between the low point of the channel and the top of the concrete shall be one foot. Each crossing will be considered on an individual basis and all design work shall be done by a competent, registered engineer. 
(Code 1972, § 12.08.040) 
Section 12.08.050. - Construction, plans, information required. 
    As a condition to final approval and acceptance for maintenance of facilities by the Town, the owner shall have a complete and accurate set of as-built drawings prepared by a competent, registered surveyor. These as-builts shall contain at least the following information: 
A.  Line locations (plan view) to scale showing true horizontal dimensions and deflection angles and shown in relation to rights-of-way or easement boundaries; 
B.  Line profile with actual length, size of pipe, percent gradient and accurate grade or road profile; 
C.  Accurate three-point ties and locations for all hydrants, valves, curb stops, air-vac valves, and PRVs; 
D.  Accurate descriptions of all materials and appurtenances used for construction of facilities; 
E.  Locations of all other utilities and services encountered during construction; 
F.  Any additional data deemed necessary for the Town Engineer or adjudged pertinent by the project engineer; 
G.  Three complete sets of operation and maintenance manuals, electrical diagrams, mechanical drawings, structural drawings and architectural drawings of any facility such as a pumping station, PRV, chlorinator or related facility to be maintained by Town personnel upon final acceptance of said facility. 
(Code 1972, § 12.08.050) 
Section 12.08.060. - Acceptance of facilities for maintenance, standards and procedures. 
    There are several steps leading to the final approval and acceptance for maintenance of any water facility: 
A.  Periodic construction inspection by the Town Engineer or his staff; 
B.  Testing and approval of lines according to Sections 12.12.220 through 12.12.250; 
C.  Formal request for preliminary acceptance by owner; 
D.  Inspection and approval by the Town Engineer or his representative, including: 
1.  Valves: operation and straightness; 
2.  Hydrants: operation of hydrant and drainback valve; 
3.  All other equipment inspection for suitability and operation on an individual basis and as a functioning part of the system; 
E.  Inspection and approval of roads, shoulders, ditches, driveways and general cleanup by the Town Public Works Director; 
F.  Formal preliminary acceptance and partial release of the performance guarantee by the Town Board; 
G.  Mandatory one-year guaranty period during which the owner assumes the responsibility and costs of all maintenance and repair; 
H.  Formal final acceptance and full release of the performance guarantee by the Town Board contingent upon any and all repairs deemed necessary by the Town Engineer to facilities or roads being completed in a satisfactory manner; 
I.  At this point the Town assumes full responsibility for maintenance and repair except materials and equipment under any express guaranty by the manufacturer. 
(Code 1972, § 12.08.060) 
Section 12.08.070. - Construction, suspension of work. 
    The Town Engineer may at any time suspend the contractor's operations when the conditions of these specifications are not met or when an unsafe working condition prevails. 
(Code 1972, § 12.08.070) 
Section 12.08.080. - Revegetation. 
    Any work in rights-of-way or green areas owned or authorized for use by the public that disturbs or destroys the natural or existing environment shall include revegetation to be done to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer. 
(Code 1972, § 12.08.080) 
Section 12.08.090. - Town Engineer access to work. 
    The Town Engineer shall have access to all work being performed within the Town service area. 
(Code 1972, § 12.08.090) 
CHAPTER 12.12. - WATER DISTRIBUTION FACILITIES - TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS 

Section 12.12.010. - Applicability of regulations generally. 
    This chapter shall govern all labor, materials, equipment and services which are required for installation of all water distribution systems including pipe, valves, valve boxes, fittings, fire hydrants, air-vac valves, PRV valves, service taps and lines and all appurtenant items as mentioned in this chapter. Also included shall be the flushing, testing and disinfection of all water distribution facilities. All pipes shall be installed in conformance with the State Department of Public Health and Environment design disinfection procedure criteria. 
(Code 1972, § 12.12.010) 
Section 12.12.020. - Materials, specifications. 
    All materials shall be new, of the highest quality and meet the following specifications: 
A.  Ductile iron pipe. All water mains and services greater than two inches in diameter shall be DIP and shall be in accordance with ANSI Specifications A21.51-71, cement lined in accordance with A21.4-1971, with push-on or mechanical joints in accordance with ANSI Specifications A21.11-1972. All diameters up to and including 12-inch diameter pipe shall have a Class 50 wall thickness. All pipe 14 inches and larger in diameter shall have a Class 52 wall thickness. All DIP with push-on joints shall be connected by electrodes to permit electrical conductivity. 
B.  Gate valves shall be Mueller Resilient seat gate valves up to eight inches; ten inches and larger shall be butterfly type or approved equals. 
C.  Valve boxes shall be "Buffalo-Type" Mueller H10360, which are cast iron, 51/2-inch shaft with screw-type adjustment and a flare base. Valve boxes for valves over 12 inches in size shall be "Buffalo-Type" Mueller H10357 or approved equal. 
D.  Fittings shall be ductile iron in accordance with ANSI Specifications A21.10-71, with mechanical joints in accordance with ANSI Specifications A21.11-1972. 
E.  Fire hydrants shall be Mueller Centurion or approved equal and shall have a six-inch mechanical joint bottom connection, an automatic drain feature, open left, two 21/2-inch N.S.T. thread hose nozzles, one 41/2-inch N.S.T. thread pumper nozzle, one 11/2-inch N.S.T. operating nut, red in color and be adequate length for proper installation conditions. 
F.  Tapping sleeves. Depending upon the size of line being tapped and the size of the actual tap being made, the tapping sleeves shall be Mueller H615 or J.C.M. 412 series or approved equal. 
G.  Corporation stops shall be Mueller H15000 with cc threads or approved equal with outlet for flared copper. Corporation stops larger than one inch shall be Mueller or approved equal with NSP threads. 
H.  Curb stops shall be Mueller Oriseal Mark II H15174 with flared copper connections or approved equivalent. Curb stops larger than one inch shall be Mueller 110 compression connection. 
I.  Valve boxes for valves two-inch or less shall be Mueller H10334 with stationary red and either 88619 or 87081 lid or approved equal. 
J.  Service fittings shall be Mueller or approved equal with flared fittings. Fittings over one-inch in size shall be Mueller 110 compression connections. 
K.  Air-vac valves. 
L.  Pressure reducing valves. 
M.  Copper tubing. All service lines installed not using ductile iron pipe (generally, any service under two inches in diameter) shall be Type K seamless soft copper tubing. No plastic, wrought iron, cast iron, galvanized pipe or any other material other than that heretofore specified shall be used. 
(Code 1972, § 12.12.020) 
Section 12.12.030. - Pipe laying-Mains, depth and width requirements. 
    The trench shall be dug so that the pipe can be laid to the alignment and depth required, six feet being the minimum depth to cover. The trench shall be excavated only so far in advance of pipe laying as permitted by the Town Engineer. The trench shall be so braced and drained that the workmen may work therein safely and efficiently, and pipes can be laid in unwatered conditions. Local, State and Federal OSHA safety regulations shall be followed at all times and, when required, trenches shall be of extra width to permit the use of timbers, shoring, bracing, sheeting and trench boxes. The width of the trench shall be ample enough to permit the pipe to be laid and jointed properly and the backfill placed as specified. In no case will the trench width be less than 15 inches wider than the outside diameter of the pipe. Should the trench width or depth become excessive, the Town Engineer, at his option, may direct that special bedding and backfill measures be used to ensure that design loading of the pipe is not exceeded. 
(Code 1972, § 12.12.030) 
Section 12.12.040. - Same-Service, depth and width requirements. 
    The same specifications for main excavation shall be followed. The Town Engineer, at his option, may require any service to be laid deeper than six feet if site conditions warrant more depth for protection or prevention of freezing. 
(Code 1972, § 12.12.040) 
Section 12.12.050. - Excavations-Classifications. 
A.  There shall be two classifications of materials excavated from pipe and service line trenches. Criteria for each class of excavated material shall be as follows: 
1.  Earth excavation. This classification includes all soils and loose, broken and laminated rock or stones and boulders which can be reasonably ripped, broken and removed with skillfully operated, power driven excavating equipment having a bucket capacity of three-fourths yard or smaller. 
2.  Rock excavation. This classification includes all solid rock masses and boulders which cannot be excavated as specified under "earth excavation." 
B.  Where blasting is necessary, suitable weighted plank coverings or mattresses shall be provided to confine all materials lifted by the blasting within the trench or excavation area when a danger from flying debris exists (i.e., houses, structures, traffic). The contractor shall comply with all local, state and federal laws, ordinances, safety codes and OSHA regulations relative to the handling, storage and use of explosives and the protection of life and property. All blasting operations shall be under the direct supervision of a duly licensed person. The contractor shall be responsible for notifying all parties affected by blasting operations and shall be liable for all damages caused by his operations. 
(Code 1972, § 12.12.050) 
Section 12.12.060. - Same-Trench preparation. 
    The trench bottom shall be graded so that the pipe or service line will have continuous support over its entire length and will rest either on undisturbed soil or compacted fill. Any rocks over six inches in diameter in the trench bottom shall be removed and the resulting void filled with suitable fines. Bell holes shall be provided at each pipe joint to permit the jointing to be made properly. In all cases the trench shall be dewatered during pipe and service line installation. 
(Code 1972, § 12.12.060) 
Section 12.12.070. - Bedding and backfill-Materials. 
    Materials for bedding and backfill shall be: 
A.  Suitable fines. The suitable fines from the excavated material or trench sides shall not include any rock or stones over two inches in size, general debris, organics, expansive clays or frozen material. 
B.  Unclassified backfill. That portion of the excavated material not having rocks larger than six inches in size, general debris, organics, expansive clays or frozen material. 
C.  Imported bedding. When the trench bottom is unstable or below the water table, the Town Engineer will require a hard, durable 1 1 / 2 -inch washed aggregate bedding in the trench bottom to stabilize it. 
D.  If suitable fines cannot be obtained, the Town Engineer, depending on groundwater conditions, will direct the use of 11/2 inch washed aggregate or a three-fourths inch minus bedding material meeting the following specifications: 
Standard Size of Sieve Percent Passing Sieve by Weight 3/4" 100% No. 4 30-60% No. 8 25-50% No. 200 5-15% This material is commonly referred to as base material or Class C road base.  
(Code 1972, § 12.12.070) 
Section 12.12.080. - Bedding, preparation procedure. 
A.  If the trench has been over-excavated or excavated in rock (in which it shall be over-excavated a minimum of six inches), the trench shall then be backfilled with suitable fines and compacted to a minimum Modified Proctor Test value of 95 percent until the pipe or service line can rest with full bearing at the proper invert elevation. 
B.  After shaping the trench bottom so the pipe or service line has continuous support when placed, the bedding shall be inspected by the Town Engineer. The trench shall then be backfilled to the spring line of the pipe in one loose lift of suitable fines and compacted to a minimum value of 90 percent Modified Proctor Test. Special care shall be taken with this portion of the backfill to ensure proper filling and compaction under pipe haunches and to avoid damaging or moving the pipe. The trench shall then be filled and compacted using suitable fines from the spring line to 12 inches above the top of the pipe and compacted to a minimum value of 90 percent Modified Proctor Test. 
(Code 1972, § 12.12.080) 
Section 12.12.090. - Backfill, unclassified. 
    The remainder of the trench shall then be backfilled with unclassified backfill. The unclassified backfill shall not be placed by dozing over the edge of the trench, but rather by forming a gentle slope proceeding upgrade in the trench and in lifts not to exceed 12 inches. All material shall be compacted to a minimum value of 95 percent Modified Proctor Test. 
(Code 1972, § 12.12.090) 
Section 12.12.100. - Pipe, handling procedure for pipes and accessories at work site, responsibility for damage. 
A.  Proper alignment, tools and facilities shall be provided and used by the contractor for the safe and efficient prosecution of work. All pipe, fittings, valves, miscellaneous equipment and lines shall be carefully lowered into the trench by means of a derrick, ropes or suitable equipment to prevent damage to the materials, protective coatings and linings. Under no circumstances shall materials be dropped or dumped into the trench. 
B.  All lumps, blisters and excess coal tar coatings shall be removed from the bell and spigot ends of each pipe, and the outside of the spigot and the inside of the bell shall be wire-brushed and wiped clean and dry and free from soil and grease before the pipe is laid. 
C.  The pipe shall be so handled that the coating and lining will not be damaged. If, however, any part of the coating or lining is damaged, the repair shall be made by the contractor at his expense and in a manner satisfactory to the Town Engineer. 
(Code 1972, § 12.12.100) 
Section 12.12.110. - Installation-Procedure to keep pipe clear of foreign matter. 
    Blocking under the pipe shall not be used. Every precaution shall be taken to prevent foreign material from entering the pipe while it is being placed in the line. If the pipe-laying crew cannot put the pipe into the trench and in place without getting earth into it, the Town Engineer may require that before lowering the pipe into the trench, a heavy, tightly woven canvas bag of suitable size shall be placed over each end and left there until the connection is to be made to the adjacent pipe. During laying operations no debris, tools, clothing or other material shall be placed in the pipe. 
(Code 1972, § 12.12.110) 
Section 12.12.120. - Same-Alignment. 
    After placing a length of pipe in the trench, the spigot end shall be centered in the bell and the pipe forced home and brought to correct line and grade. Pipe and fittings which do not allow a sufficient and uniform space for joints shall be removed and replaced with pipe and fittings of proper dimensions to ensure such uniform space. Precautions shall be taken to prevent dirt from entering the joint space. 
(Code 1972, § 12.12.120) 
Section 12.12.130. - Same-Cutting of pipe, procedure. 
    The cutting of pipe for inserting valves and fittings of closure places shall be done in a neat and workmanlike manner without damage to the pipe or cement lining, leaving a smooth end at right angles to the axis of the pipe. The flame cutting of pipe by means of an oxyacetylene torch shall not be allowed. The cut end shall be beveled to allow the pipe to be jointed without damage to or displacement of the rubber gasket. 
(Code 1972, § 12.12.130) 
Section 12.12.140. - Same-Direction of pipe laying. 
    The direction of pipe laying shall be uphill with bell ends facing in the direction of laying, unless otherwise directed by the Town Engineer. 
(Code 1972, § 12.12.140) 
Section 12.12.150. - Same-Pipe deflection, procedure generally. 
    Wherever it is necessary to deflect the pipe from a straight line, either in the vertical or horizontal plane, to avoid obstructions or plumb gate valve stems, or where curves are necessary, the allowable amount of deflection shall be that indicated in Sections 12.12.160 and 12.12.170. 
(Code 1972, § 12.12.150) 
Section 12.12.160. - Same-Pipe deflection, push-on joints. 
    The last six inches outside of the spigot and inside of the bell of the push-on joint pipe shall be thoroughly cleaned of oil, grit, tar (other than standard coating) and other foreign matter from the joint. The gasket shall be placed in the bell with the large round side of the gasket first so it will spring into place over the bell head. A thin film of manufacturer supplied lubricant furnished with the pipe shall be applied to the inside surface of the gasket and also on the outside of the plain end of the pipe and its beveled edge. The plain end of the pipe shall then be wiped clean with a cloth and lifted and inserted just far enough to make contact with the gasket. The plain end shall then be forced all the way into the bell socket by crowbar, spade, jack, choker slings or other means acceptable to the Town Engineer. 
ALLOWABLE DEFLECTION PER JOINT 
Diameter Minimum Radius 
of Curvature Deflection in Inches 
per 18" Length 4" 205' 19" 6" 205' 19" 8" 205' 19" 10" 205' 19" 12" 205' 19" 14" 340' 11" 16" 340' 11" 18" 340' 11"  
(Code 1972, § 12.12.160) 
Section 12.12.170. - Same-Pipe deflection, mechanical joints. 
A.  The last eight inches outside of the spigot and inside of the bell of the mechanical joint shall be thoroughly cleaned to remove oil, grit, tar (other than standard coating) and other foreign matter from the joint, and then painted with a solution recommended by the pipe manufacturer. The gland shall then be slipped on the spigot end of the pipe with the lip extension of the gland toward the socket or bell end. The gasket shall be painted with the soap solution and placed on the spigot end with the thick edge toward the gland. The entire section of the pipe shall be pushed forward to seat the spigot end in the bell. The gasket shall then be pressed into place within the bell, being careful to have the gasket evenly located around the entire joint. The gland shall be moved along the pipe into position for bolting, all of the bolts inserted and the nuts screwed up tightly with the fingers. All nuts shall be tightened with a suitable (preferably torque-limiting) wrench. Torque range for the three-fourths inch nuts used with four inch through 24 inch ductile iron pipe shall be 60 to 90 pounds. 
B.  Nuts spaced 180 degrees apart shall be partially tightened in an alternate sequence until full torque is reached in order to produce an equal pressure on all parts of the gland and gasket. 
ALLOWABLE DEFLECTION PER JOINT 
Diameter Minimum Radius 
of Curvature Deflection in Inches 
per 18" Length 4" 125' 31" 6" 145' 27" 8" 195' 20" 10" 195' 20" 12" 195' 20" 14" 285' 131/2" 16" 285' 131/2" 18" 340' 11"  
(Code 1972, § 12.12.170) 
Section 12.12.180. - Same-Gate valves and valve boxes. 
    Gate valve locations shall be subject to final approval by the Town Engineer and shall be set plumb. Valves shall have the interior cleaned of all foreign matter before installation. Valves shall be inspected in opened and closed positions to ensure that all parts are in working condition. A valve box shall be set so that it is centered and plumb over the valve operating nut. Valves over six feet deep shall have operating extension. 
(Code 1972, § 12.12.180) 
Section 12.12.190. - Same-Fire hydrants. 
A.  Hydrant location shall be subject to final locations by the Town Engineer and Fire Department and in a manner to provide complete accessibility and to minimize damage from vehicles. 
B.  Hydrants shall stand plumb and be set to the established grade with nozzles at least two feet above final grade. No hydrant shall be less than ten feet from the shoulder of a dedicated road. 
C.  Each hydrant shall have a gate valve and valve box and shall be connected to the main with six inch D.I.P. Hydrants shall be provided with drainage weepholes and washed rock for drainage purposes. 
(Code 1972, § 12.12.190) 
Section 12.12.200. - Pipeline-Disinfection. 
A.  During pipe laying, the contractor shall maintain the cleanliness of the pipe interior. Any solid material entering the pipe shall be removed prior to jointing. 
B.  All piping shall be disinfected after installation is complete in accordance with the procedures outlined in AWWA C601-68. Calcium hypochlorite tablets in an amount needed to form a minimum 50 ppm free chlorine residual shall be placed in the pipe during laying. When installation has been completed, the main shall be filled with water at a velocity of less than one foot per second. This water shall remain in the pipe for at least 24 hours. 
C.  After the applicable retention period, the heavily chlorinated water shall be flushed from the main until the chlorine concentration in the water leaving the main is no higher than that generally prevailing in the system or less than one ppm. The Town Engineer shall make final tests to determine the chlorine level before the system is approved for domestic use. 
(Code 1972, § 12.12.200) 
Section 12.12.210. - Same-Flushing. 
    The contractor shall flush the lines by a means in accordance with good practice to ensure that sand, rock or other foreign material is not left in any of the pipeline interiors. If large quantities of water are not available for flushing, this program shall be coordinated through the Town Engineer. 
(Code 1972, § 12.12.210) 
Section 12.12.220. - Main testing-Pressure and leakage, responsibility, procedure generally. 
A.  The contractor shall furnish all labor, materials and equipment and shall perform all operations required to conduct the pressure and leakage tests. Water for testing will be available from the Town water supply system when possible. 
B.  Before applying the specified test pressure, all air shall be expelled from the pipe. Where any section is provided with concrete thrust blocks, the test shall not be made until at least two days have elapsed after the concrete was installed, to allow for proper curing. 
C.  The hydrostatic pressure test shall be conducted prior to the leakage test. 
D.  The Town Engineer shall be notified at least 48 hours in advance whenever pipe is to be tested, so that he may be present during the test. 
(Code 1972, § 12.12.220) 
Section 12.12.230. - Same-Hydrostatic pressure, procedure. 
    After the pipeline has been laid and partially backfilled, except for the joints, or except when the Town Engineer directs the trench to be backfilled for reasons of public safety, the pipe shall be filled with water and subjected to a hydrostatic pressure test. The pipeline shall be slowly filled with water and the specified test pressure (determined on an individual system basis by the Town Engineer and project engineer) applied by means of a pump connected to the pipe in a manner satisfactory to the Town Engineer. The test shall continue for a minimum of one hour. All exposed pipes, fittings, valves, hydrants and joints will be carefully examined during the test. Any cracked or defective pipes, fittings, valves, hydrants and joints shall be removed and replaced by the contractor with sound material in the manner provided heretofore, and the test repeated until satisfactory to the Town Engineer. 
(Code 1972, § 12.12.230) 
Section 12.12.240. - Leakage, permitted degree. 
    The test pressure of 150 psi shall be maintained for a period of not less than two hours, during which time the leakage shall be measured. No pipe installation will be accepted if the leakage is greater than that determined by the formula: 
ND P 
L= 
3700 
Where L is the allowable leakage in gallons per hour, N is the number of joints in the length of pipeline tested, D is the nominal diameter of the pipe in inches, and P is the average test pressure during the leakage test in pounds per square inch gauge. 
(Code 1972, § 12.12.240) 
Section 12.12.250. - Same-Leakage, repair. 
    Should any test of pipe laid disclose leakage greater than that specified above, the contractor shall at his own expense locate and repair the defective joints until the leakage is within the specified allowance. 
(Code 1972, § 12.12.250) 
Section 12.12.260. - Service lines-Size. 
    No service line shall be less than three-fourths-inch diameter Type K soft copper. All service lines shall be in conformance with the current Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC) to adequately supply the property being served. 
(Code 1972, § 12.12.260) 
Section 12.12.270. - Same-Construction authority. 
    Water service line construction in Town streets or rights-of-way shall be done only by the contractor or contractors approved by the Town Engineer. 
(Code 1972, § 12.12.270) 
Section 12.12.280. - Same-Taps. 
    All taps to the Town water system for three-fourths-inch or one-inch services may be made by a Town crew using their tapping machine or an approved contractor. The work shall be at the owner's or contractor's expense. All larger taps shall be made only with the Town Engineer's express permission if a Town crew is unable to do the work. 
(Code 1972, § 12.12.280) 
Section 12.12.290. - Same-Connection details. 
A.  All services shall have a corporation stop or gate valve (for larger sizes) at the main. Section 12.12.020(B), (C) and (G) defines the required stops and boxes to be used. 
B.  All new or reconstructed services shall have a main service shut-off valve at the dwelling unit or structure inside the foundation line in the crawl space or in a vault so constructed for this purpose. 
(Code 1972, § 12.12.290) 
Section 12.12.300. - Same-Required depth. 
    Section 12.12.040 of this chapter requires that all services be laid to a depth of six feet or deeper if feasible. 
(Code 1972, § 12.12.300) 
Section 12.12.310. - Same-Inspection, additional requirements. 
    The Town Engineer shall inspect and approve all water services prior to backfilling and use. The service shall not leak and shall be buried at least six feet deep. 
(Code 1972, § 12.12.310) 
Section 12.12.320. - Same-Location. 
    All service line locations are subject to review and approval by the Town Engineer and shall be laid in a continuous straight line, perpendicular to the main whenever possible. All service stubs to undeveloped lots on property shall extend into the lot or property line. 
(Code 1972, § 12.12.320) 
Section 12.12.330. - Same-Separate trench requirements. 
A.  All domestic water services shall be laid so that no point is nearer than ten lateral feet from a sewage service line, sewer main, building drains, any waste discharge line or non-potable water line. 
B.  Electric, phone or TV cables may be laid in the same trench as water service lines if there is a minimum three feet of cover between the water service and the laid cable. 
C.  Gas service lines may be laid in the same trench as water service lines if the gas line is steel, cast iron, or plastic with attached location wires and the gas line is a minimum of 30 inches above the water service. 
(Code 1972, § 12.12.330) 
Section 12.12.340. - Same-Pumps, Town Engineer's permission required. 
    The installation of pumps to increase water pressure and/or flow in service lines is prohibited without the written permission of the Town Engineer. 
(Code 1972, § 12.12.340) 
Section 12.12.350. - Electrical connection of push-on joints. 
    All water mains shall have conductivity straps for cathodic protection. 
(Code 1972, § 12.12.350) 
Section 12.12.360. - Electrical conductivity test. 
    Electrical conductivity tests performed by the contractor in the presence of the Town Engineer shall be the basis for determining whether or not satisfactory electrical conductivity has been established. The pipe shall conduct at least 300 amperes at 16 volts for a 200 foot length of pipe section. No pipe section will be accepted if it does not satisfactorily conduct the electricity stated. 
(Code 1972, § 12.12.360) 
Section 12.12.370. - Thrust block requirements. 
    Thrust blocks shall extend from the fitting, valve, or hydrant to solid, undisturbed earth and shall be installed so all joints are accessible for repair. If in the Town Engineer's opinion adequate support or undisturbed earth is not available, the contractor will be directed to secure the thrust block to the fitting, etc., by means of a metal harness or strap. The concrete used for thrust blocks shall have a minimum 28-day compressive strength of 3,000 psi and shall be allowed to cure a minimum of 48 hours at no less than 50 degrees Fahrenheit prior to backfilling operations. 
(Code 1972, § 12.12.370) 
CHAPTER 12.16. - WATER SERVICE - REGULATIONS FOR CONNECTION, INSPECTION 

Section 12.16.010. - Plant investment fees required. 
    No service line installation, water tap or other connection with the water lines of the Town water system shall be made without approval of the director and until all applicable plant investment fees have been paid and the permit has been issued pursuant to Section 12.16.070. Any person who makes any connection to the water system contrary to the provisions of this Code or any ordinance of the Town commits a Class A municipal offense. Said offense shall be one of strict liability. 
(Code 1972, § 12.16.010; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 134, 2001) 
Section 12.16.020. - Water service within the Town. 
A.  Application for water service, where both the tap and all points of consumption are within the corporate limits of the Town, shall be made as provided for in this Title. 
B.  Application for the use of water shall be made in writing to the Town Clerk and to the Public Works Director on such forms as the Town Manager may prescribe. Application must be made by the owner of the property to be served, or his duly authorized representative, designating the property, stating the purpose for which the water may be required, and stating the number of EQR units associated with such purpose. 
C.  An application shall be required, and plant investment fees and water dedication shall be assessed, for any new or expanded use of water, whether or not such new or expanded use requires a new or enlarged tap. 
(Code 1972, § 12.16.020; Amended Ord. No. 19, § 1(part), 2001) 
Section 12.16.030. - Water service outside the Town. 
    The Town shall not extend water service to any property lying outside the corporate limits of the Town except as set forth in this section. 
A.  Except as provided in Subsection (C) of this section, no property lying outside the corporate limits of the Town that is eligible for annexation to the Town shall be provided water service until such property is annexed by the Town. 
B.  Except as provided in Subsection (C) of this section, no property lying outside the corporate limits of the Town not currently eligible for annexation to the Town shall be provided water service unless: 
1.  Lack of municipal water service creates a demonstrable hardship upon the owner of the property; 
2.  The property is capable of being annexed within a reasonable time as determined by the Board of Trustees; 
3.  The owner, for itself and its successors and assigns, executes a binding agreement with the Town to annex the property to the Town at such time as it becomes eligible for annexation; and 
4.  Development and future annexation of said property is in accordance with the Town's three-mile annexation plan, water master plan, and all other applicable plans. 
C.  Notwithstanding the requirements contained in Subsections (A) and (B) of this section, water service may be provided to property lying outside the corporate limits of the Town when said property is owned by the United States, the State, or the county, and the Board of Trustees finds and determines that it is in the best interest of the Town to provide requested extraterritorial water service to such property. Such water service shall be provided upon any terms and conditions deemed appropriate or necessary by the Board of Trustees and any such terms or conditions shall be incorporated into an extraterritorial water services agreement entered into by the Town and the governmental entity requesting service. Following the extension of water service to such property, if the governmental entity conveys the property to private person(s) or a private entity, the Town shall cease to provide water service to the property unless Subsection (A) or (B) of this section is complied with. 
D.  All provisions of this Title shall apply to those areas outside the corporate limits of the Town, except those areas covered by a contract existing as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived which expressly establishes other rules for the area served under the contract. 
E.  Nothing contained in this section shall obligate the Town to provide water service to any property lying outside the corporate limits of the Town when the Board of Trustees determines that it is not in the best interests of the Town to provide the requested extraterritorial water service. The Town may impose such contract and performance guarantee requirements as it deems necessary to safeguard the best interests of the Town. 
F.  Any person desiring to connect a service line which is located outside the corporate limits of the Town to the Town's water supply system shall make application to the Town Clerk or Public Works Director for water service. The application for service shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information deemed necessary by the Town Manager to determine compliance with all ordinances, goals, policies, plans, regulations or rules concerning the water system. The Town Manager shall review and approve or disapprove the application as complying or failing to comply with all such ordinances, goals, policies, plans, regulations or rules concerning the Town's water system. Upon consent by the Board of Trustees to provide extraterritorial water service pursuant to contract, including an agreement to annex the served property when eligible, plant investment fees, connection fees and water dedication shall be assessed. Notwithstanding the payment of any fees pursuant to the provisions of this Title, tap connections to the Town's water system for service outside the Town shall at all times be subject to availability. 
(Code 1972, § 12.16.025; Ord. No. 19, § 2(part), 2004; Amended Ord. No. 33-2005(part), 2005) 
Section 12.16.040. - Connection to municipal water utility. 
    All buildings within the Town's limits that contain water supply facilities shall be connected to the municipal water utility, unless otherwise determined by the Town Board. 
(Code 1972, § 12.16.030) 
Section 12.16.050. - Water plant investment fee; prepayment of deposit; building permits. 
A.  At the time of any site-specific development plan approval for any development containing ten or more EQR, on or after January 1, 2012, which confers vested property rights in accordance with Chapter 4.17 and C.R.S. Title 24, Art. 68, or would have conferred such rights but for an applicant's waiver of such rights, the developer or owner of the subject property shall pay to the Town 60 percent of the estimated water plant investment fees for such development within seven days following approval of such site-specific development plan by the Town. The estimated plant investment fees shall be based on the Table of Equivalent Units, as found in Section 12.16.060. Estimated plant investment fees for commercial buildings or units shall be based upon an estimate approved by the Town Engineer. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the prepaid deposit of estimated plant investment fees shall not exceed the sum of $3,000,000.00; provided, however, the Board of Trustees, in its sole discretion, may defer the prepayment of such fees for a period of time up to the time of approval of the first subdivision final plat within the development. If the Board of Trustees permits the deferral of the payment of 60 percent of the estimated plant investment fees for a period of time, payment of such fees shall be due upon demand of the Town, and the obligation to pay such fees shall be secured by an irrevocable letter of credit or such other performance guarantee approved by the Town Attorney. The Board of Trustees shall determine when said letter of credit or other performance guarantee shall be delivered to the Town. At the time of any land use approval requiring the prepayment of a portion of the water plant investment fees and which approval grants vested development rights, the applicable development agreement or subdivision improvements agreement shall specify whether prepayment of 60 percent of estimated water plant investment fees shall be paid at time of approval of the site-specific development plan conferring vested property rights or shall be deferred for a period of time and shall be due upon demand by the Town. The Board of Trustees, in its sole discretion, may consider such factors as the timing of construction of the Town's new lower basin water treatment plant, the lowering of the Town's bonded indebtedness, any effect of the decision on existing water customers, developer project financing and the timing of any first subdivision final plat by the developer in determining when prepaid plant investment fees shall be due and payable. The deposit provided pursuant to this subsection shall be nonrefundable and shall be applied to the plant investment fees for individual water consuming units based on an EQR pro rata basis. In the event the maximum prepayment of $3,000,000.00 in estimated plant investment fees is paid, the deposit provided pursuant to this subsection shall be nonrefundable and shall be applied to the plant investment fees for 60 percent of the individual water consuming units based on an EQR pro rata basis. The remaining 40 percent of individual water consuming units will not require a deposit to be paid in advance and will not receive such credit. If the prepayment of $3,000,000.00 is entirely credited with a single development, then any subsequent building permit shall pay 100 percent of the prevailing plant investment fees. 
B.  At the time of application for any building permit or construction of any structure which will use Town water service, the owner or authorized representative shall make application to the Town Clerk and to the Public Works Director for water service to the property for which the building permit is issued. The plant investment fee and tapping charges, if applicable, shall be assessed at the then prevailing rate applicable, as specified in this chapter, and any prepaid deposit for the plant investment fee for such unit as provided in Subsection (A) of this section shall be applied. The credit applied shall be equal to the dollar amount applied at time of prepayment according to Subsection (A) of this section. The balance due for any plant investment fee shall be due and payable at the same time the building permit is issued. The owner of any lot within the Eagle Ranch PUD which has paid a water system improvement fee in accordance with the annexation agreement and amendments thereto governing the Eagle Ranch PUD shall be granted a credit against the plant investment fee to be paid in the amount of the Eagle Ranch water system improvement fee paid and shall not be required to pay any remaining amounts of the system improvement fee. 
C.  In the event an application is made for a building permit issued by another entity, outside the corporate limits of the Town, the owner or authorized representative of the property of which water service is sought, shall make application to the Town Clerk and to the Public Works Director for out of Town water service to the property for which the building permit is sought. Application shall be made on such forms as the Town Manager may prescribe. The plant investment fee, and tapping charges if applicable, shall be assessed at the rate applicable under this chapter and shall be due and payable at the time the building permit is issued. 
D.  Any commitment by the Town to extend water service shall not be transferred to any property other than that for which the commitment was made; provided, however, if the commitment by the Town arises from the approval of a site-specific development plan and the payment of 60 percent of the estimated plant investment fees for the property, the commitment by the Town may be transferred between lots or units within the property upon approval by the Town; provided, however, the deposit cannot be aggregated to allow more than 60 percent prepayment of the plant investment fee on a per unit basis. 
E.  Upon payment of 60 percent of the estimated water plant investment fees as provided in Subsection (A) of this section, the owner or developer shall be granted assurance by the Town of the availability of water service from the Town for the subject property subject to the completion of the lower basin water treatment plant, payment of the balance of the fee owing at the time of application for a building permit at the then prevailing rate, and any other provisions which may be contained in applicable development or subdivision improvements agreements. 
F.  All rates, fees, charges, and assessments provided by this chapter, from the time the same shall become due and payable, shall become and remain a lien on the premises until said rates, fees, charges and assessments have been paid to the Town. This lien on the premises may be foreclosed by an action at law or in equity in the name of the Town in any court having jurisdiction thereof. If the Town must resort to court action for collection of amounts due it under this chapter, the Town shall also be entitled to its reasonable attorney's fees and other expenses incurred in such action if the Town prevails. In the event such rates, fees, charges, and assessments are not paid when due, the Town Treasurer may certify the amount of the same to the County Treasurer, to be placed on the tax list for the current year, and to be collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected with ten percent added thereto to defray the cost of collection, pursuant to C.R.S. § 31-20-105. All laws of this state for the assessment and collection of general taxes, including the laws for the sale of property for taxes and redemption of the same, shall apply. 
(Code 1972, § 12.16.040; Amended Ord. No. 12-2011, § 1, 2011; Amended Ord. No. 18-2011, § 1, 2011; Ord. No. 01-2017, § 8, 1-10-2017) 
Section 12.16.060. - Plant investment fees and connection fees. 
A.  No water shall be furnished to a consumer until the entire plant investment fee, and any tapping charges or other expenses if applicable, has been paid to the Town. Each applicant shall be required to submit the plant investment fee and connection fees, if applicable, in the amounts calculated in accordance with the following table, any prepaid deposit of fees made in accordance with Section 12.16.050 and the fees established by the Board of Trustees by resolution. 
TABLE OF EQUIVALENT UNITS 
CLASSIFICATION       EQUIVALENT UNIT 
1. Single family residence with up to three bedrooms and two bathrooms-including 2,500 square feet of permanently irrigated landscaped area (sprinkler and/or drip) ..... 1.0 
Each additional bedroom ..... 0.15 
Each additional kitchen (wet bar) ..... 0.10 
Each additional 1,000 square feet of permanently irrigated landscaped area exceeding allowable amount ..... 0.25 
2. Multi-family residential duplex (per unit), up to three bedrooms and two bathrooms-including 1,250 square feet of permanently irrigated landscaped area ..... 0.9 
3. Multi-family residential (townhouses, condominiums, and apartments per unit)-includes 500 square feet of permanently irrigated landscaped area per unit 
Studio-no bedrooms, one bathroom ..... 0.4 
Up to two bedrooms and one and one-half bathrooms ..... 0.6 
Two bedrooms and two bathrooms ..... 0.8 
Each additional bedroom ..... 0.15 
Each additional kitchen (wet bar) ..... 0.1 
Each additional 1,000 square feet of permanently irrigated landscaped area ..... 0.25 
4. Accessory dwelling unit (700 square feet max.) ..... 0.2 
5. Non-potable irrigation credit ..... 0.25 
EQR per 2,500 square feet 
permanently irrigated landscaped area, 
not to exceed 25% of total EQR 
6. Motel, hotel transient rental units 
a.  First unit or manager headquarters ..... 1.0 
b.  Each additional rental room without cooking facilities ..... 0.4 
c.  Each additional rental room with cooking facilities ..... 0.5 
7. Other common facilities 
a.  washing machine-less than 12 pound capacity (larger machines subject to commercial rate) ..... 0.5 
Other facilities may be subject to commercial classification 
8. Commercial, industrial, warehouse, public buildings 
a.  Bars, restaurants 
For business with less than 25 seating capacity ..... 1.0 
For each additional 25 seating capacity or part thereof ..... 0.6 
b.  Service stations 
Full service with service or lubrication bay, and/or one wash bay ..... 2.0 
Self-service, no wash or lube and/or service bays ..... 1.0 
Each wash bay or rack in addition to the above ..... 1.0 
c.  Commercial, industrial-warehouse, or public buildings, such as stores, offices, and similar, having no process water or waste loads (i.e. which are served by sanitary sewer use only for nonsolid waste disposal) 
Up to two men's and two women's toilets or urinals with manual flush mechanism ..... 0.5 
For each additional toilet or urinal with manual flush mechanism ..... 0.5 
For each lavatory ..... 0.2 
For each shower or tub or combination thereof ..... 0.3 
For each laundry or mop sink or bar sink ..... 0.2 
For each other water using fixture or appliance except as otherwise specified in this table, including drinking fountains which are not continuous flow or decorative fountains which recycle water ..... 0.3 
d.  Churches, nonprofit organizations halls (no residence or regular eating facilities) ..... 0.1 
e.  Schools, public or private 
Basic rate for capacity of up to 50 pupils ..... 2.0 
For each additional 50 students or fraction thereof ..... 1.0 
For gymnasium with showers ..... 1.2 
f.  Swimming pools in conjunction with other use classification; for each 25,000 gallons or fraction thereof swimming pool capacity ..... 1.0 
g.  Laundromat or laundry basic ..... 1.0 
Each top loading washing machine, by load capacity less than 12 pounds ..... 0.5 
12.1 to 21 pounds ..... 0.7 
21.1 to 31 pounds ..... 1.0 
31.1 to 41 pounds ..... 1.3 
41.1 to 51 pounds ..... 1.6 
51.1 to 75 pounds ..... 2.0 
Each front loading washing machine, by load capacity 
Less than 20 pounds ..... 0.3 
20.1 to 30 pounds ..... 0.7 
30.1 to 40 pounds ..... 1.1 
40.1 to 60 pounds ..... 1.4 
9. Industrial uses requiring process water 
Such uses shall require applicant to submit an independent analysis of projected water usage. The Board of Trustees shall establish the plant investment fee using the EQR schedule as a basis. 
B.  Before a temporary certificate of occupancy or certificate of occupancy is issued, the Public Works Director shall inspect the property designated on the application and shall certify on the application that the number of EQR units stated on the application equal the number of EQR units actually to be used. If the actual EQR total is less than the EQR total stated in the application, the applicant only, not the original developer or owner, shall be entitled to a refund of any overpayment made, except that no refund shall be made for any labor, material, or other expenses. If the actual EQR total is greater than the EQR total stated in the application, no water shall be furnished until the deficit in the plant investment fee has been paid by the applicant. If a larger tap is required, no water shall be furnished until such tap is provided and all associated fees have been paid. 
(Code 1972, § 12.16.050; Amended Ord. No. 12-2004, § 12(part), 2004; Amended Ord. No. 16-2007, § 1(part), 2007; Amended Ord. No. 12-2011, § 2, 2011; Amended Ord. No. 12-2013, § 1, 2013; Ord. No. 29-2015, § 1(12.16.050(B)), 10-13-2015; Ord. No. 30-2015, § 1, 10-27-2015; Ord. No. 01-2017, § 8, 1-10-2017; Ord. No. 01-2018 , § 1, 1-23-2018; Ord. No. 18-2018 , §§ 1, 2, 6-12-2018) 
Section 12.16.070. - Size of taps, connection fees. 
    When a service line is not provided from the water main to the property line or where a service line must be enlarged to provide adequate service, a connection fee shall be charged. The fee shall be a minimum amount established by resolution of the Board of Trustees, payable at the time of water tap application. If the actual cost of materials and labor to the Town exceeds such minimum amount, the additional charges will be billed and due from the applicant. Said connection charges shall be determined by the Public Works Director. Water service shall not begin until all charges have been paid to the Town. 
(Code 1972, § 12.16.060; Amended Ord. No. 12-2004, § 12(part), 2004; Ord. No. 01-2017, § 9, 1-10-2017) 
Section 12.16.080. - Special fees. 
    If the Town is required to obtain a permit for construction within the right-of-way from the county, an additional fee of $150.00 shall be added to the connection fee. 
(Code 1972, § 12.16.070; Amended Ord. No. 12-2004, § 12(part), 2004) 
Section 12.16.090. - Additional service, fixtures. 
A.  An existing tap shall not be subject to additional service, change of fixtures, or change in use without permission therefor from the Town. The Public Works Director shall have the power to grant or deny such permission. A party may appeal the decision of the Public Works Director to the Board of Trustees. Permission may be subject to conditions necessary in the interest of the Town water supply system, including a requirement that a larger tap be installed. 
B.  Any additional service or change in use that nets additional EQR usage from the present EQR usage or previously paid for EQR shall be subject to payment of a supplemental plant investment fee. The additional plant investment fee charge shall be the additional EQR value plus the net change in EQR value multiplied by the current EQR fee. If a larger tap is required, a new connection fee shall be assessed. 
(Code 1972, § 12.16.080; Amended Ord. No. 12-2004, § 12(part), 2004) 
Section 12.16.100. - Connections to water mains and installation of service lines in public rights-of-way and easements. 
A.  The installation, maintenance, and repair of service lines in the public rights-of-way and easements and the connection of the same to the main line shall be performed by the Town's public works department or their authorized representatives, unless otherwise directed by the Public Works Director. 
B.  Any person not authorized by the Town who installs a service line in the public rights-of-way or connects the same to the Town's water system commits a Class A municipal offense. Said offense shall be one of strict liability. 
(Code 1972, § 12.16.090; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 135, 2001; Amended Ord. No. 12-2004, § 12(part), 2004; Amended Ord. No. 12-2011, § 3, 2011) 
Section 12.16.110. - Installation of service lines not in the public rights-of-way, responsibility of owner. 
A.  Installation of service lines not in the public rights-of-way shall be the responsibility of the property owner served by the line. Such installation shall be in compliance with this Code and other ordinances of the Town. Inspection of the line shall be made by the Public Works Director or his designee. 
B.  No consumer shall be permitted to conduct water pipes across lots or buildings to adjoining premises without the permission of the Public Works Director. Service must include all improvements on the property with no cross-connection with any other water supply. Service pipes must be laid six feet below the surface of the ground if feasible and be of Type K copper or approved equivalent. The Town shall not be responsible for the service pipes and fixtures. All owners at their own expense must keep service pipes from the property line and all their apparatus in good working order and properly protected from frost and other disturbances. No claim shall be made against the Town on account of the breaking of service pipes and apparatus or for failure in the supply of water. No reduction in the rates will be made for any time that service pipes or fixtures may be frozen. The Town has the right to require a certain size or type of service pipe for a tap onto the Town water system, in respect to the use to which such service pipe is or is proposed to be put and the impact thereof on the Town water system. 
(Code 1972, § 12.16.100; Amended Ord. No. 12-2004, § 12(part), 2004) 
Section 12.16.120. - Separate connections required, new construction. 
    Any individually owned properties or properties intended for further subdivision must be furnished with separate outside service connection, curb stop and meter. Curb stops shall be located in a location such that water can easily be turned off and on. 
(Code 1972, § 12.16.110; Amended Ord. No. 12-2004, § 12(part), 2004) 
Section 12.16.130. - Requirements, property with single service to be further subdivided. 
    Any existing property that has an individual service and is filing application for further subdivision is subject to additional requirements. If feasible, separate connections, curb stops and meters with appropriate easements will be required to be installed as a condition of subdivision. If separate connections are not feasible, the Town and owner of the property to be subdivided shall enter into an agreement whereby all subsequent owners shall be individually and collectively responsible for metered service. 
(Code 1972, § 12.16.120; Amended Ord. No. 12-2004, § 12(part), 2004) 
Section 12.16.140. - Use during fire alarm. 
    During all alarms of fire, the use of hoses and all outlets where a constant flow of water is maintained is strictly forbidden. 
(Code 1972, § 12.16.130; Amended Ord. No. 12-2004, § 12(part), 2004) 
Section 12.16.150. - Repair, extension of service. 
    The Town reserves the right to shut off its mains for the purpose of making repairs or extensions or for any other purpose. No claim shall be made against the Town for any damage that may result from shutting off the water for repairing and re-laying main, hydrants or other connections or for lack of water service during the period of time in which the water system is shut off. 
(Code 1972, § 12.16.140; Amended Ord. No. 12-2004, § 12(part), 2004) 
Section 12.16.160. - Turning water on and off, unlawful. 
    Any person not authorized by the Town who turns on or off water from the curb stop of a building supply commits a Class B municipal offense. Said offense shall be deemed one of strict liability. Such operating of the curb stop shall only be done by the Town's public works department, or its authorized representatives. 
(Code 1972, § 12.16.150; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 136, 2001; Amended Ord. No. 12-2004, § 12(part), 2004) 
Section 12.16.170. - Violations and penalties. 
    Unless otherwise provided herein, any person violating any of these provisions contained in this chapter commits a Class A municipal offense. Each day, or part thereof, during which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1972, § 12.16.160; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 137, 2001; Amended Ord. No. 12-2004, § 12(part), 2004) 
CHAPTER 12.20. - METERED SERVICE 

Section 12.20.010. - Metered service. 
A.  Service shall be metered as follows: 
1.  All new taps will be metered; 
2.  All water service outside the corporate limits of the Town shall be metered; 
3.  Any service may be required to be metered where in the judgment of the Town Board the same is necessary or beneficial; 
4.  Any meter installed to connect with the Town water system will be of the kind used by the Town or approved by the Town. 
B.  Cost for the installation of meters in all instances shall be borne by the person in whose name the service is kept. 
(Code 1972, § 12.20.010) 
Section 12.20.020. - Meter testing, fees and costs. 
A.  Any consumer who feels his water meter is not in proper working order may call for an inspection and test of said water meter. 
B.  If the meter is found to be defective, the Town will bear all cost of materials and labor to repair said meter at no cost to the consumer. 
C.  If the meter is found not to be defective, the consumer will be assessed all costs incurred by the Town for inspection and testing of the meter, which sum shall be added to the water bill and collected as a part thereof. 
D.  All users are required to have operating water meters on their system. In the event that a mater is not operational, the owner shall have ten days to schedule with the Town a date for the repair of said meter after written notice is mailed to the user by the Town. In the event that the meter is not made operational within 30 days after notice is mailed (absent written proof from the Town that the repair of the meter has been delayed by the Town due to no fault of the owner), the water user shall be assessed a $100.00 per month charge until said meter is fixed. 
(Code 1972, § 12.20.020) 
Section 12.20.030. - Water bills, payment, penalty. 
A.  All water service usage charges shall be billed monthly. Said charges shall be due and payable ten days following the date of mailing of the statement by the Town, unless a different date due is shown on said statement. Payment for service shall be for use during the preceding billing period. All other payments due under this chapter shall be paid ten days following the date a statement is issued by the Town. 
B.  If payments required under this chapter are not made by the date said payments are due and payable, a monthly late charge shall be assessed against the party in whose name the water account is listed, said charge to be added to said party's water bill and collected as a part thereof. Said charges shall be established by resolution of the Board of Trustees. 
C.  If payments required under this chapter are not made by the date said payments are due and payable, the water supply may be turned off and discontinued by the Town without any further notice to the party in whose name the water account is listed. 
    If water service is discontinued pursuant to this section, a customer shall be charged a disconnect fee plus the cost of labor, material, and other expenses of restoring service. Said charges shall be established by resolution of the Board of Trustees. All charges assessed pursuant to this section shall be paid before water service is restored. 
(Code 1972, § 12.20.030; Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 1, 6-12-2018) 
Section 12.20.040. - Delinquent water charges, service discontinued. 
    If, for any cause, water service usage charges become delinquent and water service is turned off and discontinued, water service shall not be restored to the same property until all such delinquencies, together with the costs, fees, and charges set forth in Section 12.20.030, have been paid in full. The Town shall have the right to refuse to furnish water service to any premises until all said delinquent charges, costs, and fees are paid. Change of ownership or occupancy shall not affect the application of this section and may be enforced against the subsequent tenant, owner, or occupant thereof. This section shall be applicable to all water users within or without the corporate limits of the Town. 
(Code 1972, § 12.20.040) 
Section 12.20.050. - Water account in name of owner. 
    All charges for metered service shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property served. Payment shall be made for metered service by the owner or his legally authorized agent. 
(Code 1972, § 12.20.050; Ord. No. 32-2015, § 1, 11-10-2015) 
Section 12.20.060. - Unpaid water charges, lien, collection. 
    All rates, fees, charges, and assessments provided by this chapter, from the time the same shall become due and payable, shall become and remain a lien on the premises until said rates, fees, charges and assessments have been paid to the Town. This lien on the premises may be foreclosed by an action at law or in equity in the name of the Town in any court having jurisdiction thereof. If the Town must resort to court action for collection of amounts due it under this chapter, the Town shall also be entitled to its reasonable Attorney's fees and other expenses incurred in such action if the Town prevails. In the event said rates, fees, charges, and assessments are not paid when due, the Town Treasurer may certify the amount of the same to the County Treasurer, to be placed on the tax list for the current year, and to be collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected, with ten percent added thereto to defray the cost of collection, pursuant to C.R.S. § 31-20-105. All laws of this State for the assessment and collection of general taxes, including the laws for the sale of property for taxes and redemption of the same, shall apply. 
(Code 1972, § 12.20.060) 
Section 12.20.070. - Unlawful acts. 
    It is unlawful for any person to use or take water from the Town's water system without a permit therefor, or to make any fraudulent representations for the purpose of obtaining water, or for any person to take or use water from the Town's water system for a different purpose or purposes than provided in the customer's permit, or for any person to willfully or unreasonably waste water, or for any person to violate any of the regulations set forth in this chapter. Each and every such unlawful act shall constitute a Class A municipal offense. Any such offense shall be deemed one of strict liability. Each separate day or any portion thereof during which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1972, § 12.20.070; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 138, 2001) 
Section 12.20.080. - Regulations part of contract. 
    All regulations contained in this chapter shall be considered a part of the contract of every person taking water from the waterworks of the Town, and every person taking water shall be considered as having expressly consented to be bound thereby. 
(Code 1972, § 12.20.080) 
Section 12.20.090. - Grievance procedures. 
A.  In the event of any dispute between a person and the Town regarding water service, the following procedures shall be followed. Any person who desires to protest the amount of any monthly water service usage charge shall present a written statement of such complaint to the Town Manager prior to the date said charge is due and payable. In the event such person fails to present a written complaint within the time herein provided, such protest or complaint shall be barred. 
B.  Any complaints relating to service or acts of employees or agents of the Town shall be submitted to the Town Manager in writing within ten days of the occurrence or any further protest shall be barred. 
C.  In the event agreement cannot be reached between the Town Manager and any person filing a protest or complaint, the sole method of appeal shall be to the Board of Trustees. A hearing on such an appeal shall be scheduled for the next regular meeting of the Board of Trustees. To the extent practicable, said hearing shall be conducted in the manner provided for in Chapter 2.20. 
(Code 1972, § 12.20.090) 
Section 12.20.100. - Schedule of water rates. 
A.  All rates and charges for municipal water service shall be billed on a monthly basis. There shall be no reduction in rates or charges, or any rebates thereof, for use for less than the full monthly period, except for rates charged users making new connections to the Town's water system, which rates shall be prorated on the basis of the number of days remaining in the billing period in which the new connection is made. Payment for water service shall be for use during the preceding monthly billing period. 
B.  Beginning on the first day of January 2019 and on the first day of the month thereafter, the following water rates shall be assessed and charged: 
1.  Rates for water measured through meters located inside the corporate limits of the Town. 
Rate Type Rate Class Monthly
Base Fee Usage
Block (Gal.) Charge per
1,000 Gal. Residential Residential without accessory dwelling unit $35.29 0-6,000 
6,001-17,000 
17,001-28,000 
28,000+ $ 3.00 
$ 6.62 
$ 9.92 
$14.88 Residential Residential with accessory dwelling unit $ 44.27 0-8,000 
8,001-17,000 
17,001-28,000 
28,000+ $ 3.00 
$ 6.62 
$ 9.92 
$14.88 Non-residential Commercial & mixed use $35.29 0-6,000 
6,000+ $ 3.00 
$ 6.62 Non-residential Government, schools, & churches $35.29 0-6,000 
6,000+ $ 3.00 
$ 6.62 Residential/non-residential Compound meter-Hi side $ 0.00 All usage $ 6.62  
2.  Rates for water measured through meters located outside of the corporate limits of the Town: 
Rate Type Rate Class Monthly
Base Fee Usage
Block (Gal.) Charge per
1,000 Gal. Residential Residential without accessory dwelling unit $52.94 0-6,000 
6,001-17,000 
17,001-28,000 
28,000+ $ 4.50 
$ 9.89 
$14.84 
$22.25 Residential Residential with accessory dwelling unit $66.45 0-8,000 
8,001-17,000 
17,001-28,000 
28,000+ $ 4.50 
$ 9.89 
$14.84 
$22.25 Non-residential Commercial & mixed use $52.94 0-6,000 
6,000+ $ 4.50 
$ 9.89 Non-residential Government, schools, & churches $52.94 0-6,000 
6,000+ $ 4.50 
$ 9.89 Residential/non-residential Compound meter-Hi side $ 0.00 All usage $ 9.89  
C.  Changes in any of the water service rate schedules contained herein shall be by ordinance enacted by the Board of Trustees, and notice of such changes shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county so as to inform all residents of the Town of such changes. 
D.  The Town Treasurer shall keep available at all times for public inspection to interested persons, schedules of water rates for water used within and without the corporate limits of the Town. Copies of schedules of water rates shall be furnished to interested persons by the Town Treasurer upon request and without charge. 
E.  Rates for water service outside the corporate limits of the Town shall be two times the applicable in-Town rate, unless otherwise established by the Board of Trustees by ordinance. 
(Code 1972, § 12.20.100; Amended Ord. No. 26, § 1, 2001; Amended Ord. No. 33, § 1, 2002; Amended Ord. No. 54, § 1, 2003; Amended Ord. No. 12, § 2, 2005; Amended Ord. No. 44, § 1(part), 2006; Amended Ord. No. 16-2007, § 2, 2007; Amended Ord. No. 26, § 2(part), 2007; Amended Ord. No. 25, § 1, 2008; Amended Ord. No. 15, § 1, 2011; Amended Ord. No. 20, § 1, 2012; Amended Ord. No. 29, § 1, 2013; Amended Ord. No. 32, § 1, 2014; Ord. No. 37-2015, § 1, 12-8-2015; Ord. No. 36-2016, § 1, 2016; Ord. No. 11-2018 , § 1, 4-10-2018; Ord. No. 14-2018 , § 1, 5-8-2018; Ord. No. 41-2018 , § 1, 12-11-2018) 
Section 12.20.110. - Variable rate surcharge. 
A.  A surcharge for municipal water service shall be billed on a monthly basis. There shall be no reduction in the monthly surcharge, or rebates thereof, for water usage less than the full monthly period, except for the surcharge charged users making new connections to the Town's water system, which surcharge shall be prorated on the basis of the number of days remaining in the billing period in which the new connection is made. Payment for the water service surcharge shall be for usage during the preceding monthly billing period. 
B.  Beginning on the first day of September, 2018, and on the first day of the month thereafter, the following surcharges shall be assessed and charged: 
Average Monthly Usage (Gal.) Surcharge Category Residential Non-Residential Monthly
Surcharge 1: Low usage 0-4,000 0-2,000 $ 8.15 2: Average usage 4,000-14,000 2,000-46,000 $12.50 3: High usage > 14,000 > 46,000 $17.00  
C.  Individual water customers shall be placed in one of three surcharge categories as shown above based on a two-year historical average of water consumption values in gallons. In the event a two-year historical average cannot be determined because the water customer or account is a new account for which no water consumption history exists, said customer shall be placed in the category 2 average usage category until a one-year average can be determined during the period when all other accounts as evaluated. If necessary such customer shall be re-categorized at that time. A historical one-year average will be utilized to determine an account surcharge until a historical two-year average can be determined. 
D.  The Town Treasurer shall keep available at all times for public inspection by interested persons the surcharge category assigned for each water account and property using Town water service. 
E.  Any person who desires to challenge the surcharge category in which his or her water account has been placed may file an appeal pursuant to Section 12.20.090. Similarly, any water customer who substantially modifies his or her property in a manner affecting water consumption, such as installing xeriscape landscaping by way of example, may file an appeal pursuant to Section 12.20.090 and request a change of the surcharge category for his or her property. 
F.  The monthly surcharge rates as set forth in this section shall apply to water measured through meters located both inside the corporate limits of the Town as well as water measured through meters located outside the corporate limits of the Town. 
(Ord. No. 11-2018 , § 2, 4-10-2018; Ord. No. 14-2018 , § 2, 5-8-2018; Ord. No. 20-2018 , § 1, 7-24-2018) 
CHAPTER 12.22. - CROSS-CONNECTION AND BACKFLOW CONTROL 

Section 12.22.010. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is promotion of the health, safety and welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the Town, including: 
A.  To protect the public water systems from the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within its customers' internal distribution system(s) or its customers' private water system(s) such contaminants or pollutants which could backflow or back-siphon into the public water systems. 
B.  To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or potential, between its customers' in-plant potable water system(s) and non-potable water systems, plumbing fixtures and industrial piping systems. 
C.  To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control which will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of the potable water system. 
(Code 1972, § 12.22.010) 
Section 12.22.020. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approved means accepted by an agency, as herein provided, as meeting the applicable specification stated or cited in this chapter, or as suitable for the proposed use. 
    Auxiliary water supply means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the Town's approved public potable water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's public potable water supply or any natural source(s) such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor, etc., or used waters or industrial fluids. These waters may be polluted or contaminated or may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the Town does not have sanitary control. 
    Backflow preventer means a device or means designed to prevent backflow or back-siphonage. 
    Air-gap means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of said vessel. An approved air-gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically, above the top of the rim of the vessel; and in no case less than one inch. When an air-gap is used at the service connection to prevent the contamination or pollution of the public potable water system, an emergency bypass shall be installed around the air-gap system and an approved reduced pressure principle device shall be installed in the bypass system. 
    Double check valve assembly means an assembly of two independently operating check valves with tightly closing shut-off valves on each side of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of each check valve. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications and approval of a recognized testing establishment for backflow prevention devices. To be approved, these devices must be readily accessible for in-line maintenance and testing. 
    Reduced pressure principle device means an assembly of two independently operating approved check valves with an automatically operating differential relief valve between the two check valves, tightly closing shut-off valves on either side of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of the check and relief valves. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications and approval of a recognized testing agency for backflow prevention assemblies. The device shall operate to maintain the pressure in the zone between the two check valves at a level less than the pressure on the public water supply side of the device. At cessation of normal flow, the pressure between the two check valves shall be less than the pressure on the public water supply side of the devices. In case of leakage of either of the check valves, the differential relief valve shall operate to maintain the reduced pressure in the zone between the check valves by discharging to the atmosphere. When the inlet pressure is two pounds per square inch or less, the relief valve shall open to the atmosphere. To be approved, these devices must be readily accessible for in-line maintenance and testing and be installed in a location where no part of the device will be submerged. 
    Back pressure means backflow caused by a pump, elevated tank, boiler or other means that could create pressure within the system greater than the supply pressure. 
    Back-siphonage means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other than its intended source caused by the sudden reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system. 
    Certified inspector and/or tester means a person who has passed a State-approved and/or -sponsored testing and/or inspection course and who is listed by the State as a certified inspector and/or tester. 
    Check valve means a self-closing device which is designed to permit the flow of fluids in one direction and to close if there is a reversal of flow. 
    Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment Cross-Connection Control Manual means a manual that has been published by the State addressing cross-connection control practices which will be used as a guidance document for the agency in implementing a cross-connection control program. 
    Contamination means an impairment of the quality of the potable water by sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or other materials to a degree which creates an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. 
    Critical level means the critical level C-L or C/L marking on a backflow prevention device or vacuum breaker which is a point conforming to approved standards and established by the testing laboratory (usually stamped on the device by the manufacturer), which determines the minimum elevation above the flood level rim of the fixture or receptacle served at which the device may be installed. When a backflow prevention device does not bear a critical level marking, the bottom of the vacuum breaker, combination valve, or the bottom of any such approved device shall constitute the critical level. 
    Cross-connection means any unprotected, actual, or potential connection or structural arrangement between a public, or a consumer's, potable water system and any other source, or system, through which it is possible to introduce into any part of the potable system any substance other than the intended potable water, with which the system is supplied. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices and other temporary, or permanent, devices through which, or because of which, backflow can or may occur, are considered to be cross-connections. 
    Cross-connections, controlled means a connection between a potable water system and a non-potable water system with an approved backflow prevention device properly installed that will continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
    Flood level rim means the edge of the receptacle from which water overflows. 
    Hazard, degree of, derives from an evaluation of the potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable water system. 
    Hazard, health, means any condition, device, or practice in the water supply system and its operation which could create, or in the judgment of the Town Manager may create, a danger to the health and well-being of the water consumer. An example of a health hazard is a structural defect, including cross-connections, in a water supply system. 
    Hazard, plumbing, means a plumbing type cross-connection in a consumer's potable water system that has not been properly protected by a vacuum breaker, air-gap separation or backflow prevention device. Unprotected plumbing type cross-connections are considered to be a health hazard. 
    Hazard, pollutional, means an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or to the potability of the public or the consumer's potable water system which would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances, but would not be dangerous to health. 
    Hazard, system, means an actual or potential threat of severe damage to the physical properties of the public potable water system or the consumer's potable water system or of a pollution or contamination which would have a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system. 
    Industrial fluids system means any system containing a fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, system, pollutional or plumbing hazard if introduced into an approved water supply. This may include, but not be limited to, polluted or contaminated waters; all types of process waters and used waters originating from the public potable water system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality; chemicals in fluid form; plating acids and alkalies, circulated cooling waters connected to an open cooling tower and/or cooling towers that are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances; contaminated natural waters such as from wells, springs, streams, rivers, bays, harbors, seas, irrigation canals or systems, etc.; oils, gases, glycerine, paraffins, caustic and acid solutions and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other purposes or for firefighting purposes. 
    Manager means the Town Manager or his duly authorized representative. 
    Non-potable water means water that is not safe for human consumption or that is of questionable potability. 
    Pollution means the presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological or biological) in the water that may degrade the water quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair its usefulness. 
    Potable water means water free from impurities in amounts sufficient to cause disease or harmful physiological effects. The bacteriological, chemical, and radiological quality shall conform with State drinking water regulations. 
    Submerged inlet means a water pipe or extension thereto from a public water supply terminating in a tank, vessel, fixture or appliance which may contain water of questionable quality, waste or other contaminant and which is unprotected against backflow. 
    Vacuum means any pressure less than that exerted by the atmosphere. 
    Vacuum breaker, atmospheric type, means a vacuum breaker which has a moving element inside, which during flow prevents water from spilling from the device, and during cessation of flow drops down to provide a vent opening. The atmospheric vacuum breaker cannot be installed where there can be backpressure, only where there can be back-siphonage. This device should not remain under pressure for long durations (more than 12 hours in any 24-hour period) and it cannot have any shut-off valve downstream of it. 
    Vacuum breaker, pressure type, means a vacuum breaker that cannot be installed where there can be back-pressure, only where there can be back-siphonage. The pressure vacuum breaker can have shut-off valves downstream of the device. 
    Water service connection means the terminal end of a service connection from the public potable water system, i.e., where the Town loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the customer's water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the service connection shall mean the downstream end of the meter. There shall be no unprotected takeoffs from the service line ahead of any meter or backflow prevention device located at the point of delivery to the customer's water system. Service connection shall also include water service connection from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency water service connections from the public potable water system. 
(Code 1972, § 12.22.020) 
Section 12.22.030. - Requirements. 
A.  Water system. 
1.  The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: the utility system and the customer system. 
2.  The utility system shall consist of the source facilities and the distribution system; and shall include all those facilities of the water system under the complete control of the utility, up to the point where the customer's system begins. 
3.  The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the distribution system. 
4.  The distribution system shall include the network of conduits used for the delivery of water from the source to the customer's system. 
5.  The customer's system shall include those parts of the facilities beyond the termination of the utility distribution system which are utilized in conveying utility-delivered domestic water to points of use. 
B.  Policy. 
1.  No water service connection shall be installed or maintained by the Town unless the water supply is protected as required by State laws and regulations and this chapter. Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued by the Town if a backflow prevention device required by this chapter is not installed, tested and maintained, or if it is found that a backflow prevention device has been removed, bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises. Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected. 
2.  The customer's system should be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the Town Manager to determine whether cross-connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of these regulations, exist. When such a condition becomes known, the Town Manager shall deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing for a physical break in the service line until the customer has corrected the condition(s) in conformance with State and agency statutes relating to plumbing and water supplies and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
3.  An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed depending on degree of hazard. Such a device shall be installed at or near the property line or immediately inside the building being served; but, in all cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line wherever the following conditions exist: 
a.  In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply which is not or may not be of safe bacteriological or chemical quality and which is not acceptable as an additional source by the Town Manager, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing a backflow prevention device in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard. 
b.  In the case of premises on which any industrial fluids or any other objectionable substance is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing a backflow prevention device in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the utility system which have been subject to deterioration in quality. 
c.  In the case of premises having internal cross-connections that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled, or intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impractical or impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross-connections exist, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing a backflow prevention device in the service line. 
4.  The type of protective devices required in this Code shall depend upon the degree of hazard which exists as follows: 
a.  In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply and it is not subject to any of the following rules, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device. 
b.  In the case of any premises where there is water or substance that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health, if introduced into the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved double check valve assembly. 
c.  In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous to health which is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device. Examples of premises where these conditions will exist include sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries, and plating plants. 
d.  In the case of any premises where there are uncontrolled cross-connections, either actual or potential, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device at the service connection. 
e.  In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete in-plant cross-connection survey, the public water system shall be protected against backflow or back-siphonage from the premises by the installation of a backflow prevention device in the service line. In this case, maximum protection will be required; that is, an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed in each service to the premises. 
5.  Any backflow prevention device required herein shall be of a model and size approved by the Town Manager. The term "approved backflow prevention device" shall mean a device that has been manufactured in full conformance with the standards established by the American Water Works Association entitled: 
AWWA C506-78 Standards for Reduced Pressure Principle and Double Check Valve Backflow Prevention Devices; 
and has met completely the laboratory and field performance specifications of the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern California established by: 
Specifications of Backflow Prevention Device - #69-2, dated March 1969, or the most current issue. 
Said AWWA and FCCC&HR Standards and Specifications are hereby adopted by reference by the Town of Eagle. Final approval shall be evidenced by a "Certificate of Approval" issued by an approved testing laboratory certifying full compliance with said AWWA Standards and FCCC&HR Specifications. 
The following testing laboratory has been qualified by the Town Manager to test and certify backflow preventers: 
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control & Hydraulic Research 
University of Southern California 
University Park 
Los Angeles, CA 90007 
Testing laboratories other than the laboratory listed above will be added to an approved list as they are qualified by the Town Manager. 
Only approved backflow prevention devices may be used. 
6.  It shall be the duty of the customer user at any premises where backflow devices are installed to have certified inspections and operational tests made at least once per year. The fee shall be $25.00 per inspection. In those instances where the Town Manager deems the hazard to be great enough, he may require certified inspections at more frequent intervals. These shall be performed by Town personnel or a certified inspector and/or tester approved by the Public Works Director. These devices shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at the expense of the customer-user whenever said devices are found to be defective. Records of such tests, repairs and overhauls shall be kept and made available to the Town Manager. The form, to be provided by the Town, shall be submitted to the agency within 30 days after the device has been tested and/or inspected. 
7.  Installation of new devices. The Town will be informed of all backflow prevention devices that are installed on any premises. Upon installation, the device will be inspected and tested by Town personnel or a certified inspector and/or tester approved by the Public Works Director. The agency will be informed in writing of the results of this inspection and test. 
8.  Backflow prevention devices currently installed which are not approved shall be replaced with an approved device within three years from the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, unless the device fails an annual operational test. If the device fails any such test, it shall be replaced immediately with an approved device. 
(Code 1972, § 12.22.030) 
Section 12.22.040. - Existing cross-connections. 
    Any existing cross-connections between a public water system and any secondary water system shall be eliminated or protected by means of an approved backflow preventer. 
(Code 1972, § 12.22.040) 
Section 12.22.050. - Specific system requirements. 
A.  Irrigation systems. The following guidelines relating to backflow prevention devices for irrigation systems shall apply: 
1.  Atmospheric vacuum breakers shall be installed after the last control valve of each sprinkler circuit and at a minimum of six inches above the highest irrigation head. The atmospheric vacuum breaker shall be installed only on irrigation circuits with heads that will not return any pressure in the circuit when the circuit control valve is closed. 
2.  Pressure vacuum breakers shall be installed at the beginning of each irrigation circuit and at a minimum of 12 inches above the highest irrigation head on the circuit. Individual irrigation circuits having quick coupling valves or other similar type heads that will permit pressure to be retained in the circuit shall have a pressure vacuum breaker installed as a minimum requirement for each circuit. Irrigation systems using the subsurface drip method shall have a pressure vacuum breaker on each circuit. A pressure vacuum breaker may not be installed where a double check valve assembly, reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device, or air-gap separation is required. 
3.  A double check valve assembly may be installed to serve multiple irrigation circuits in lieu of vacuum breakers on each individual irrigation circuit. 
4.  A reduced pressure principal backflow preventer or air-gap separation shall be required before any piping network in which fertilizers, pesticides and other chemicals or toxic contaminants are injected or siphoned into the irrigation system. A reduced pressure principal backflow preventer may be installed to serve multiple irrigation circuits in lieu of vacuum breakers on each individual irrigation circuit. 
B.  Fire systems. 
1.  Water systems for fighting fire, derived from a supply that cannot be approved as safe or potable for human use, shall, whenever practicable, be kept wholly separate from drinking water pipelines and equipment. In cases where the domestic water system is used for both drinking and firefighting purposes, approved backflow prevention devices shall be installed to protect such individual drinking water lines as are not used for firefighting purposes. It is hereby declared that it is the responsibility of the person or persons causing the introduction of said unapproved or unsafe water into the pipelines to see that: 
a.  A procedure be developed and carried out to notify and protect users of this piping system during the emergency; 
b.  Special precautions be taken to disinfect thoroughly and flush out all pipelines which may have become contaminated before they are again used to furnish drinking water. In the event the means of protection of water consumers is by disinfection of the auxiliary firefighting supply, the installation and its use shall be thoroughly reliable. 
2.  When disinfection of the auxiliary supply itself is depended upon to render the water safe, the means of applying the disinfectant under this regulation shall be automatic with operation of the pump or pumps employed with the dangerous water in question. Adequate supplies of chlorine or its compounds must be kept on hand at all times. Chlorine dosing equipment shall be tested daily and kept in good operating condition. 
3.  The public water supply must be protected against backflow from dual domestic fire systems. 
(Code 1972, § 12.22.050) 
Section 12.22.060. - Violations and penalties. 
A.  The Town Manager shall notify the owner, or authorized agent of the owner, of the building or premise when there is found a violation(s) of these regulations. The Town Manager shall set a specific time for the owner to have the violation removed or corrected. If the owner fails to correct the violation(s) in the specified time, the Town Manager may, if in his, judgment an imminent health hazard exists, request that the water service to the building or premise be terminated. Additional fines or penalties may also be invoked following termination of service. 
B.  Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a Class A municipal offense. Any such offense shall be deemed one of strict liability. Each separate day or any portion thereof during which any violation of this chapter occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
C.  In the event any person, firm, or corporation fails to comply with this chapter, said person, firm, or corporation shall be liable for civil damages done to the Town's water supply system, and for the costs of any repairs and clean-up. 
(Code 1972, § 12.22.060; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 139, 2001) 
CHAPTER 12.24. - WATER QUALITY 

Section 12.24.010. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Enjoined includes temporary, preliminary, and permanent injunctive relief. 
    Municipal water supplies means all surface and/or underground water rights of the Town, and the water flowing at or available to at the point of diversion of such water rights, whether or not the decreed point of diversion is the same as the actual point of diversion, whether absolutely or conditionally decreed, which are used or are capable of being used for any beneficial purpose, including, without limitation, municipal, commercial, aesthetic, irrigation, minimum stream flow, fish and game propagation, recreation, domestic, and industrial uses. 
    Non-point source means any source of pollutant other than a point source and includes, without limitation, water use and development practices, activities which encroach on riparian areas, vegetation disturbance, soil disturbance and earth movement, impervious cover, and stormwater runoff from developed areas. 
    Permit means a permit lawfully issued pursuant to Public Law 92-500, the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 (33 USC 1251 et seq.) or pursuant to C.R.S. § 25-8-502 et seq. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, municipality, district, Federal or State agency, commission, or other state or federal body or political subdivision thereof. 
    Point source means any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, or concentrated animal feeding operation, from which pollutants are or may be discharged. 
    Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical waste, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, agricultural waste, dirt, and slurry. 
    Presumption means that any person charged with the waste of water resources shall bear the burden of proving that the water diversions which were wasted did not contribute to or result in a degradation of the water quality standards set forth in Section 12.24.020. 
    Sources means any area which contributes to the water supply of any stream or river and includes, without limitation, any drainage basin or underground aquifer. 
    Waste means the failure to apply water diverted from any source which contributes to municipal water supplies to a beneficial use and includes, without limitation, causing or permitting the application of water in excess of that reasonably required to accomplish the purpose or purposes for which the water is diverted; permitting water to escape from ditches, canals, or other structures in excess of reasonable loss; and any diversion of water rights decreed for a given purpose under circumstances which cannot reasonably justify such usage. 
(Code 1972, § 12.24.010) 
Section 12.24.020. - Water quality standards. 
    Within the jurisdictional areas set forth in Section 12.24.030, the standards for water quality shall be those standards adopted from time to time by the Water Quality Control Commission pursuant to C.R.S. §§ 25-8-202(b) and 25-8-204, as applicable to the waters located within the jurisdiction of this chapter. Said standards are incorporated in this chapter by reference. 
(Code 1972, § 12.24.020) 
Section 12.24.030. - Jurisdiction for water quality. 
    Pursuant to C.R.S. § 31-15-707(b) and for the purpose of maintaining and protecting its municipal water supply from injury and pollution, the Town shall exercise regulatory and supervisory jurisdiction within the incorporated limits of the Town and over all streams and sources contributing to municipal water supplies for a distance of five miles above the points from which municipal supplies are diverted. The Board of Trustees shall approve a map outlining the approximate boundary of said jurisdiction which shall be on file in the Town Clerk's office. 
(Code 1972, § 12.24.030) 
Section 12.24.040. - Discharges unlawful. 
    Within the jurisdictional areas defined in Section 12.24.030, any person who discharges from either a point source or a non-point source any pollutant or engages in any activity which will result in the degradation of water quality below the standards set forth in Section 12.24.020 commits a Class A municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 12.24.040; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 140, 2001) 
Section 12.24.050. - Waste prohibited. 
    Within the jurisdictional areas defined in Section 12.24.030, any person who wastes water resources commits a non-criminal municipal offense. The failure to apply water to a beneficial use shall give rise to a presumption of waste. 
(Code 1972, § 12.24.050; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 141, 2001) 
Section 12.24.060. - Compliance with permits. 
    Compliance with an applicable permit held by any person charged with a violation of this chapter shall constitute an absolute defense to any such violation. 
(Code 1972, § 12.24.060) 
Section 12.24.070. - On-site waste disposal systems. 
A.  It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of any building used for residence or business purposes within the incorporated limits of the Town to construct or reconstruct an on-site sewage disposal device for the purpose of collecting, storing, or disposing of sewage; provided, however, that temporary, self-contained privies may be placed on construction sites or at public gatherings for the duration of the construction or attraction. These temporary facilities shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. 
B.  If any structure within the jurisdictional limits defined in Section 12.24.030 is currently being served by an on-site sewage disposal system and that system fails or malfunctions to the extent that it no longer is effectively treating waste and a danger is created that pollution of the Town's water supply may occur, the owner or occupant shall make application within five days from the date on which the owner or occupant first learns of said failure or malfunction to the sanitation district for attachment of the structure to the public sewage system. If said structure is not within a sanitation district, or capable of being attached to a public sewage system, the owner or occupant shall be responsible for controlling, repairing, or replacing said failure or malfunction within five days from the date on which owner or occupant first learns of said failure or malfunction. Any malfunction or failure of an on-site waste disposal system is a public nuisance. 
C.  Any violation of this section shall constitute a Class A municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 12.24.070; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 142, 2001) 
Section 12.24.080. - Disposal of animal carcasses required. 
    Any animal which shall be killed or die from any cause in the Town or within 100 feet of the banks of Brush Creek, East Brush Creek, West Brush Creek, or any tributary thereto, that is within the jurisdictional limits defined in Section 12.24.030, shall be at once removed to a designated landfill by the owner or person having had such animal in his possession, control, or charge, and the carcass of such animal shall be buried or disposed of in a sanitary manner. If ownership of the animal cannot be determined, it shall be the responsibility of the Animal Control Department to pick up and dispose of such an animal carcass as provided in this section. 
(Code 1972, § 12.24.080) 
Section 12.24.090. - Specific activities causing pollution. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person or persons to have, keep, or maintain any grazing livestock or other animal within 100 feet of any water treatment facility, reservoir, intake point, distribution stream, trench, inlet pipe, or drain comprising a part of the Town municipal water utility. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to bathe or swim in any of the reservoirs or other part of the Eagle water utility. 
C.  Any violation of this section shall constitute a non-criminal municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 12.24.090; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 143, 2001) 
Section 12.24.100. - Accumulation of standing water on land regulated. 
    It is unlawful for any person owning or occupying any premises, lot, or parcel of land within the jurisdictional limits defined in Section 12.24.030 to allow an accumulation of standing water that is or is likely to become offensive or injurious to public health. Any person owning or occupying any premises, lot, or parcel of land whereupon water shall be standing as aforesaid shall be deemed guilty of a Class B municipal offense. 
(Code 1972, § 12.24.100; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 144, 2001) 
Section 12.24.110. - Penalties and relief. 
A.  Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, any person, firm, or corporation committing any municipal offense contained in this chapter shall be guilty of a Class A municipal offense. Said offense shall be deemed one of strict liability. Each separate day or any portion thereof during which any violation of this chapter occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
B.  The Town may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction, enjoining any person from further or continued violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 12.24.110; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 145, 2001) 
CHAPTER 12.26. - WATER RIGHTS 

Section 12.26.010. - Intent and purpose. 
A.  It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to further the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Town by requiring the dedication of water rights prior to the extension of treated or raw water service to new customers and to thereby ensure an adequate and stable supply of water to the Town service area; to prevent the abandonment of water rights to the detriment of the Town; to ensure the financial stability of the Town water utility; and to promote the general welfare of the public. 
B.  This chapter, in part, provides a supplemental requirement for annexation pursuant to Chapter 4.15 and the Municipal Annexation Act of 1965, C.R.S. § 31-12-101 et seq., and is not to be construed as altering, modifying, eliminating or replacing any requirements set forth therein. 
(Code 1972, § 12.26.010) 
Section 12.26.020. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Annexation means the act of attaching, adding, joining, or uniting a parcel of land to the legal entity known as the Town. 
    Appurtenant means belonging to, accessory or incident to, adjunct, appended, or annexed to. 
    Conveyance of water rights means the legal process by which legal title to the water rights to be dedicated is transferred to the Town by appropriate deed. 
    Dedication means the conveyance of a water right to the Town, made by the owner, and the acceptance of such conveyance by the Town in accordance with this chapter, for use by the Town through its municipal water system for service to the Town, its inhabitants, and water customers. 
    Equivalent residential unit (EQR) means a number related to the volume of water consumptively used by a single-family residential unit housing a statistical average of 31/2 persons and having not more than 2,500 square feet of irrigated lawn or garden. The water consumption for each EQR is 1.0 acre-foot per year if wastewater is returned to the Eagle River system by the municipal wastewater treatment facilities serving the Town. For deliveries to demand utilizing wastewater treatment facilities which are 100 percent consumptive in nature without material effluent return flows to the Eagle River or Brush Creek, the water consumption for each EQR is 1.0 acre-foot per year. For deliveries to water uses not utilizing the Town's municipal wastewater treatment facilities, it is assumed that no return flows are generated to the Eagle River or Brush Creek systems; this presumption may be rebutted by a licensed professional engineer's analysis of actual return flow efficiency of the wastewater system to be utilized. If wastewater efficiencies are less than those of Town sewer facilities but greater than a system which is totally consumptive, the water consumption per EQR shall be modified by the appropriate fraction. The consumptive use as to all other residential (but not commercial) uses is considered to bear the same ratio to the consumptive use of an average single-family residence as the EQR value assigned to that use in the respective tables of EQRs in Section 12.16.060 bears to the EQR value assigned to the single-family residence in the table of EQRs for the respective wastewater system utilized. Consumptive use for commercial uses shall be determined by a licensed professional engineer based upon the circumstances of each particular case. 
    Historical use affidavit means a document which sets forth the following information concerning the water rights proposed for dedication: 
A.  The name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) of the water rights proposed for dedication; 
B.  A legal description of the land to be annexed or provided with municipal water service; 
C.  The total number of acres to be annexed, subdivided, replatted, or provided with municipal water service and the current use of the property; 
D.  The total number of acres presently being irrigated and/or intended to remain in irrigation; 
E.  A copy of all decrees concerning all water rights appurtenant to property and/or all water rights proposed for dedication; 
F.  A copy of any legal decree or judgment which affects the title of those water rights entered since the owner received title to the water rights appurtenant to the property and/or proposed for dedication; 
G.  A copy of the documents by which the owner received title to the water rights appurtenant to the property and/or proposed for dedication; 
H.  A copy of all diversion records of the water rights proposed for dedication; 
I.  The owner's statement as to the historic use of water rights appurtenant to the property and/or proposed for dedication. 
    Lease means any grant for permissive use which results in the creation of a landlord-tenant relationship on a contractual basis. 
    Party means an individual, a partnership, a corporation, a municipality, or any other legal entity, public or private. 
    Plat means an accurately surveyed map or chart of a piece of land subdivided into lots with streets, alleys, roads and other such avenues of transportation delineated thereon and drawn to scale. 
    Replat means to make a change in the original plat. 
    Subdivide means to separate into smaller divisions a tract of land into two or more lots, tracts, parcels, sites, separate interests in common, condominium interests or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or for future, of transfer of ownership, or for building or other development, or for street use by reference to such subdivision or a recorded plat thereof. 
    Sufficient legal priority means that the water rights proposed for dedication may be reasonably expected to provide a dependable water supply throughout the season of use in the amount for which they are decreed, and that such water rights are reasonably expected to be transferrable for use by the Town at its existing and proposed points of diversion. In making this determination, factors to be considered shall include, but not by way of limitation, the adjudication date and appropriation date of the water rights, the decreed use(s), the historic use of the water under the decree, the physical flow available, and the administration practices of the office of the State Engineer, and the location and amounts of other water rights which may be injured by any transfer; provided, however, that any water right proposed for dedication which has Brush Creek as its decreed source of supply shall not be deemed to have sufficient legal priority unless the water right was lawfully adjudicated prior to January 1, 1900. 
    Town Manager means the Town Manager of Eagle, Colorado. 
    Transfer of water rights means all actions required under the laws of the State to be brought in the water court and elsewhere to change said water right for use through and within the Town's water system. Such actions may include, but not by way of exclusion or limitation, a plan for augmentation, a change in the type, place, or time of use, a change in the point of diversion, a change from a fixed point of diversion to alternate or supplemental points of diversion, a change from alternate or supplemental points of diversion to a fixed point of diversion, a change in the means of diversion, a change in the place of storage, a change from direct application to storage and subsequent application, a change from storage and subsequent application to direct application, a change from a fixed place of storage to alternate places of storage, a change from alternate places of storage, or any combination of such changes. "Transfer of water rights" includes transfer of conditional water rights as well as transfer of water rights. 
    Water right means a decreed right to use in accordance with its priority a certain portion of the waters of the State by reason of the appropriation of the same. 
(Code 1972, § 12.26.020) 
Section 12.26.030. - Basic dedication requirement. 
A.  A dedication and transfer of direct flow and/or storage water rights to the Town shall be required: 
1.  Prior to the approval of the annexation of any land to the Town; 
2.  Prior to all extensions of municipally treated water service outside the Town limits as they existed on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived as originally codified; or 
3.  Prior to the subdivision or replatting of any land now located within the Town, if such subdivision or replatting requires a change of zone district. 
B.  The dedication requirement shall be calculated in accordance with Subsection (C) of this section on forms provided by the Town Manager. Such forms shall be accompanied by a historical use affidavit. For those persons whose compliance with Subsection (C) of this section results in a total EQR of greater than 30 EQR, no historical use affidavit shall be required, but an engineering analysis, acceptable to the Town, of the historic use of the water rights proposed for dedication shall be required. 
C.  The basic dedication requirement for the irrigation season shall be 0.95 AF/year of historic consumptive use of a water right of sufficient legal priority for each domestic or residential EQR calculated under the table of EQRs in Section 12.16.060 for Town sewered water service. The basic dedication requirement for the irrigation season shall be 0.95 AF/year of historic consumptive use of a water right of sufficient legal priority for each domestic or residential EQR for evapo-transpirative sewered service. For purposes herein, the term "evapo-transpirative sewered service" means any system which processes or disposes of liquid or solid wastes through transference from the earth's surface to the atmosphere or through transpiration by plants. The basic dedication requirement for the non-irrigation season for all uses shall be a fee to be paid to the Town at the time of conveyance of the water rights. The fee shall be determined by the Town Board, based on costs for acquisition, administration, and maintenance of the Town's contract for water service from Green Mountain Reservoir. For raw water uses, commercial uses, or other uses not calculated under the table of EQRs, the basic requirement for the irrigation season shall be the quantity of water to be required ultimately in the satisfaction of those uses as contemplated by the new user and taking into account the return flow patterns of such use to Brush Creek and to the Eagle River. 
D.  The basic requirement shall be satisfied by the person seeking approval of annexation, subdivision, replatting, or the extension of municipally treated water service, whether or not that person will be the ultimate user(s). 
(Code 1972, § 12.26.030) 
Section 12.26.040. - Dedication of water rights for open space. 
    The owner of any property proposed to be annexed or subdivided who dedicates property to the Town pursuant to Section 4.13.190 to be used for open space, park, aesthetic, recreation, or irrigation purposes shall also comply with the provisions of this chapter for the property to be dedicated. 
(Code 1972, § 12.26.040) 
Section 12.26.050. - Procedure. 
A.  In accordance with the basic requirements set forth in Section 12.26.030, the Town Manager shall determine, after consultation with a person or persons skilled in the knowledge of water rights, whether the water rights proposed for dedication pursuant to the provisions of this chapter will be of sufficient legal priority under the laws of the State to ensure the Town's ability to meet the service demands of the new user. This determination will be aided by a historic use affidavit or engineering report provided by the new user. 
B.  The Town shall have the right, in its sole discretion, to accept or reject any water rights proposed for dedication pursuant to the provisions of this chapter which the Board has determined do not have sufficient legal priority. If the Board determines that the water rights proposed fail to satisfy the basic dedication requirement, the following alternatives, or combination thereof, may be used to otherwise satisfy the basic dedication requirement: 
1.  The person required to comply with the basic dedication requirement may pay to the Town a cash amount equal to the fair market value of the water rights necessary to satisfy the basic dedication requirement. 
2.  The Town Manager may, in his discretion, negotiate with the new user to establish other terms or conditions which shall constitute compliance with the basic dedication requirement of this chapter. 
C.  The new user shall dedicate the water rights determined by the Town by filing with the Town Board an offer thereof. It is the intent of this chapter that no water service shall be extended to a new user until the agreed to water rights have been dedicated to the Town; however, if there are matters pending resolution in the water court concerning the water rights to be dedicated, or if there is other delay beyond the control of the new user, the Town Manager shall have the discretion to approve the extension of such water service prior to the dedication of water rights to the Town. 
D.  Subject to negotiations with the Board, all costs and expenses attendant to the conveyance and transfer of water rights dedicated to the Town shall be borne by the new user. The Town Manager may, with approval by the Board, determine for small uses to negotiate a one-time, up-front fee to be paid by the developer and used by the Town for the costs of conveyance and transfer. Otherwise, the Town Manager shall establish a deposit requirement to be held by the Town and maintained by the new user to pay for such costs. 
E.  Any decision of the Town Manager made hereunder shall be appealable at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Board of Trustees, whose determination shall be final. 
(Code 1972, § 12.26.050) 
Section 12.26.060. - Agricultural and open space property. 
    If the owner of the property proposed to be annexed or subdivided desires to retain the land or any portion thereof in agricultural production or as open space prior to development, he may be permitted to lease back, on an annual basis, and for irrigation, aesthetic and recreational purposes only, the water rights transferred pursuant to this chapter. The terms of the lease shall be negotiated with the Board. 
(Code 1972, § 12.26.060) 
Section 12.26.070. - Option to purchase. 
A.  Time. Any person required to comply with the basic dedication requirement shall also grant to the Town the option to purchase any and all water rights which are appurtenant to the land to be annexed but which are in excess of the basic dedication requirement. Said option may be exercised by the Town at any time for a period of one year following the date of the grant to the Town with regard to any or all of the water rights subject to the grant. 
B.  Price. The option price shall be that price agreed upon by the parties. If the parties do not agree upon an option price within 30 days after notice of the Town's intent to exercise its option is received by the owner, appraisal at the Town's expense will establish the price that reflects the fair market value of the water right(s). The appraisal shall be conducted by one appraiser appointed by the Town, one appraiser appointed by the owner of the water rights, and a third appraiser who shall be appointed by both parties. The average of the three appraisals shall be the option price. 
C.  Right of first refusal. 
1.  Grant of right. In addition to the grant of the option to purchase by the new user(s), there shall be a grant to the Town by the user(s) of a right of first refusal regarding the water rights subject to said option to purchase. If the Town for any reason should choose not to exercise its option to purchase, it shall retain said right of first refusal, in the event the water rights are sold independently of the land, for a period of ten years following annexation or final approval, or replatting, or extension of water service to a subdivision, whichever last occurs. 
2.  Notice period. If the owner of the water rights subject to said right of first refusal wishes to sell the water rights to a third party, he shall give to the Town at least 90 days' notice of his intention to effect a sale of said water rights by delivering to the Town a bona fide written offer to purchase made by a third party. 
3.  Exercise of right. During the 90-day notice period provided for in Subsection (C)(2) of this section, the Town shall enjoy its right of first refusal entitling it to purchase the water rights subject to its right and proposed for sale. If within 90 days following notice by the owner of his intention to sell his water rights, the Town chooses to exercise its right to purchase, then the Town shall pay to the owner the fair market price of the water rights prevailing at the time of the offer, which price shall be at least equal to the amount tendered to the owner in the bona fide offer by the third party. In the event that the Town determines not to exercise its right to purchase the water rights offered for sale, the owner shall be free to sell the water rights to the third party; provided, however, that any such sale to a third party shall be for a price which is at least equal to that price which was tendered to and refused by the Town. 
(Code 1972, § 12.26.070) 
II. - WASTEWATER COLLECTION SYSTEM 
CHAPTER 12.32. - WASTEWATER COLLECTION SYSTEM - DEFINITIONS 

Section 12.32.010. - Generally. 
    For the purposes of Chapters 12.32 through 12.38, certain words, terms and phrases are defined and shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this chapter, unless otherwise more specifically defined or it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended. 
    Act or Clean Water Act means the Clean Water Act of 1977 (Pub.L. 95-217), 33 USC 1251 et seq., as the same is in effect on the date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived becomes effective or as may hereafter be amended. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the wastewater line, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Collection system means a system of wastewater mains that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with minor quantities of groundwater, stormwater, and surface water that are not admitted intentionally. The term only includes those wastewater mains that have been accepted by the Town for public ownership, maintenance, repair and control and which are designated on official maps of the Town or previously by the Eagle Sanitation District. The wastewater mains of the collection system are generally those lines receiving discharge from multiple service lines and which are located between publicly accepted manholes. 
    Connection permit means a permit to connect to the collection system of the Town issued in accordance with Section 12.36.040. 
    Discharge permit means a permit to discharge industrial waste into the collection system of the Town, as authorized and permitted by Sections 12.36.090 through 12.36.110. 
    Industrial discharger or discharger means any nonresidential user who discharges an effluent into the collection system by means of pipes, conduits, pumping stations, force mains, constructed drainage ditches, surface water intercepting ditches, and all constructed devices and appliances appurtenant thereto, as described in Section 12.36.080. 
    Industrial waste means solid, liquid or gaseous waste resulting from any industrial manufacturing trade or business process, or from the development, recovery or processing of natural resources. 
    Pollutant means any substance discharge into the Town wastewater treatment facilities or its collection system, which is listed in the National Pretreatment Standards, 40 CFR 4003, as the same is now in effect or may hereafter be amended. 
    Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the collection system of the Town. This reduction or alteration may be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes or by other means, except as otherwise prohibited. Appropriate pretreatment technology includes control equipment such as equalization tanks or facilities for the protection against surges or slug loadings that might interfere with or otherwise be incompatible with the wastewater treatment facilities of the Town. 
    Runoff waters means any water from storm or surface runoff, including, by way of example but not by limitation, groundwaters, or storm and surface runoff from building foundations or roof drains, or any other collected or uncollected water from natural sources. 
    Service line means the extension from the building drain to the public collection system or other place of disposal, also called "house connection," whether on private property, a public right-of-way or easement, including the saddle or connecting device to the wastewater main. 
    Slug means any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24 hour concentration of flows from such user during normal operation and which adversely affect the Town's collection system or performance of its wastewater facilities. 
    Superintendent means the official designated by the Town Manager to be superintendent of wastewater facilities of the Town, or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
    Town , where the context so requires or permits, shall mean the Town of Eagle, Colorado, Wastewater Enterprise, the wastewater activity enterprise owned by the Town, which business is responsible for the operation and maintenance of the Town wastewater collection and treatment system and which business receives under ten percent of its annual revenues in grants from all state and local governments combined and which is authorized to issue its own revenue bonds. "Board of Trustees," where the context so requires or permits, shall mean the governing body of the Town of Eagle, Colorado, Wastewater Enterprise. 
    Wastewater means water-carried industrial waste, human waste, or any other waste, including that which may be combined with any groundwater, surface water, or stormwater that may be discharged into the wastewater treatment facilities of the Town; also means sewage. 
(Code 1972, §§ 12.32.010-12.32.160; Ord. No. 18-1997, § 1(part), 1997) 
CHAPTER 12.34. - WASTEWATER COLLECTION SYSTEM - GENERALLY 

Section 12.34.010. - Wastewater collection and treatment system established. 
    Effective January 1, 1995, the Town wastewater collection and treatment system was created and established for the express purpose of carrying and disposing of human waste and, under certain specified conditions, industrial waste of a liquid nature and other waste, pursuant to C.R.S. § 31-35-401 et seq. 
(Code 1972, § 12.34.010; Ord. No. 18-1997, § 2(part), 1997) 
Section 12.34.020. - Extraterritorial wastewater collection service. 
    The Town shall not extend wastewater collection service to any property lying outside the corporate limits of the Town or the boundaries of the now dissolved Eagle Sanitation District except as set forth in this section. 
A.  Except as provided in Subsection (C) of this section, no property lying outside the corporate limits of the Town or the boundaries of the now dissolved Eagle Sanitation District that is eligible for annexation to the Town shall be provided wastewater collection service until such property is annexed to the Town. An owner of property not subdivided and approved for residential and/or commercial development as of November 3, 2001, requesting wastewater collection service shall petition for annexation of the property to the Town prior to obtaining such subdivision or development approval. Such property shall be annexed to the Town prior to any further subdivision or development approval, and prior to receiving wastewater collection service; provided, however, nothing contained herein shall require the Town to annex any eligible property. 
B.  Except as provided in Subsection (C) of this section, no property lying outside the corporate limits of the Town or the boundaries of the now dissolved Eagle Sanitation District not currently eligible for annexation to the Town shall be provided wastewater collection service unless: 
1.  Lack of municipal wastewater collection service creates a demonstrable hardship upon the owner of the property; 
2.  The property is capable of being annexed within a reasonable time as determined by the Board of Trustees; 
3.  The owner, for itself, its successors and assigns, executes a binding agreement with the Town to annex the property to the Town at such time as it becomes eligible for annexation; and 
4.  Development and future annexation of said property is in accordance with the Town's three-mile annexation plan, and all other applicable Town plans. 
C.  Notwithstanding the requirements contained in Subsections (A) and (B) of this section, wastewater collection service may be provided to property lying outside the corporate limits of the Town when said property is owned by the United States, the State, or the county, and the Board of Trustees finds and determines that it is in the best interest of the Town to provide requested extraterritorial wastewater collection service to such property. Such wastewater collection service shall be provided upon any terms and conditions deemed appropriate or necessary by the Board of Trustees and any such terms or conditions shall be incorporated into an extraterritorial wastewater services agreement entered into by the Town and the governmental entity requesting service. Following the extension of wastewater collection service to the property, if the governmental entity conveys the property to private person(s) or a private entity, the Town shall cease to provide wastewater collection service to the property unless Subsection (A) or (B) of this section is complied with. 
D.  All provisions of this Title shall apply to those areas served outside the corporate limits of the Town, except those areas covered by a contract existing as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived which expressly establishes other rules for the area served under the contract. 
E.  Nothing contained in this section shall obligate the Town to provide wastewater collection service to any property lying outside the corporate limits of the Town or the boundaries of the now dissolved Eagle Sanitation District when the Board of Trustees determines that it is not in the best interests of the Town to provide the requested extraterritorial wastewater service. The Town may impose such contract and performance guarantee requirements as it deems necessary to safeguard the best interests of the Town. 
F.  Any person desiring to connect a service line which is located outside the corporate limits of the Town to the Town's wastewater collection system shall make application to the Town Clerk or Public Works Director for wastewater collection service. The application for service shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information deemed necessary by the Town Manager to determine compliance with all ordinances, goals, policies, plans, regulations or rules concerning the wastewater collection system. The Town Manager shall review and approve or disapprove the application as complying or failing to comply with all such ordinances, goals, policies, plans, regulations or rules concerning the Town's wastewater collection system. Upon consent by the Board of Trustees to provide extraterritorial wastewater collection service pursuant to contract, including an agreement to annex the served property when eligible, plant investment fees and connection fees shall be assessed. Notwithstanding the payment of any fees pursuant to the provisions of this Title, connections to the Town's wastewater collection system for service outside the Town shall at all times be subject to availability. 
(Code 1972, § 12.34.020; Ord. No. 18-1997, § 2(part), 1997; Amended Ord. No. 19, § 3(part), 2001; Amended Ord. No. 33-2005, §§ 5-8(part), 2005) 
Section 12.34.030. - Wastewater collection main extensions. 
    All construction, extension or enlargement of collection mains necessary to collect wastewater from existing undeveloped areas, new subdivisions, additions, or annexed territory shall be extended by the owner or developer of the property to be served by such collection mains from the existing collection main to the point or points of the property line farthest from the existing collection main. Application for said extension shall be made in writing and shall require the written consent of the Town Board of Trustees. Such application shall include a map or plat of existing and proposed rights-of-way and easements and a map of the proposed extension or enlargement of the collection system prepared by a licensed land surveyor or civil engineer. All such extensions and enlargements of the collection system shall be constructed by the prospective developer or owner in accordance with Town specifications contained in Chapters 12.32 through 12.38 or regulations issued pursuant to such chapters. The applicant shall bear the sole cost and expense of such extensions and enlargements of the wastewater collection system unless otherwise approved in writing by the Town Board. 
(Code 1972, § 12.34.030; Ord. No. 18-1997, § 2(part), 1997) 
Section 12.34.040. - Operation and control. 
    The operation and management of the wastewater collection and treatment system shall be under the control of the superintendent, who shall direct the maintenance and operations thereof. In all cases not particularly provided for by this Title or other provisions of law, the superintendent shall determine in what manner and upon what terms wastewater collection service may be provided to any property owner or collection system user and the character of the connections which may be made or used. 
(Code 1972, § 12.34.040; Ord. No. 18-1997, § 2(part), 1997) 
Section 12.34.050. - Regulations. 
    The Town Manager may, from time to time, propose technical rules, regulations and specifications not inconsistent with Chapters 12.32 through 12.38. Such proposed regulations shall be presented to the Town Board of Trustees and approved by resolution. Once approved, such regulations, rules and specifications shall have the same force and effect as any ordinance of the Town. 
(Code 1972, § 12.34.050; Ord. No. 18-1997, § 2(part), 1997) 
Section 12.34.060. - Violations and penalties. 
A.  In the event any provision of Chapters 12.32 through 12.38 is violated by a user, the Town may suspend wastewater collection system service to the violator, as determined by the superintendent. Any person notified of the suspension of wastewater collection system service shall, within a reasonable period of time, as determined by the superintendent, cease using the wastewater collection system. In the event of failure of the violator to comply voluntarily with the suspension order within the specified time, the superintendent shall, upon notice, immediately terminate water service to the user and may commence judicial proceedings to compel compliance with such order. 
B.  Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any of the provisions of Chapters 12.32 through 12.38, or rules, regulations and specifications adopted thereunder, commits a Class A municipal offense. Each day during which such offense occurs shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. Any such violation shall be deemed one of strict liability. 
(Code 1972, § 12.34.060; Ord. No. 18-1997, § 2(part) 1997; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 146, 2001) 
CHAPTER 12.36. - WASTEWATER COLLECTION SYSTEM - REGULATIONS CONCERNING CONNECTIONS, DISCHARGES, ENFORCEMENT AND INSPECTIONS 

Section 12.36.010. - Privies and septic tanks prohibited. 
    Except as otherwise expressly provided, no person shall maintain within the Town any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended for use for the disposal of wastewater. 
(Code 1972, § 12.36.010; Ord. No. 18-1997, § 4(part), 1997) 
Section 12.36.020. - Connection to collection system required. 
A.  The Town Board of Trustees deems it necessary for the protection of the public health that the owners of all residential dwellings, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, nonresidential or other purposes, situated within the Town, install, at the owner's expense, suitable toilet facilities therein, and connect such facilities directly with the collection system in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Such connection with the collection system shall be made prior to issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy, certificate of occupancy, or within 30 days after date of written notice given by certified or registered mail to such owners notifying them to connect their premises with the collection system. 
B.  The Board of Trustees may grant an exception, on a case by case basis, and at their sole discretion, to not require a connection to the system when considering the following factors. For purposes of considering distances in this section, the measurement shall be from the dwellings or buildings to a designated point on the collection system and on an alignment of the service line approved by the Town Engineer. 
1.  Where a collection system main does not run within 400 feet of a property boundary line; or 
2.  Where a collection system does not run within 500 feet of the perimeter of a residential dwelling unit or nonresidential structure within the Town or in any area under the jurisdiction of the Town; or 
3.  When the Town Engineer makes a recommendation that connecting to the system would present undue hardship due to grade; and/or difficulty in stream, road or railroad crossings; and 
4.  The private wastewater service line serving such property or in such residential dwelling unit, as applicable, is required to be connected to a private individual sanitary disposal system complying with the provisions and recommendations of the State Department of Public Health and Environment, as administered by the County Department of Environmental Health. 
C.  At such time as a public wastewater collection main runs within 400 feet of the property line of any property served by a private wastewater disposal system or within 500 feet of the perimeter of a residential dwelling unit or nonresidential structure served by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the collection system in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise determined by the Town Engineer in accordance with Subsection (B)(3) of this section, and any septic tank, cesspool or similar wastewater disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material, all at the owner's expense. 
(Code 1972, § 12.36.020; Ord. No. 5-2009, § 1, 2009) 
Section 12.36.030. - Plant investment and connection fees required. 
    No service installation, wastewater tap or other connection with the wastewater mains and lines of the Town wastewater collection system shall be made without approval of the superintendent and until all applicable plant investment and connection fees have been paid and a permit has been issued. It is unlawful for any person to make any connection to the wastewater collection system contrary to the provisions of this Title or any other ordinance or regulation of the Town. 
(Code 1972, § 12.36.030; Ord. No. 18-1997, § 4(part), 1997) 
Section 12.36.040. - Application for connection to wastewater collection system. 
A.  Application for wastewater collection service shall be made in writing to the Town Clerk and to the superintendent, on such forms as the Town Manager may prescribe. Application must be made by the owner of the property to be served or his duly authorized representative, designating the property, stating the purpose for which the wastewater collection service may be required, and stating the number of EQR units associated with such purpose. 
B.  No wastewater collection system connection permit shall be issued nor any connection commitment approved except as provided in this chapter, unless the plant investment and connection fee is paid, or the connection permit is issued and paid for pursuant to a phasing agreement, or other agreement with the Town to the contrary, unless said fee is waived or reduced. 
C.  At the time of application for any Town building permit, construction, or for any use which will use the Town's wastewater collection system, the owner or authorized representative shall make application for wastewater collection service. Plant investment and connection fees shall be assessed at the rate applicable under this chapter and shall be due and payable at the same time the building permit is issued. 
D.  In the event an application is made for a building permit issued by another entity, the owner or authorized representative of the property for which wastewater collection service is sought shall make application to the Town for wastewater collection service to the property for which the building permit is sought. Plant investment and connection fees shall be assessed at the rate applicable under this chapter and shall be due and payable at the same time the building permit is issued. 
E.  Wastewater collection service shall be provided on a first come, first served basis with other wastewater collection service customers. No property owner shall receive any preference for or the assurance of the availability of wastewater collection service from the Town until payment of the plant investment and connection fee. Prepayment of plant investment and connection fees shall not be permitted. 
F.  Any commitment by the Town to extend wastewater collection service shall not be transferred to any property other than that for which the commitment was made. 
(Code 1972, § 12.36.040; Ord. No. 18-1997, § 4(part), 1997; Ord. No. 36-2006, § 4, 2006) 
Section 12.36.050. - Plant investment and connection fee. 
    No wastewater connection service shall be furnished to a consumer unless the plant investment and connection fee and other applicable expenses have been paid to the Town. Each applicant shall be required to submit plant investment and connection fees in an amount established by resolution of the Board of Trustees per EQR, as calculated in accordance with the Table of Equivalent Units contained in Section 12.16.060. 
(Code 1972, § 12.36.050; Ord. No. 13, § 1, 2006; Amended Ord. No. 25, § 3, 2007; Amended Ord. No. 26, § 2, 2007; Amended Ord. No. 24-2008, § 2, 2008; Amended Ord. No. 12-2013, § 2, 2013; Ord. No. 29-2015, § 2, 10-13-2015; Ord. No. 30-2015, § 1, 10-27-2015; Ord. No. 01-2017, § 10, 1-10-2017) 
Section 12.36.060. - Wastewater connections. 
    Any user of the wastewater collection system, either inside or outside of the Town, must install and maintain its service line to the collection system. All connections made directly to the wastewater main shall be performed by employees of the Town. Connections made to pre-tapped service lines at the property line may be made by the property owner subject to inspection by the superintendent. 
A.  A separate and independent service line shall be provided for every lot or parcel of property. Where more than one building exists on one lot or when multifamily development is planned, a plan showing the service line system must be presented to the Town for approval by the superintendent. 
B.  Building service lines for existing buildings may be used in connection with additions and renovations only when they are found, upon examination and testing by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of the ordinances and any wastewater collection system installation regulations of the Town. 
C.  Whenever possible, the building wastewater service line shall be brought from the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public wastewater collection system, an accepted means of lifting and discharging the wastewater into the public collection system shall be required. 
D.  No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation or floor drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building drain or service line which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to the collection system. 
E.  All connections of the service lines into the collection system shall be made watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the procedures and materials prescribed in this chapter and any wastewater collection system installation specifications of the Town must be approved by the superintendent before installation. The applicant for a connection permit shall notify the superintendent when the service line is ready for inspection and connection to the collection system. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of that official or his representative. 
F.  All excavations for service line installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored by the owner, at the owner's expense and in a manner satisfactory to the Town. If connection of the service line to the collection system requires construction in the public right-of-way, the superintendent may require an application for construction within the right-of-way permit be submitted and approved. 
G.  All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the service line shall be borne by the owner of the property to be served, regardless of whether the installation is within the public right-of-way. 
H.  All costs and expenses incurred by the Town incidental to the installation and connection of a wastewater service line to the collection system from the premises of a customer shall be borne by the owner of the premises. Such costs and expenses shall include, by way of example and not limitation, costs for all labor and inspections by the Town, based upon hourly rates set by the Town Manager or his designee, the cost of any materials and machinery required to be installed, and the costs of all services provided by the Town. 
(Code 1972, § 12.36.060; Ord. No. 18-1997, § 4(part), 1997) 
Section 12.36.070. - Conformance with rules, regulations and specification standards. 
    The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of the collection system and service lines, the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, backfilling the trench, and connection of the building drain and service line into the collection system, shall all conform to the requirements of all applicable Town ordinances, regulations and specifications which may be adopted by the Town Manager. Such regulations shall be presented to the Town Board of Trustees and approved by resolution. When so approved, they shall have the same force and effect as any ordinance of the Town. 
(Code 1972, § 12.36.070; Ord. No. 18-1997, § 4(part), 1997) 
Section 12.36.080. - Discharge of certain materials. 
    In order to prevent the discharge into the collection system of the Town, of any waters which may interfere with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities, or cause injury, damage or pollution; 
A.  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described water or wastes into the wastewater treatment facilities of the Town: 
1.  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas; 
2.  Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant; 
3.  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of the wastewater works; 
4.  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in the collection system, or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, underground garbage, whole blood, cattle manure, hair and fleshings, entrails or, either whole or ground by garbage grinders, paper dishes, cups or milk containers; 
5.  Any toxic substance, as the same is defined in the Rules and Regulations of the Environmental Protection Agency embodied in 40 CFR 403; 
6.  Any substance which would cause the wastewater treatment plant of the Town to violate any permit issued by the State, the Federal government, or any other applicable agency. 
B.  The following described substances, materials, waters or waste shall not be discharged into the Town's wastewater collection system in concentrations or quantities which will harm the collection system or wastewater treatment facilities, process or equipment, or employees; have an adverse effect on the receiving watercourse; or otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance: 
1.  Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the wastewater treatment facilities plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at its introduction into the collection system higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit or 65 degrees Celsius; 
2.  Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per liter of petroleum, oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or product of mineral oil origin; 
3.  Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fat or grease; 
4.  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected to service lines of residential dwellings, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers; 
5.  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment facility exceeds the limits established for such materials by the appropriate official of the Town; 
6.  Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances exceeding limits which may be established by the Town; 
7.  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the Town in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations; 
8.  Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a "slug," as defined in Chapter 12.3; 
9.  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed by the Town, or amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge of the receiving waters from the Town's treatment facilities; 
10.  Any waters or wastes which, by interaction with other water or wastes in the wastewater collection system, release obnoxious gases, form suspended solids which interfere with the collection system, or create any condition deleterious to the structures or processes of the Town's treatment facilities, or would cause such facilities to violate the terms and conditions of any applicable permit; 
11.  Any pollutant, as defined in Chapter 12.32; 
12.  Any water or wastes which are defined in 40 CFR 403, as requiring pretreatment, or as toxic. 
C.  If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged, to the collection system, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in Subsections (A) and (B) of this section, the superintendent shall have those remedies as are set forth in Section 12.36.140. 
D.  In the case of an industrial or non-industrial discharger, grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided by the owner of the property at his expense when, in the opinion of the superintendent or Building Official, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, petroleum products, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity required by the Uniform Plumbing Code and approved by the superintendent or Building Official and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In maintaining these interceptors the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured materials, and shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal, which records are subject to review by the superintendent. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by the owner must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms. 
(Code 1972, § 12.36.080; Ord. No. 18-1997, § 4(part), 1997) 
Section 12.36.090. - Industrial discharges, permit required. 
A.  All industrial dischargers who propose to connect to, or to discharge wastewater, industrial wastes and other wastes to the Town wastewater treatment facilities shall obtain a discharge permit. All existing industrial dischargers connected to, or discharging to the wastewater treatment facilities of the Town shall obtain a discharge permit within 60 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
B.  A permit application shall be filed with the superintendent, in a form prescribed by him, which shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name, address and location of the discharger; 
2.  The standard industrial classification (S.I.C.) number of the business according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual; 
3.  Disclosure of wastewater constituents and characteristics, including, but not limited to, those mentioned in this chapter, including the regulations of the United States Environmental Protection Agency as incorporated herein, as determined by appropriate chemical or biological analyses. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the procedures established by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, and contained in 40 CFR 136, as amended; 
4.  Disclosure of the time and duration of discharge; 
5.  Disclosure of average daily and instantaneous peak wastewater flow rates, and gallons per day, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any. All flows shall be measured, unless other verifiable techniques are approved by the superintendent due to cost or other reasons; 
6.  Disclosure of site plans, floor plans, mechanical and pumping plans, and details to show all drains, service line connections, inspection manholes, sampling chambers and appurtenances by size, location and elevations; 
7.  A description of activities, facilities and plant processes on premises, including all materials which are or may be discharged to the collection system of the Town; and disclosure of the nature and concentration of any pollutants or materials prohibited by this chapter in the discharge, together with a statement regarding whether or not compliance is being achieved with this chapter on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance activities or additional pretreatment would be required in order for the discharger to comply with this chapter; 
8.  Where additional pretreatment and/or operation or maintenance activities will be required to comply with this chapter, the discharger shall provide a declaration of the shortest schedule by which it will provide such additional pretreatment and/or implementation of additional operation and maintenance activities; 
9.  Disclosure of each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production; and disclosure of the type and amount of raw materials utilized (average and maximum per day); 
10.  All permit applications shall be signed by the discharger, or its authorized agent, under oath and subject to the penalties of perjury, and shall be approved by an engineer licensed to practice in the State. 
(Code 1972, § 12.36.090; Ord. No. 18-1997, § 4(part), 1997) 
Section 12.36.100. - Discharge permit-Structures required. 
    The owner of any property which requires a discharge permit shall install a suitable structure, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building drain or service line to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such structures shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the superintendent. The structure shall be installed and maintained by the owner at his expense so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Code 1972, § 12.36.100; Ord. No. 18-1997, § 4(part), 1997) 
Section 12.36.110. - Same-Conditions and reports. 
A.  Within 90 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, and then each June and December thereafter, all dischargers subject to this chapter shall file a written report with the superintendent. This report shall contain at least the following information: 
1.  The nature and concentration of prohibited or regulated substances in the effluent; 
2.  A record of all measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows during the reporting period; 
3.  Whether or not the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, what additional pretreatment may be necessary in order to bring the discharger into compliance with the applicable standards; 
4.  The results of all sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and nature of the concentration or production en masse where required by the superintendent. All analyses shall be performed in accordance with 40 CFR 136. 
B.  All such periodic reports shall be signed by a responsible official of the discharger, under oath, and subject to the penalties of perjury, and, if required by the superintendent, shall be signed by an engineer licensed to practice in the State. 
(Code 1972, § 12.36.110; Ord. No. 18-1997, § 4(part), 1997) 
Section 12.36.120. - Inspection and sampling. 
    The superintendent may inspect the monitoring facilities of any discharger to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter. The discharger shall allow the superintendent or his representative to enter upon the premises of the discharger at all hours, for the purpose of inspection, sampling or records examination. The superintendent shall have the right to set up on the discharger's property such devices as may be found necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring or metering operations. 
(Code 1972, § 12.36.120; Ord. No. 18-1997, § 4(part), 1997) 
Section 12.36.130. - Confidentiality of information. 
A.  Information and data furnished to the superintendent with respect to the nature and frequency of discharges shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction, unless the discharger specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the superintendent that the release of this information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets or proprietary information. 
B.  When requested by a discharger furnishing a report, the portions of the report which may disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this Title, or the permits which the Town holds. 
(Code 1972, § 12.36.130; Ord. No. 18-1997, § 4(part), 1997) 
Section 12.36.140. - Enforcement, dischargers. 
    In the event of the discharge of any waters or waste which are prohibited by this chapter, the superintendent may: 
A.  Suspend the wastewater collection service and the discharge permit of either a discharger or a user when the actual or threatened discharge presents or may present an imminent or substantial danger to the health, safety or welfare of persons, substantial danger to the environment, interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities, violate any pretreatment limits imposed by this chapter, or any discharge permit issued pursuant to this chapter. Any discharger notified of the suspension of wastewater collection service or the discharge permit shall, within a reasonable period of time, as determined by the superintendent, cease all discharges. In the event of failure of the discharger to comply voluntarily with the suspension order within the specified time, the superintendent shall immediately terminate water service to the facility and may commence judicial proceedings to compel compliance with such order. 
B.  The superintendent may further revoke the permit of any discharger who fails to: 
1.  Factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
2.  Report significant changes in wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
3.  Refuses reasonable access to the discharger's premises by representatives of the Town for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or 
4.  Violates the conditions of its permit, or this chapter, or any final judicial order entered with respect thereto. 
C.  Following the entry of any order by the superintendent with respect to the conduct of any discharger contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the Town Attorney may, following the authorization of such action by the Board of Trustees, commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the district court of the county. 
(Code 1972, § 12.36.140; Ord. No. 18-1997, § 4(part), 1997) 
Section 12.36.150. - List of enforcement actions, dischargers. 
    A list of all significant dischargers who were the subject of enforcement proceedings pursuant to this chapter during the previous 12 months shall be published annually by the Town in the legal publication of the Town. This list shall summarize the enforcement actions taken against the dischargers during the period. 
(Code 1972, § 12.36.150; Ord. No. 18-1997, § 4(part), 1997) 
Section 12.36.160. - Recovery of costs. 
    Any discharger violating any of the provisions of this chapter, or who discharges or causes a discharge producing a deposit or obstruction, or causes damage to or impairs the Town's wastewater disposal system shall be liable to the Town for any expense, loss or damage caused by such violation or discharge. The Town shall bill the discharger for the costs incurred by the Town in any cleaning or repair or replacement work caused by the violation or discharge. Refusal to pay the assessed cost shall constitute a violation of this chapter, enforceable as provided in Section 12.38.030. 
(Code 1972, § 12.36.160; Ord. No. 18-1997, § 4(part), 1997) 
Section 12.36.170. - Entry onto private property. 
A.  Whenever necessary for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing pertinent to wastewater discharges into the Town's collection system in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, or whenever there is reasonable cause to believe that a violation of Chapters 12.32 through 12.38 exists in any building or upon any real property subject to said provisions, the superintendent or other duly authorized employees of the Town may, upon presentation of proper credentials, if requested, enter such building or real property at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon them by this Code; provided that, if such building or real property is unoccupied, the authorized official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or real property and request entry. If entry is refused, or the owner cannot be located, the superintendent, or his authorized designee, is expressly authorized to obtain a search warrant from the Eagle Municipal Court pursuant to Rule 241(b)(2) of the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure in order to gain entry. When entering private property, Town employees shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the owner or contractor for its own employees. 
B.  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the Town shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the Town holds an easement dedicated for public or utility purposes for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, maintenance, or replacement of any portion of the Town's collection system lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, within such easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the easement. 
(Code 1972, § 12.36.170; Ord. No. 18-1997, § 4(part), 1997) 
Section 12.36.180. - Abandonment of wastewater service line. 
    A previously used or purchased wastewater connection permit or wastewater service line serving a premises shall be deemed abandoned at such time as the water service to the property has not been used for 24 consecutive months. When a wastewater service line is deemed abandoned, the Town may require that the owner of the premises at its expense effectively seal the connection, in a manner directed by the superintendent or his designee. When a wastewater connection permit or wastewater service line is deemed abandoned, the Town shall have no further obligation to provide wastewater collection service to the premises, except upon re-application for a connection permit and payment of all applicable fees (including system improvement fees) and installation costs. 
(Code 1972, § 12.36.180; Ord. No. 18-1997, § 4(part), 1997) 
Section 12.36.190. - Interference prohibited. 
    No person shall in any way interfere with the employees of the Town in the discharge of their duties in the tapping of any wastewater collection pipe, main, or lateral. No person shall dig up or cause to be dug up any public street, public alley or right-of-way in the Town, without first obtaining a permit for construction within any portion of such street, alley or public right-of-way for: 
A.  Connecting a service line with the collection system of the Town; or 
B.  Repairing, maintaining or replacing any service line which shall fail. 
(Code 1972, § 12.36.190; Ord. No. 18-1997, § 4(part), 1997) 
Section 12.36.200. - Town responsibility/property owner responsibility. 
A.  The Town shall be responsible only for the repair and maintenance of the public wastewater collection system. The responsibility for and the expense and cost of maintaining, repairing and replacing any service lines from the point where such lateral taps the wastewater main (including the saddle or connecting device) to the boundary of the user's property, and the service line within the user's property, shall be borne and paid for by the property owner(s) served by such lateral. In such instances that a service lateral is in disrepair and raw wastewater is leaking above or below ground or such disrepair presents a danger to the public or environment, the superintendent may order corrective action satisfactory to the Town. If corrective action is not made within seven days following written notice by the superintendent that such action needs to occur, the Town shall have the right to terminate water service to buildings contributing to the leakage. Additionally, the Town shall have the right to correct the repair, which cost for labor, materials and machinery shall be paid immediately upon request by the effected property owner(s). If no payment is made within 30 days, said costs shall constitute a lien on the property in accordance with Section 12.38.030. 
B.  In instances where a service lateral needs repair and multiple users are using said line, the responsibility and cost of repair of the service lateral shall be equally borne by all users upstream of the damaged section of service line. 
C.  Except as otherwise required by law, the Town shall not be responsible to any person, firm or corporation for any damage caused by blockage of either a wastewater main or wastewater lateral. The fact that a blockage has occurred shall not create a presumption of negligence on the part of the Town or Town employees. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Town Manager may, without acknowledging responsibility or liability, and in cases where the cleanup is estimated to be less than $2,000.00, authorize the cleanup of any wastewater backup which, in his opinion, may have been created by blockage of the wastewater main. This provision is intended to alleviate the problems caused by wastewater backup in cases where it is difficult to determine the responsibility therefor. In no case shall the agreement by the Town to provide this service constitute an admission of liability of any kind. 
(Code 1972, § 12.36.200; Ord. No. 18-1997, § 4(part), 1997) 
Section 12.36.210. - Malicious or negligent damage. 
    No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage or destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the Town's public wastewater collection and treatment system. 
(Code 1972, § 12.36.210; Ord. No. 18-1997, § 4(part), 1997) 
Section 12.36.220. - Unpaid sewer charges, lien, collection. 
A.  All rates, fees, charges and assessments provided under Chapters 12.32 through 12.38, from the time the same shall be due and payable, shall become and remain a lien on the premises served until said rates, fees, charges and assessments have been paid to the Town. This lien on the premises may be foreclosed by an action at law or in equity in the name of the Town in any court having jurisdiction thereof. If the Town must resort to court action for collection of said amounts due, the Town shall also be entitled to its reasonable Attorney's fees and other expenses incurred in such action if the Town prevails. 
B.  In the event said rates, fees, charges, and assessments are not paid when due, the Town Treasurer may certify the amount of the same to the County Treasurer, to be placed on the tax list for the current year, and collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected, with ten percent added thereto to defray the cost of collection, pursuant to C.R.S. § 31-20-105. All laws of this State for the assessment of general taxes, including the sale of the property for taxes and redemption of the same, shall apply. 
C.  Alternatively, or in conjunction with the actions provided in Subsections (A) and (B) of this section, the Town may terminate water service to the premises until all unpaid rates, fees, charges and assessments made in connection with the Town's wastewater collection system are paid in full. 
(Code 1972, § 12.36.220; Ord. No. 18-1997, § 4(part), 1997) 
CHAPTER 12.38. - WASTEWATER COLLECTION SERVICE - USE AND CHARGES 

Section 12.38.010. - Wastewater collection service bills, payment, penalty. 
A.  All wastewater collection service use charges shall be billed monthly. Said charges shall be due and payable ten days following the date of mailing of the statement by the Town, unless a different date is shown on said statement. The Town may combine the billing of wastewater collection service fees with the billing of water service fees and refuse collection fees. Payment for wastewater collection service shall be for use during the preceding billing period. All other payments due under this chapter shall be paid ten days following the date a statement is issued by the Town. If a payment is received by the Town in response to a combined billing statement as set forth above, such payment shall first be credited towards all outstanding wastewater collection service charges, then to all outstanding refuse collection charges, and finally to all outstanding water service charges. 
B.  If payments required under this chapter are not made by the dates said payments are due and payable, a late charge of $5.00 per month shall be assessed against the party in whose name the wastewater collection service account is listed, said charge to be added to said party's wastewater collection service bill and collected as a part thereof. 
(Code 1972, § 12.38.010; Ord. No. 28-1996, § 1(part), 1996; Amended Ord. No. 18-1997, § 3(part), 1997) 
Section 12.38.020. - Wastewater collection service account in name of owner. 
A.  All charges for wastewater collection service shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property served. Payment shall be made for wastewater collection service by the owner or his legally authorized agent. 
B.  Wastewater collection service accounts may be established in the name of a non-owner after application is made to the Town Clerk. In the event that a non-owner proves to be repetitively delinquent in payment the Town may require that the account be transferred back to the name of the owner. Nothing in this section shall relieve the owner of the ultimate responsibility for payment of wastewater collection service charges or to the remedies for collection set forth in Section 12.38.030. 
(Code 1972, § 12.38.020; Ord. No. 28-1996, § 1(part), 1996; Amended Ord. No. 18-1997, § 3(part), 1997; Amended Ord. No. 12-2004, § 13(part), 2004) 
Section 12.38.030. - Unpaid wastewater collection charges, lien, collection. 
A.  All rates, fees, charges and assessments provided under Chapters 12.32 through 12.38, from the time the same shall be due and payable, shall become and remain a lien on the premises served until said rates, fees, charges and assessments have been paid to the Town. This lien on the premises may be foreclosed by an action at law or in equity in the name of the Town in any court having jurisdiction thereof. If the Town must resort to court action for collection of said amounts due, the Town shall also be entitled to its reasonable Attorney's fees and other expenses incurred in such action if the Town prevails. 
B.  In the event said rates, fees, charges, and assessments are not paid when due, the Town Treasurer may certify the amount of the same to the County Treasurer, to be placed on the tax list for the current year, and collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected, with ten percent added thereto to defray the cost of collection, pursuant to C.R.S. § 31-20-105. All laws of this State for the assessment of general taxes, including the sale of property for taxes and redemption of the same, shall apply. 
C.  Alternatively, or in conjunction with the actions provided in Subsections (A) and (B) of this section, the Town may terminate water service to the premises until all unpaid rates, fees, charges and assessments made in connection with the Town's wastewater collection system are paid in full. 
(Code 1972, § 12.38.030; Ord. No. 28-1996, § 1(part), 1996; Amended Ord. No. 18-1997, § 3(part), 1997) 
Section 12.38.040. - Regulations part of contract. 
    All regulations contained in this Title or regulations promulgated by the Town Manager shall be considered a part of the contract of every person using the Town's wastewater collection system, and every person using such wastewater collection system shall be considered as having expressly consented to be bound thereby. 
(Code 1972, § 12.38.040; Ord. No. 28-1996, § 1(part), 1996; Amended Ord. No. 18-1997, § 3(part), 1997) 
Section 12.38.050. - Grievance procedures. 
A.  In the event of any dispute between a person and the Town regarding wastewater collection service, the following procedures shall be followed. Any person who desires to protest the amount of any monthly wastewater collection service usage charge shall present a written statement of such complaint to the Town Manager prior to the date said charge is due and payable. In the event such person fails to present a written complaint within the time herein provided, such protest or complaint shall be barred. 
B.  Any complaints regarding wastewater collection service shall be submitted to the Town Manager in writing within ten days of the occurrence or any further protest shall be barred. 
C.  In the event agreement cannot be reached between the Town Manager and any person filing a protest or complaint, the sole method of appeal shall be to the Board of Trustees. The hearing on such appeal shall be scheduled for the next regular meeting of the Board of Trustees. To the extent practicable, said hearing shall be conducted in the manner provided for in Chapter 2.20. 
(Code 1972, § 12.38.050; Ord. No. 28-1996, § 1(part), 1996; Amended Ord. No. 18-1997, § 3(part), 1997) 
Section 12.38.060. - Schedule of wastewater collection service rates. 
A.  All rates and charges from municipal wastewater collection service shall be billed on a monthly basis. There shall be no reduction in rates or charges or any rebates thereof for use for less than the full monthly period, except for rates charged users making new connections to the Town's wastewater collection system, which rates shall be prorated on the basis of the number of days remaining in the billing period in which the new connection is made. Payment for wastewater collection service shall be for use during the preceding monthly billing period. 
B.  Commencing on the first day of January, 2019, and on the first day of each month thereafter, sewer service rates shall be calculated, assessed and charged for each property receiving sewer service in accordance with the schedule contained in subsection (c) at the rate of $58.82 per unit. 
C.  Sewer service unit schedule. 
Use Units 1. Single-family dwelling - per unit 1 unit 2. Multiple-family dwelling - per unit 1 unit 3. Hotels and motels - per double bed; not including restaurant, bar, swimming pool 
  areas, etc. - at their respective fees   a. Without kitchens 0.5 unit   b. With kitchens 0.75 unit 4. Mobile homes 1 unit 5. Cafes, restaurants, bars, private clubs - per 1,000 square feet of customer service area 2 units 6. Drive-in restaurants - per car space 0.33 unit 7. Filling stations and garages   a. Without washing racks 2 units   b. Additional - each washing rack 1 unit 8. Laundry - self-service, per washer 0.25 unit 9. Schools - per student and staff member per month 0.10 unit 10. Hospital - per bed 1.1 unit 11. Auto dealers - 0.25 unit per 1,000 square feet of building; minimum = one unit 1 unit (minimum) 12. Barber shops - per chair, 0.25 unit; minimum = one unit 1 unit (minimum) 13. Beauty shops - per chair, 0.4 unit; minimum = one unit 1 unit (minimum) 14. Boardinghouse - per bed 0.25 unit 15. Boarding school - per bed 0.25 unit 16. Bowling alleys - per lane, excluding bars, restaurants, etc. 0.15 unit 17. Car wash, do-it-yourself - per stall, coin operated, at 10-gallons or less per car 1 unit 18. Car wash, mechanical - per stall, without conveyor, over 10-gallons per car 1.5 units 19. Car wash - conventional 10 units 20. Commercial building, including officer - per 1,000 square feet 0.75 unit 21. Cleaners - per 1,000 square feet 1 unit 22. Convalescent homes - per bed 0.25 unit 23. Convents - per bed 0.25 unit 24. Country clubs - per 1,000 square feet of general building area, plus restaurant, bars, 
   pools, etc., at their respective rates 1.5 units 25. Drug stores, without fountain service - per 1,000 square feet 1 unit 26. Drug stores, with fountain service (Add (a) and (b))   a. Per 1,000 square feet, plus 0.7 unit   b. Per chair 0.1 unit 27. Factories - per 1,000 square feet, not including industrial wastes which shall be 
   assigned a rate appropriate to each case 0.75 unit 28. Fraternal organizations, not including bars, restaurants 1 unit 29. Grocery stores and supermarkets - per 1,000 square feet 0.8 unit 30. Office buildings and clinics - per 1,000 square feet 0.7 unit 31. Public institutions - other than hospitals per 1,000 square feet 0.7 unit 32. Auxiliary dining room - open not more than 20 hours per week - per 1,000 square 
   feet 2 units 33. Stores, other than specifically listed, with restrooms - per 1,000 square feet; 
   minimum 1 unit 0.5 unit 34. Drive-thru drive-ins - per drive thru lane 2 units 35. Public swimming pool - when connected to system - per 1,000 square feet of net area 
   of pool. See country club for building unit 3 units 36. Theater, includes snack bar, 50 seats and restroom 1 unit 37. Theater - drive-in - per car space, includes snack bar and restrooms 1 unit 38. Warehouse - per 1,000 square feet 0.15 unit 39. Private swimming pool, home pools, when connected to system 1 unit 40. Public restrooms - per restroom 1 unit 41. Jail - per cell 0.33 unit  
Note- The minimum monthly service fee for all uses shall be the fee for one unit. 
D.  Changes in the wastewater collection service rates schedule contained herein shall be by ordinance enacted by the Board of Trustees and notice of such changes shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county so as to inform all users of such changes. 
E.  The Town Treasurer shall keep available at all times for public inspection to interested persons, schedules of wastewater collection service rates for service within and without the corporate limits of the Town or the boundaries of the now dissolved Eagle Sanitation District. Copies of such schedules shall be furnished to interested persons by the Town Clerk upon request. 
(Code 1972, § 12.38.060; Amended Ord. No. 27, §§ 1, 2(part), 2001; Amended Ord. No. 34-2002, § 1, 2002; Amended Ord. No. 55-2003, § 1, 2003; Amended Ord. No. 42-2005, § 1, 2005; Amended Ord. No. 43, § 1(part), 2006; Amended Ord. No. 25, § 2, 2007; Amended Ord. No. 24-2008, § 1, 2008; Amended Ord. No. 14-2011, § 1, 2011; Amended Ord. No. 30, § 1, 2013; Amended Ord. No. 33, § 1, 2014; Ord. No. 36-2015, § 1(12.38.060(B), (C)), 12-8-2015; Amended Ord. No. 35, § 1, 2016; Ord. No. 33-2017, § 1, 12-18-2017; Ord. No. 42-2018 , § 1, 12-11-2018) 
Title 13 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal powers-building and fire regulations, C.R.S. § 31-15-601; authority of municipality to adopt codes by reference, C.R.S. § 31-16-202. 

CHAPTER 13.01. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 13.01.010. - Short title. 
    This title may be cited for all purposes as the "Town of Eagle Building and Construction Code." 
(Code 1972, § 13.01.010; Ord. No. 37-2005, § 1(part), 2005) 
Section 13.01.020. - Applicability of codes. 
    The building codes adopted by reference in this Title shall be applicable within the Town, where: 
A.  A building or structure is built, this Title applies to the design and construction of said building or structure, including plumbing, heating and electrical installation of the building or structure; 
B.  The whole or part of a building, structure, factory-built unit, manufactured home, or mobile home is moved, either into or from the Town or from one property to another within the Town, this Title applies to the building, structure, factory-built unit, manufactured home, or mobile home or part thereof moved and to any remaining part affected by the change, unless otherwise provided by law; 
C.  The whole or part of a building, structure, factory-built unit, manufactured home, or mobile home is demolished, this Title applies to the demolition and to any remaining part affected by the change; 
D.  A building, structure, factory-built unit, manufactured home, or mobile home is altered, this Title applies to the alteration and all parts of the building, structure, factory-built unit, manufactured home, or mobile home affected by the change; 
E.  Repairs are made to a building, structure, factory-built unit, manufactured home, or mobile home, this Title applies to any such repair; and 
F.  The class of occupancy of the building or structure or part thereof is changed, this Title applies to all parts of the building or structure affected by the change. 
(Code 1972, § 13.01.020; Ord. No. 37-2005, § 1(part), 2005) 
Section 13.01.030. - Exceptions. 
A.  This title does not apply to any mobile home, manufactured home, or factory-built unit which conforms to the health and safety requirements of the State Board of Health, the State Division of Housing, or the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974. 
B.  Provided, however, any factory-built unit, manufactured home, or mobile home referred to in Subsection (A) of this section shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 13.12. Additions to any mobile home, manufactured home, or factory-built unit shall comply with all provisions of this Title. 
(Code 1972, § 13.01.030; Ord. No. 37-2005, § 1(part), 2005; Ord. No. 2-2009, § 1, 2009; Amended Ord. No. 23-2013, § 1, 2013) 
Section 13.01.040. - Prevailing provisions. 
    Where the requirements or conditions imposed by any provision of a code adopted by reference in this Title, or its appendices, differ from the requirements or conditions imposed by a provision of another law, ordinance, resolution or order having application in the Town, the provision which is more restrictive shall govern. 
(Code 1972, § 13.01.050; Ord. No. 37-2005, § 1(part), 2005) 
Section 13.01.050. - Violations; penalty. 
    Except as may otherwise be provided in this Title, any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Title shall be deemed guilty of a Class A municipal offense and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Title is committed, continued or permitted. Said offense shall be deemed to be one of strict liability. 
(Code 1972, § 13.01.060; Ord. No. 37-2005, § 1(part), 2005) 
CHAPTER 13.02. - DEFINITIONS 

Section 13.02.010. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Title, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Generally. For the purpose of this Title, all words, terms and expressions contained herein shall be interpreted in accordance with the definitions set out in the codes adopted by reference in this Title, except as otherwise set forth in this chapter. 
    Administrative authority means the Eagle Building Department. 
    Building contractor. 
A.  "Building contractor" means a person, firm, co-partnership, corporation, association or other organization, or any combination thereof: 
1.  Who undertakes with or for another, within the Town, to build, construct, alter, repair, add to or demolish any building or structure or any portion thereof, for which a permit is required and for a fixed sum, price, fee, percentage or other compensation or any combination thereof; or 
2.  Who builds, constructs, alters, adds to, moves or demolishes any building or structure either on his own or other property, for purpose of resale or rental, except a residence intended for his own personal use and occupancy. A person constructing his own home without the aid of a licensed contractor may secure a permit on only one residence in any three-year period and the construction of more than one residence by said person in any three years shall be presumed to have been for resale or rental, and said person shall be considered a building contractor for the purposes of this Title. 
B.  The following shall not be deemed to be contractors as the term is used herein: 
1.  Plumbers, electricians, or other specialized trades for which special licenses are required. 
2.  Owners making ordinary repairs to any building, which repairs do not involve the structure of the building and on which a contractor is not employed. 
    Building Official or inspector means the Town Chief Building Official and the Building Official's duly authorized deputies, inspectors, staff and others reasonably involved in code administration and enforcement. 
    Certificate of occupancy. No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the Building Official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefor as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this Title or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Certificates presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this Title or other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. 
    Chief of the Fire Department means the head of the fire protection district having jurisdiction, or his regularly authorized deputy, or the Eagle Building Official. 
    Code means the International Building Code, 2015 Edition, with appendices thereto; the International Residential Code, 2015 Edition, with appendices thereto; the International Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition, with appendices thereto; the International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition, with appendices thereto; the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 Edition, with appendices thereto; the International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 Edition; National Electric Code, 2017 Edition; the ANSI/ASME Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators, A17.1 2013 Edition, the American Society of Mechanical Engineers; ANSI/ASME Guide for Inspection of Elevators, Escalators and Moving Walks A17.2 2014 Edition, ANSI/ASME Safety Code for Existing Elevators and Escalators A17.3 2011 Edition, ANSI/ASME Safety Standard for Platform Lifts and Stairway Chairs A18.1 2014 Edition, and ICC/ANSI Accessible and Usable Building and Facilities A117.1 2009 Edition; the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, with appendices thereto; and all amendments to said Codes and/or Standards as of the date of this Title. 
    Electrical contractor means any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of installing electrical wires, fixtures, signs, appliances or apparatus using electrical energy within the corporate limits of the Town. Nothing contained in this definition shall apply to the installation of their own apparatus by a telecommunications, cable television, or power company operating under a franchise granted by the Town. 
    Factory-built unit means any structure or component thereof, designed primarily for residential or commercial occupancy, either permanent or temporary, which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in a manufacturing facility for installation or assembly and installation, on a permanent foundation at a building site and which carries a State Division of Housing "factory-built unit certification." 
    Final inspection means a final inspection and final approval of all buildings and structures when deemed complete and ready for occupancy and use. A final inspection approval for one- and two-family dwelling units may be granted only if, but not limited to, the following components of a project are complete, in compliance with the codes, and approved by the Building Official: 
A.  Kitchen complete and operative; 
B.  All bathrooms complete and operative as per the approved plans; 
C.  All smoke detectors installed per IBC 907 and IRC R314; 
D.  The following life safety items are fully installed: 
1.  Address numbers; 
2.  Handrails; 
3.  Guardrails; 
4.  Decks; 
5.  Stairs; 
6.  Separation between the garage and house complete, with a self-closing, tightfitting, 20-minute fire protection rated door (must latch); 
7.  Floor covering; 
E.  Furnace/boiler operable; 
F.  Final electrical approval; 
G.  Final mechanical and plumbing approval; 
H.  Fire department review and approval of commercial or multifamily residential projects where required; 
I.  All required permits are issued; 
J.  Culvert under the driveway installed per specifications (located on the approved drawing), and the on-site drainage improvements are cleaned to allow water to flow freely; 
K.  Positive drainage away from the structure at all locations directed to a drainage easement or street and not impairing adjacent properties; 
L.  The exterior of the building shall be completed, including roof assembly and parking areas, as per approved plans; 
M.  Sufficient roadway access for emergency vehicles; 
N.  Landscape and revegetation completed. Revegetation of minimum of sod, hydroseed or seed and mulch; and 
O.  Final site inspection from the Town public works department is completed. 
    Health officer means the Town health officer, or the county health officer, or a regularly authorized designee. 
    Jurisdiction means the corporate limits of the Town. 
    Loft means any story or floor area in a building which is open to the floor directly below, but which does not qualify as a mezzanine due to its failure to comply with one or more of the items specified for mezzanine floors in IBC 505. At least one side of the loft shall be at least 50 percent open to the room below. Lofts may be habitable space or non-habitable space. (Habitable lofts in residential occupancies shall be considered as sleeping rooms or bedrooms.) 
    Lot means any legal parcel of land approved by the Board of Trustees and created in accordance with the Town land use ordinance and a plat showing such lot is recorded in the office of the County Clerk and Recorder. 
    Manufactured home means a single-family dwelling which is partially or entirely manufactured in a factory and designed for long-term residential or nonresidential use and transported to its occupancy site; and is not less than 24 feet in width and 36 feet in length; and is installed on an engineered permanent foundation; and has brick, wood, or cosmetically equivalent exterior siding and a pitched roof; and is certified pursuant to the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC 5401 et seq., as amended, and bears such certification label. 
    Mobile home means a structure defined in Section 4.16.040, or a factory-assembled structure or structures equipped with the necessary service connections and made so as to be readily moveable as a unit or units on its (their) own running gear and designed to be used as a dwelling unit(s) without permanent foundation. 
    Without a permanent foundation indicates that the support system is constructed with the intent that the mobile home placed thereon will be moved from time to time at the convenience of the owner. (American National Standards Institute [ANSI] Article A119.1: Standard for Manufactured Homes, Installation, Sites and Communities, National Fire Protection Association [NFPA Edition No. 501A, 2013 Section 1.2]). 
    Permitted construction hours and activities. 
A.  Construction and related construction support activities shall be limited to the construction hours and activities described in this definition. For the purpose of this definition, "construction and related construction support activity" includes the operation of any construction device or power equipment which is attended by loud or unusual noise as determined by the Town's Building Official as well as noise attributed to workers arriving on a job site, such as loud talking, laughing or singing; vehicular noise, the playing of radios or other music; assembling, moving or stacking of construction materials; deliveries; and the running of motors, engines or generators. Construction hours and related construction activities shall be limited to the following: 
Day Hours Monday through Friday 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Sunday No outside construction or related 
construction support activities shall be permitted at any time on Sundays. 
Finish work and related support 
activities that occur within a fully 
constructed structure is permitted 
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 
6:00 p.m. on Sundays Holidays (January 1, Memorial Day, July 4, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day) All construction and construction 
support related activities are prohibited  
B.  Exceptions. 
1.  When an emergency condition exists, necessary construction and related activities shall be permitted at any hour or day of the week. Such emergency work shall be completed as rapidly as possible in order to prevent any disruption or disturbance to occupants of adjacent properties. 
2.  The Building Official and/or Town Engineer may grant a waiver to the limitations on construction and related construction activities on a case by case basis. 
    Plumbing contractor means any person, firm or corporation registered with the State who is engaged in the business, or desiring to engage in the business, of installing plumbing fixtures, fixture traps, soil, waste, and vent pipes with their devices, appurtenances and connections, within or adjacent to buildings or structures, public or private, in the Town. 
    Road or street means a way or right-of-way reserved for public or private use (other than an alley) which also provides primary vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties; it may also be used for drainage or utility access to adjacent properties, and may include the terms: "avenue," "drive," "highway," "lane," "place," "road," "street" or other similar designation. 
    Sign includes any writing, letter, word, numeral, pictorial representation, pictorial abstraction, graphic or pictorial form, emblem, symbol, trademark, object or design which conveys a recognizable meaning or identity or distinction, or any of the above which forms a structure or part of a structure or which is affixed in any fashion to any structure and which by reason of the form or color or wording or stereotyped design or other feature attracts or is designed to attract attention to the subject matter or is used as a means of identification or advertisement or announcement. 
    Site means any parcel or area of land having an area sufficient to satisfy the applicable provisions of Title 4. 
    Special contractor means a contractor for all other trades not specifically classified elsewhere in this Title, such as, but not limited to, masonry, plastering, elevator installation, glaziers, drywall, painters, carpet layers, tilers, landscapers, steel fabrication and erection, house moving, demolition, asphalt paving, concrete form and finish, excavating and heavy equipment or any other particular trade or work connected with the building industry. 
    Temporary certificate of occupancy for commercial or multifamily, three or more units (A, B, E, F, H, I, M, R-l, R-2, R-3, R-4, S & U occupancies) means a temporary certificate of occupancy that may be issued when, but not limited to, the following components of a project are complete and approved by the Building Official: 
A.  Kitchen operable; 
B.  One bathroom operative per unit in multifamily and required restrooms in commercial occupancy; 
C.  All smoke detectors installed per IRC 313 and IBC 907.2.10; 
D.  The following life safety items are fully installed: 
1.  Address numbers; 
2.  Handrails; 
3.  Guardrails; 
4.  Decks; 
5.  Stairs; 
6.  Separation between the garage and house complete or for commercial occupancy, with a self-closing, tightfitting, 20-minute fire protection rated door (must latch); 
7.  Floor covering complete; 
8.  Outside of building complete; 
E.  Furnace/boiler is operable; 
F.  Final electrical approval; 
G.  Final mechanical and plumbing approval; 
H.  Fire department review and approval of commercial and multifamily projects where required; 
I.  If a culvert under the driveway is required, it is to be installed per specifications (located on the approved drawing) and on-site drainage improvements are cleaned to allow water to flow freely; 
J.  Positive drainage away from the structure at all locations directed to a dedicated drainage easement or to the street and not impairing adjacent properties; 
K.  Commercial or multifamily residential (three or more dwelling units) projects shall be required to have a completed core and shell inspection. The exterior of said buildings shall be required to be completed, including roof assembly. The interior of said buildings shall have all exit corridors, ramps, stairways, smoke proof enclosures, horizontal exits, exit passageways, courts, yards and entryways completed in all occupied areas. (Separate adequate parking shall be required for the public of said buildings); and 
L.  Where landscaping, revegetation, drainage or culvert installation is required under the Town's land use code for the purposes of preventing land erosion, improper drainage, damage to properties and unsightliness in residential zones containing multifamily dwellings and in all portions of lots in Commercial Limited (CL), Commercial General (CG), Industrial (I) and Planned Unit Development (PUD) Zone Districts is not complete, or where public improvements are required under the Town's land use code, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be awarded upon submittal and approval of a properly executed construction improvement agreement. If the improvements required for issuance of a final certificate of occupancy have not been completed within one year of the date of issuance of the temporary certificate of occupancy, the Town may arrange such completion using the collateral provided. Should compliance be attained any time prior to the expiration of one year, the collateral will be returned to the permittee upon issuance of the final certificate of occupancy; and 
M.  Temporary certificate of occupancy inspection completed by the Town Public Works Department and approved. 
The temporary certificate of occupancy for commercial or multifamily dwellings shall be valid for a period of up to, but not more than, one year from the date of issuance, where a project does not have a construction improvement agreement. The temporary certificate of occupancy shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises until final approval of occupancy is complete. 
    Temporary certificate of occupancy for one- and two-family units (R-3 occupancies) means a temporary certificate of occupancy that may be issued when, but not limited to, the following components of a project are complete and approved by the Building Official: 
A.  Kitchen operative; 
B.  One bathroom operative as per the approved plans; 
C.  All smoke detectors installed per IRC R314 and IBC 907.2.11.2; 
D.  The following life safety items are fully installed: 
1.  Address numbers; 
2.  Handrails; 
3.  Guardrails; 
4.  Decks; 
5.  Stairs; 
6.  Separation between the garage and house complete, with a self-closing, tightfitting, 20-minute fire protection rated door (must latch); 
7.  Floor covering complete; 
8.  Outside of building complete; 
E.  Furnace/boiler is operable; 
F.  Final electrical approval; 
G.  Final mechanical and plumbing approval; 
H.  Culvert under the driveway installed per specifications (located on the approved drawing) and the on-site drainage improvements are cleaned to allow water to flow freely; 
I.  Positive drainage away from the structure at all locations directed to a drainage easement or to the street and not impairing adjacent property; 
J.  The permit holder and owner/buyer/occupant shall agree that all required corrections as stated by the Building Official are completed within a 90-day time period; 
K.  Sufficient roadway access for emergency vehicles; and 
L.  Temporary certificate of occupancy inspection completed by the Town public works department and approved. 
The contractor and/or owner (if owner built) shall sign a temporary certificate of occupancy. The temporary certificate of occupancy for one- and two-family dwellings shall be valid for a period of up to, but not more than, 90 days from the date of issuance and shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises until final approval for occupancy is complete. The Building Official may grant an extension on a case by case basis. 
    Town means the incorporated area of the Town of Eagle, which may be referred to in this Title as the regulated area. 
    Work means the construction, demolition, alteration, repair, moving or change in the class of occupancy of any building, equipment or structure, and shall include the installation, construction, alteration or repair of any private or subsurface sewage disposal system, and the placement and use of a mobile home, manufactured home, and factory-built unit anywhere within the Town. 
(Code 1972, §§ 13.02.010-13.02.190; Ord. No. 37-2005, § 2(part), 2005; Ord. No. 15-2007, § 1, 2007; Amended Ord. No. 2-2009, § 2, 2009; Amended Ord. No. 23-2013, § 1, 2013; Amended Ord. No. 23-2014, § 1, 2014; Ord. No. 10-2017, §§ 2-6, 5-9-2017) 
CHAPTER 13.03. - INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE 

Section 13.03.010. - Adopted by reference. 
    Pursuant to the power and authority conferred by the laws of the State, there is adopted by reference thereto, the International Building Code, 2015 Edition, with Appendices C, E, G, I, J and K thereto, promulgated by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue NW 6th Floor, Washington, DC 20001. The purposes of the Code are to protect the safety of residents of the Town by prescribing minimum standards for buildings and other structures. The subject matter of this Code includes regulations concerning the erection, enlargement, construction, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, use, height, area, maintenance and other matters relating to buildings and structures with the Town. 
(Code 1972, § 13.03.010; Ord. No. 23-2013, § 10, 2013; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 9, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.03.020. - Amendments. 
    The International Building Code, 2015 Edition, ("IBC 2015") is hereby amended as follows: 
A.  Where the requirements or conditions imposed by a provision of this Title differ from the requirements or conditions imposed by IBC 2015, the most restrictive shall govern. 
B.  Section 104.1: The first sentence of the first paragraph of Section 104.1 is amended to read as follows: 
    The Building Official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this Code; however, a guarantee that all buildings and structures have been constructed in accordance with all provisions of this Code is neither intended nor implied. 
C.  Section 105.1.1. Section 105.1.1 is hereby deleted. 
D.  Section 105.1.2. Section 105.1.2 is hereby deleted. 
E.  Section 105.2. Section 105.2, entitled Work Exempt from Permits, under Building, is amended by revising Subsections (1) and (2) and including an additional Subsection (14) which shall read as follows: 
1.  One story detached buildings used as tool and storage sheds, a playhouse and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet and the height of said buildings does not exceed ten feet at peak of roof. The buildings must specifically not be intended or used for human habitation. 
2.  Fences not over six feet high and located in side or rear yard areas. 
14.  Decks not more than 30 inches above grade and not more than 20 square feet, will not require a building permit. 
F.  Section 105.3.1. Section 105.3.1, entitled Action on Application, is amended to include the following additional paragraph: 
    A building permit will not be issued in the Town jurisdiction until all construction drawings and applications are submitted and approved and payment of permit fees, use tax, street improvement fees, fire protection impact fees, and water and wastewater plant investment (tap) fees are made and all other fees are paid. 
G.  Section 105.7. Section 105.7, entitled Placement of Permit, is amended to include the following additional sentences: 
    The permit cards shall be posted as described in Section 13.13.050(C). It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to display the building permit card on the job site throughout the construction process for inspector to see. 
H.  Section 107.1. Section 107.1, in the second sentence remove the words "statutes of the". 
I.  Section 109.4. Section 109.4, entitled Work Commencing before Permit Issued, is amended to include the following additional subsection: 
    109.4.1 Fee. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the minimum required permit fee as established by resolution of the Board of Trustees. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this Code or from any penalty prescribed by law. 
J.  Section 109.6. Section 109.6, entitled Refunds, is amended to include the following additional paragraph: 
    The Building Official may authorize refunding of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. The Building Official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this Code. The Building Official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan reviewing is done. The Building Official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment. 
K.  Section 109.3. Section 109.3, entitled Valuation, is hereby amended to include the following additional sentence: 
    The minimum valuation for building permits in the Town shall be not less than the average cost figures per square foot shown in the most current Building Valuation Data Chart published semi-annually by the International Code Council. 
L.  Section 406.3.4.1: The first and second sentences of Section 406.3.4.1, entitled Dwelling Unit Separation, is amended to read as follows: 
    Five-eighths inch in thickness type X Gypsum Board applied to the garage side, in the first sentence. Five-eighths inch in thickness type X Gypsum Board applied to structures supporting the separation from habitable rooms above the garage, in the second sentence. 
M.  Section 708.1. Section 708.1, entitled Fire Partitions, is amended to include the following additional sentences: 
6.  Insulation placed in occupancy separations shall not contain combustible materials. 
7.  No less than a one-hour fire resistive assembly shall be required for separation between individual tenants of Group A, B, F and M occupancies located under a common roof assembly. 
N.  Section 708.3: Section 708.3, Fire-Resistance Rating - Delete the exceptions. 
O.  Section 711.1. Section 711.1, entitled General, is amended to include the following sentence: 
    No less than a one-hour fire resistive horizontal assembly shall be required for separation between individual tenants of Group A, B, F and M occupants located under a common roof assembly. 
P.  Section 1204.1: Section 1204.1, entitled Temperature Control Equipment and Systems, is amended to include the following additional sentence: 
    Heat loss calculations shall be required for all dwelling units. The minimum design criteria shall be a 68 degree temperature inside and a minus 20 degree temperature outside. 
Q .  Section 1608.1. Section 1608.1, entitled Snow Loads, is amended to include the following additional sentence: 
    Minimum roof snow load requirements for the Town shall be determined by using the most current edition of the Snow Load Design Data for Colorado prepared by the Structural Engineering Association of Colorado. 
R.  Section 1704.1: Section 1704.1, entitled Special Inspections and Tests, Contractor Responsibility and Structural Observation, is amended to include the following additional paragraph: 
    LOG HOMES: A third party inspection by a certified log inspection agency shall be required of all structural log type buildings. A letter of certification from said agency shall be required at the time of framing inspection. 
S .  Section 1804.4. Section 1804.4, entitled Site Grading, is amended to include the following additional paragraph: 
    Positive drainage away from the exterior of all foundation walls must be maintained. In those locations where the foundation is subjected to a high water table, or where surface water or groundwater drainage will present a problem, additional precautions may be required. Drainage improvements shall be completed per approved plans and be ready for inspection at the time of the temporary certificate of occupancy inspection. It will be the general contractor's responsibility to maintain positive drainage on the site during all phases of construction, including protection of any drainage along the public roadway. 
T.  Section 1809.5: Section 1809.5, entitled Frost Protection, is amended to include the following additional paragraph: 
    All heated spaces within a building or attached thereto shall have foundation frost walls having a depth of at least 48 inches measured from the bottom of the footing to the backfill grade lines, unless otherwise designed by a structural engineer for a specific location. 
U.  Section 2113.9.1: Section 2113.9.1, entitled Termination, is amended to include the following additional sentences: 
    Solid fuel chimney caps shall not be constructed in a way that prevents accessibility for cleaning. 
    Where solid fuel and gas burning appliance flue vents are terminated within 24 inches horizontally of each other, said flue vents are to be offset ten inches vertically. 
V.  Section 3001.5: A new Section 3001.5, entitled Elevators and Conveying Systems, is added and shall read as follows: 
1.  ASME A17.1. 2013 Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators, includes Requirements for Moving Walks, Material Lifts and Dumbwaiters with Automatic Transfer Devices. 
2.  ASME A17.2. 2014 Guide for Inspection of Elevators, Escalators, Moving Walks. 
3.  ASME A17.3. 2011 Safety Code for Existing Elevators and Escalators. 
4.  ASME A18.1. 2014 Safety Standard for Platform Lifts and Stairway Chairs. 
5.  ICC/ANSI A117.1 2009 Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities. 
W.  Section 3001.6: A new Section 3001.6, entitled Elevators and Conveying Systems Permit Fees, is added and shall be read as follows: 
    Fees concerning elevators and conveying systems permits shall be established by resolution of the Board of Trustees. 
X.  Appendices C, E, G, I, J and K: International Building Code, 2015 Edition, Appendices C, E, G, I, J and K are hereby adopted. 
Y .  Appendix J. Appendix J, entitled Grading, is amended by adding the following Section J104.5, entitled Permit Fee: 
    Fees concerning grading permits shall be established by resolution of the Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1972, § 13.03.020; Ord. No. 23-2013, § 10, 2013; Ord. No. 03, series 2015, § 1; Ord. No. 19, series 2015, § 1; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 10, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.03.030. - Copies on file and available for sale. 
    At least one copy of the International Building Code, 2015 Edition, and the adopted appendices thereto, together with one copy of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, shall be kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk or Building Official. Copies of said Code and appendices shall be available for sale to the public at a moderate price. 
(Code 1972, § 13.03.030; Ord. No. 23-2013, § 10, 2013; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 11, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.03.040. - Penalties. 
    The section of the International Building Code, 2015 Edition, entitled Violations, which contains a penalty clause is herewith amended and adopted as follows: 
    Section 114.1: Section 114.1, entitled Unlawful Acts: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the Town or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this Code. 
    Section 114.2: Section 114.2, entitled Notice of Violation: The Building Official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition or occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of the International Building Code, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. 
    Section 114.3: Section 114.3, entitled Prosecution of Violation: If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the Building Official is authorized to request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of this Code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. 
    Section 114.4: Section 114.4, entitled Violation Penalties: Any person who violates a provision of this Code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a Class A municipal offense and each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed, continued or permitted. Any municipal offense under this section shall be deemed one of "strict liability." 
(Code 1972, § 13.03.040; Ord. No. 37-2005, § 3(part), 2005; Ord. No. 2-2009, § 10, 2009; Ord. No. 23-2013, § 10, 2013; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 12, 5-9-2017) 
CHAPTER 13.04. - INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE 

Section 13.04.010. - Adopted by reference. 
    Pursuant to the power and authority conferred by the laws of the State, there is adopted by reference thereto, the International Residential Code, 2015 Edition, together with appendices E, F, H, J, K, M and O thereto, promulgated by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue NW 6th Floor, Washington, DC 20001. The purposes of the Code are to protect the safety of residents of the Town by prescribing minimum standards for buildings and other structures. The subject matter of this Code includes regulations concerning the erection, enlargement, construction, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, use, height, area, maintenance and other matters relating to buildings and structures within the Town. 
(Code 1972, § 13.04.010; Ord. No. 23-2013, § 11, 2013; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 13, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.04.020. - Amendments. 
    International Residential Code, 2015 Edition, ("IRC Code") is hereby amended as follows: 
A.  Where the requirements or conditions imposed by a provision of this Title differ from the requirements or conditions imposed by IRC 2015, the most restrictive shall govern. 
B.  Section R104.1: The first sentence of the paragraph of Section R104.1 is amended to read as follows: 
    The Building Official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this Code; however, a guarantee that all buildings and structures have been constructed in accordance with all provisions of this Code is neither intended nor implied. 
C.  Section R105.2: Section R105.2 entitled Work Exempt from Permit under Building, Subsections 1, 2 and 10 are hereby amended to read as follows: 
    1. One story detached buildings used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet and the height of said buildings does not exceed ten feet at the peak of the roof. These buildings must specifically not be intended or used for human habitation. 
    2. Fences not over six feet high and located in side or rear yard areas. 
    10. Decks not more than 30 inches above grade, and not more than 20 square feet will not require a permit. 
D.  Section R105.3.1: Section R105.3.1, entitled Action on Application, is amended to include the following additional paragraph: 
    A building permit will not be issued in the Town jurisdiction until all construction drawings and applications are submitted and approved and payment of permit fees, use tax, street improvement fees, fire protection impact fees, and water and wastewater plant investment (tap) fees are made and all other fees are paid. 
E.  Section R105.7: Section R105.7, entitled Placement of Permit, is amended to include the additional following sentences: 
    The permit cards shall be posted as described in Section 13.13.050(C). 
    It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to display the building permit card on the job site throughout the construction process for inspector to see. 
F.  Section R108.3: Section R108.3, entitled Building Permit Valuation, is amended to include the additional following sentence: 
    The minimum valuation for building permits in the Town shall be not less than the average cost figures per square foot shown in the most current building valuation data chart published semi-annually by the International Code Council. 
G.  Section R108.5: Section R108.5, entitled Fee Refunds, is amended to read as follows: 
    The Building Official may authorize refunding of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. 
    The Building Official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this Code. 
    The Building Official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan reviewing is done. 
    The Building Official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment. 
H.  Section R108.6: Section R108.6, entitled Work Commencing Before Permit Issuance, is amended to include the following additional subsections R108.6.1, entitled Investigation, and R108.6.2, entitled Fee, shall be added to Section R108 and shall read as follows: 
    R108.6 Work Commencing Before Permit. 
    R108.6.1: Investigation. Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this Code has been commenced without first obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. 
    R108.6.2: Fee. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the minimum required permit fee as established by resolution of the Board of Trustees. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this Code or from any penalty prescribed by law. 
I.  Section R301.6: Section R301.6, entitled Roof Load, is amended to include the additional following sentence: 
    Minimum snow load requirements shall be determined by using the most current edition of the Snow Load Design Data Guideline for Colorado, prepared by the Structural Engineers Association of Colorado. 
J.  Section R302.3: Section R302.3, entitled Two-Family Dwellings, is amended to include the following additional sentence and delete exceptions 1 and 2: 
    Single family residences having primary and secondary units within, require one hour fire resistive separation assembly between them. 
K.  Table R302.6: Table R302.6 Dwelling-Garage Separation amend as follows: under Material change one-half" to five-eighths" in each area. 
L.  Section R302.7: Section R302.7, entitled Under Stair Protection, is amended to read as follows: 
    Enclosed accessible and useable space under stairs shall have walls, under stair surface and any soffits enclosed or useable space sided with five-eighths inch Type X Gypsum Board. 
M.  Section R302.13: Delete Section R302.13 Fire Protection of Floors. 
N.  Section R303.10: Section R303.10, entitled Required Heating, is amended to include the following additional sentence: 
    Heat loss calculations shall be required for all dwelling units, the minimum design criteria shall be a 68 degree temperature inside and a minus 20 degree temperature outside. 
O.  Section R309.5: Delete Section R309.5, Fire Sprinklers. 
P.  Subsection R309.6: A new Subsection R309.6, entitled Mechanical and Hot Water Equipment in Garage, shall be added to Section R309 and shall read as follows: 
    Mechanical and hot water equipment located in a garage shall be located in a separate room or alcove with a minimum of 18 inches off of the garage floor or six feet above garage floor if in the open area of the garage. 
Q.  Section R313.1: Section R313.1, entitled Townhome Automatic Fire Sprinkler System change "shall" to "may". 
R.  Section R313.2: Section R313.2, entitled One- and Two-Family Dwellings, Automatic Fire System change "shall" to "may". 
S.  Section R401.3: Section R401.3, entitled Drainage, is amended to include the following additional sentence: 
    Positive drainage away from the exterior of all foundation walls must be maintained. In those locations where the foundation is subjected to a high water table, or where surface water or groundwater drainage will present a problem, additional precautions may be required. 
T.  Section R403.1.4.1: Section R403.1.4.1, entitled Frost Protection, is amended to include the following additional sentence: 
    All heated spaces within a building or attached thereto shall have foundation frost walls having a depth of at least 48 inches measured from the bottom of the footing to the backfill grade lines, unless otherwise designed by a structural engineer for a specific location. 
U.  Section R405: Section R405, entitled Foundation Drainage, is amended to include the following additional paragraph: 
    Foundation Drains. Where foundation or footing drains are required or provided voluntarily, they shall be connected to a positive outfall, sump pump or approved drywell. Perforated tile shall be installed below the area to be protected. Tile shall be made of approved materials and shall be installed having a minimum slope to outfall of one-half percent approximately one inch in 20 feet. Tops of joints in drain tile shall be covered with six to eight inches of course gravel or crushed rock. Foundation drains may be omitted at the discretion of the soils engineer where well-drained soil exists or where groundwater or surface water will not present a problem. 
V.  Section R1003.9.1: Section R1003.9.1, entitled Termination, is amended to include the following additional sentence: 
    Solid fuel chimney caps cannot be constructed in a way that prevents accessibility for cleaning. 
W.  Section R1005.8: A new Subsection R1005.8, entitled Shaft Enclosure, is added to Section R1005, entitled Factory-Built Chimneys, and shall read as follows: 
    R1005.8: Shaft Enclosure. Factory built chimneys shall be enclosed with materials suitable for construction of a one hour fire resistive wall. Fire stops can be omitted in cases which are protected on all sides. Cap enclosures shall be constructed of non-combustible material. 
X.  Section R1006.1: Subsection R1006.1, entitled Exterior Air, is amended to read as follows: 
    Factory built or masonry fireplaces covered in this chapter shall be equipped with exterior air supply from the exterior of the building to assure proper fuel combustion and terminate inside the fire box. 
Y.  Section N1101.9.1: A new Subsection N1101.9.1 entitled Exterior Design Conditions is added to read as follows: 
Winter, Design Dry-Bulb -22ºF Summer, Design Dry-Bulb 87ºF Summer, Design Wet-Bulb 62ºF Degree-Days Heating 8426 Degrees North Latitude 39º39" Climate Zone 6  
Z.  Table N1102.1.2: Table N1102.1.2, entitled Insulation and Fenestration Requirements By Component, the Climate Zone 6 Column the entry entitled Wood Frame Wall "R-Value" shall be amended to read "R-21". 
AA.  Section N1103.7: Section N1103.7 entitled Equipment Sizing and Efficiency Rating (Mandatory) is amended to include the following additional Subsection N1103.7.1 entitled Heating Equipment Efficiency and shall read as follows: 
    Section N1103.7.1, Heating Equipment Efficiency. All Gas fired boilers and furnaces shall have a minimum efficiency of 92 percent AFUE. A condensate riser with trap attached to the drain system shall be installed close to heating equipment so condensation water doesn't run on floor. 
AB.  Section M1503: Section M1503, entitled Range Hoods, and Subsection M1503.1, entitled General, is amended to delete the exceptions. 
AC.  Section G2406.2: Section G2406.2 Prohibited Location - delete items 3 and 4. 
AD.  Section G2445: Section G2445, entitled Unvented Room Heaters is hereby deleted. 
AE.  Subsection P2904.1: Subsection P2904.1, entitled General, add "If installed" at the beginning of the first sentence. 
AF.  Subsection P2904.1.1: Subsection P2904.1.1, entitled Required Sprinkler Locations, add "If installed" at the beginning of the first sentence. 
AG.  Appendices E, F, H, J, K, M and O: International Residential Code 2015 Edition, Appendices E, F, H, J, K, M and O are hereby adopted. 
(Code 1972, § 13.04.020; Ord. No. 23-2013, § 11, 2013; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 14, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.04.030. - Copies on file and available for sale. 
    At least one copy of the International Residential Code, 2015 Edition, and the adopted appendices thereto, together with one copy of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, shall be kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk or Building Official. Copies of said Code and appendices shall be available for sale to the public at a moderate price. 
(Code 1972, § 13.04.030; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 15, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.04.040. - Penalties. 
    Section R113 of the International Residential Code, 2015 Edition, entitled Violations, which contains a penalty clause, is herewith amended and adopted as follows: 
    Section R113.1: Section R113.1, entitled Unlawful Acts: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, extend, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, demolish, occupy any building, structure or use any equipment regulated by this Code or maintain any building or structure in the Town or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this Code. 
    Section R113.2: Section R113.2, entitled Notice of Violation: The Building Official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition or occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of this Code, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. 
    Section R113.3: Section R113.3, entitled Prosecution of Violation: If the notice of violation is not complied within the time prescribed by such notice, the Building Official is authorized to request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of this Code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. 
    Section R113.4: Section R113.4, entitled Violation Penalties: Any person who violates a provision of this Code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a Class A municipal offense and each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed, continued or permitted. Any municipal offense under this section shall be deemed one of "strict liability." 
(Code 1972, § 13.04.040; Ord. No. 37-2005, § 4(part), 2005; Ord. No. 2-2009, § 11, 2009; Ord. No. 23-2013, § 11, 2013; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 16, 5-9-2017) 
CHAPTER 13.05. - INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE 

Section 13.05.010. - Adopted by reference. 
    Pursuant to the power and authority conferred by the laws of the State, there is adopted by reference thereto, the International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition, together with appendix A thereto, promulgated by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue NW 6th Floor, Washington, DC 20001. The purpose of this Code is to protect the safety of residents of this Town by prescribing minimum standards for the installation, design, construction, quality of materials, location, operation and maintenance of heating, ventilating, cooling and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other miscellaneous heat producing appliances. 
(Code 1972, § 13.05.010; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 17, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.05.020. - Amendments. 
    The International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition, is hereby amended as follows: 
A.  Section 106.1.1: Section 106.1.1 Annual Permit is hereby deleted. 
B.  Section 106.1.2: Section 106.1.2 Annual Permit Records is hereby deleted. 
C.  Section 106.5.2: Section 106.5.2, entitled Fee Schedule, is amended to read as follows: 
Fees concerning mechanical permits shall be established by resolution of the Board of Trustees. 
D.  Section 106.5.3 : Section 106.5.3, entitled Fee Refunds, is amended to add "80%" to the first sentence in items 2 and 3. 
E.  Subsection 309.1: Subsection 309.1, entitled Space Heating Systems, is amended to delete the exceptions and add the following: 
The minimum design criteria shall be a 68 degree temperature inside and a minus 20 degree temperature outside. Heat loss calculations shall be required for all dwelling units 
F.  Section 501.3: Section 501.3 entitled Exhaust Discharge is amended to delete exception 3. 
G.  Section 505.1: Section 505.1 entitled Domestic Systems shall be amended by deleting the exceptions and adding the following additional sentences: 
Domestic kitchen range exhaust ducts which discharge from the floor, shall be made of at least 26-gauge metal and shall have smooth surfaces. This requirement shall include those listed ranges, which permit the use of flexible metal exhaust ducts. All other domestic kitchen ranges located within dwelling units shall have range hoods over them and discharge to the outside through sheet metal ducts. 
H.  Appendix A: International Mechanical Code 2015 Edition, Appendix A is hereby adopted. 
(Code 1972, § 13.05.020; Ord. No. 23-2013, § 12, 2013; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 18, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.05.030. - Copies on file and available for sale. 
    At least one copy of the International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition, together with Appendix A thereto, together with one copy of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, shall be kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk or Building Official. Copies of said Code and appendices shall be available for sale to the public at a moderate price. 
(Code 1972, § 13.05.030; Ord. No. 23-2013, § 12, 2013; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 19, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.05.040. - Penalties. 
    The section of the International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition, Section 108, entitled Violations, which contains a penalty clause is herewith amended and adopted as follows: 
    Section 108.1: Section 108.1, entitled Unlawful Acts: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, repair, move, demolish, or utilize a mechanical system, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this Code. 
    Section 108.2: Section 108.2, entitled Notice of Violation: The Building Official shall serve a notice of violation or order to the person responsible for the erection, installation, alteration, extension, repair, removal or demolition of mechanical work in violation of the provisions of this Code, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. 
    Section 108.3: Section 108.3, entitled Prosecution of Violation: If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the Building Official shall request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this Code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. 
    Section 108.4: Section 108.4, entitled Violation Penalties: Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of the International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, or who fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair mechanical work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code, shall be deemed guilty of a Class A municipal offense and each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed, continued or permitted. Any such offense shall be deemed one of "strict liability." 
(Code 1972, § 13.05.040; Ord. No. 37-2005, § 5(part), 2005; Ord. No. 2-2009, § 12, 2009; Ord. No. 23-2013, § 12, 2013; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 20, 5-9-2017) 
CHAPTER 13.06. - INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE 

Section 13.06.010. - Adopted by reference. 
    Pursuant to the power and authority conferred by the laws of the State, there is adopted by reference thereto, the International Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition, together with Appendices C and E thereto, promulgated by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue NW 6th Floor, Washington, DC 20001. The purpose of this Code is to protect the safety of residents of this Town by prescribing minimum standards for plumbing installation, alteration, addition, repair, relocation, replacement, maintenance or use of any plumbing systems. The plumbing standards of this Code include standards relating to materials, joints, traps, drains, fixtures, supplies, and vents. 
(Code 1972, § 13.06.010; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 21, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.06.020. - Amendments. 
    The International Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition, is hereby amended as follows: 
A.  Section 106.1: Section 106.1 Annual Permit is hereby deleted 
B.  Section 106.1.2 : Section 106.1.2 Annual Permit Records is hereby deleted 
C.  Section 106.6.2: Section 106.6.2, entitled Fee Schedule, is amended to read as follows: 
Fees concerning plumbing permits shall be established by resolution of the Board of Trustees. 
D.  Section 106.6.3: Section 106.6.3, entitled Fee Refunds, is amended to add "80%" to the first sentence in items 2 and 3. 
E.  Section 201: Section 201 entitled General is amended to add the following new Section 201.5 Qualified Licensed Plumber: 
Pursuant to Section 12-58-115, C.R.S., only qualified licensed plumbers may install "Plumbing Systems" as defined in Section 202 of the International Plumbing Code. 
F.  Section 312.3: Section 312.3 entitled Drainage and Vent Air Test, delete first sentence. 
G.  Section 802.1.6: Section 802.1.6, entitled Domestic Dishwashing Machines, the last sentence is amended to read after the word "connect" as follows: 
to a listed deck mounted air gap installed with the flood level (FL) marking at or above the flood level of the sink or drain board, whichever is higher, or separately trapped with the air break located on the stand pipe with a wye branch fitting as high as possible under the sink rim or counter. 
H.  Section 903.1: Section 903.1, entitled Roof Extension, is amended to add "6 inches above the roof" in the first sentence. 
I.  Section 904.3: Section 904.3, entitled Vent Termination, is amended to include the additional following sentence: 
Vent terminations on metal roofs shall be within three feet of the ridge or be provided with an alternate means of protection. 
J.  Section 912.1.2: A new Subsection 912.1.2, entitled Horizontal Wet Venting, is added to Section 912, entitled Wet Venting, and shall read as follows: 
Single bathroom groups - a single bathroom group of fixtures may be installed with the drain from an individually vented lavatory or lavatories serving as a wet vent for a bathtub, shower compartment, or floor drain and for a water closet provided the requirements listed below are met: (1) Not more than four fixture units drain into a minimum two inch diameter wet vent. Kitchen sinks, dishwashers, or automatic clothes washer connections are not permitted. (2) The horizontal branch drain connects to the stack at the same level as the water closet drain; or it may connect to the upper half of the horizontal portion of the water closet bend at an angle not greater than 45 degrees from the direction of flow. 
K.  Section 1003.4.2.1. Section 1003.4.2.1, entitled General Design Requirements, is amended to include the following additional sentences: 
For concrete or hard surface, extend top ring and install iron ring and cover. 
Location depends on fire regulations and other considerations. If gas tight cover is provided, trap may be installed inside. 
L.  Section 1003.4.2.2: Section 1003.4.2.2, entitled Garage and Service Stations, is amended by deleting the last two sentences of said Section. 
M.  Appendices C and E: International Plumbing Code 2015 Edition. Appendices - C and E are hereby adopted. 
(Code 1972, § 13.06.020; Ord. No. 23-2013, § 13, 2013; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 22, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.06.030. - Copies on file and available for sale. 
    At least one copy of the International Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition, together with Appendices C and E thereto, together with one copy of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, shall be kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk or Building Official. Copies of said Code and appendices shall be available for sale to the public at a moderate price. 
(Code 1972, § 13.06.030; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 23, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.06.040. - Penalties. 
    The following section of the International Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition, Section 108, entitled Violations, which contains a penalty clause is herewith amended and adopted as follows: 
    Section 108.1: Section 108.1, entitled Unlawful Acts, states: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, repair, remove, demolish, or utilize any plumbing system, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this Code. 
    Section 108.2: Section 108.2, entitled Notice of Violation, states: The Building Official shall serve a notice of violation or order to the person responsible for the erection, installation, alteration, extension, repair, removal or demolition of plumbing work in violation of the provisions of this Code, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. 
    Section 108.3: Section 108.3, entitled Prosecution of Violation, states: If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the Building Official shall request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this Code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. 
    Section 108.4: Section 108.4, entitled Violation Penalties, states: Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this Code, or who fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, or repair plumbing work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code, shall be deemed guilty of a Class A municipal offense. Each separate day or portion thereof, during which any violation of this Code occurs or continues, shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as herein provided. The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for, and approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this Code. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this Code shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use, which is authorized is lawful. 
(Code 1972, § 13.06.040; Ord. No. 37-2005, § 6(part), 2005; Ord. No. 2-2009, § 13, 2009; Ord. No. 23-2013, § 13, 2013; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 24, 5-9-2017) 
CHAPTER 13.07. - INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE 

Section 13.07.010. - Adopted by reference. 
    Pursuant to the power and authority conferred by the laws of the State, there is adopted by reference thereto, the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 Edition, promulgated by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue NW 6th Floor, Washington, DC 20001. The purpose of this Code is to protect the safety of residents of this Town by prescribing minimum standards for the installation standards of a fuel gas pipe system, fuel gas utilization equipment and related accessories. The fuel gas standards of this Code include standards relating to materials, installation and protection of equipment. 
(Code 1972, § 13.07.010; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 25, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.07.020. - Amendments. 
    The International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 Edition, is hereby amended as follows: 
A.  Section 106.1: Section 106.1 Annual Permit is hereby deleted. 
B.  Section 106.2 : Section 106.2 Annual Permit Records is hereby deleted. 
C.  Section 401.11: A new Section 401.11, entitled Gas Meter Location, is added to Section 401, entitled General, and shall read as follows: 
When the gas meters are located in an area subject to vehicle traffic, proper protection shall be provided around the gas meters to protect from damage. 
D.  Section 621: Section 621, entitled Unvented Room Heaters is hereby deleted. 
(Code 1972, § 13.07.020; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 26, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.07.030. - Copies on file and available for sale. 
    At least one copy of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 Edition, together with one copy of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk or Building Official. Copies of said Code and appendices shall be available for sale to the public at a moderate price. 
(Code 1972, § 13.07.030; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 27, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.07.040. - Penalties. 
    The following section of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 Edition, Section 108, entitled Violations, which contains a penalty clause is herewith amended and adopted as follows: 
    Section 108.1: Section 108.1, entitled Unlawful Acts: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, repair, move, demolish, or utilize an installation, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this Code. 
    Section 108.2 : Section 108.2, entitled Notice of Violation: The Building Official shall serve a notice of violation or order to the person responsible for the erection, installation, alteration, extension, repair, removal or demolition of work in violation of the provisions of this Code, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. 
    Section 108.3: Section 108.3, entitled Prosecution of Violation: If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the Building Official shall request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this Code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. 
    Section 108.4: Section 108.4, entitled Violation Penalties: Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this Code, or who fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or who erects, installs, alters or repairs work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code, shall be deemed guilty of a Class A municipal offense. Each separate day or portion thereof, during which any violation of this Code occurs or continues, shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as herein provided. The issuance or granting of a permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this Code shall not be valid, except insofar as the work or use, which is authorized, is lawful. 
(Code 1972, § 13.07.040; Ord. No. 37-2005, § 7(part), 2005; Ord. No. 2-2009, § 14, 2009; Ord. No. 23-2013, § 14, 2013; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 28, 5-9-2017) 
CHAPTER 13.08. - NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE 

Section 13.08.010. - Adopted by reference. 
    Pursuant to the power and authority conferred by the laws of the State, there is hereby adopted by reference thereto, the National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association, 1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MS 02169. The purpose of this Code is the practical safeguarding of persons and property from hazards arising from the use of electricity. The subject matter of this Code includes regulations relating to the installation of electrical conductors and equipment within or on public and private buildings or other structures, including mobile homes, recreational vehicles, floating dwelling units; and other premises such as yards, carnivals, parking and other lots, and industrial substations, installations of conductors that connect to the supply of electricity and installations of other outside conductors on the premises. 
(Code 1972, § 13.08.010; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 29, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.08.020. - Amendments. 
    The National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, is amended as follows: 
A.  Article 210.8: Article 210.8 is amended to include the additional following sentence: 
All G.F.C.I. protection shall be resettable in rooms where protection is required including outside receptacles. 
B.  Article 590.3: Article 590.3 is amended to include a new Subsection (e) to read as follows: 
(e)  Permanent services on buildings which are energized for construction work will be considered as temporary service equipment until such time as the final inspection is complete. 
C.  Article 680.71: Article 680.71 is amended to include the following additional paragraph: 
All G.F.C.I. protection shall be located within the same room. It is to be installed five feet off of finished floor and six feet from hydro massage bathtub. The cord is not to exceed three feet from motor to receptacle installed near the access door protected by the resettable G.F.C.I. mounted on wall. (The resettable G.F.C.I. is not to be installed under the tub.) 
(Code 1972, § 13.08.020; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 30, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.08.030. - Copies on file and available for sale. 
    At least one copy of the National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, together with one copy of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk or the Building Official. Copies of said Code shall be available for sale to the public at a moderate price. 
(Code 1972, § 13.08.030; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 31, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.08.040. - Penalties. 
    The following article of the National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, Article 90.4 entitled Enforcement, is hereby amended to include the following new Section 90.4.1, Violations and Penalties, which contains the violation and penalty clause, is herewith set forth in full and hereby adopted as: 
Article 90.4.1: Article 90.4.1, entitled Violation and Penalties, states: Whenever the authority having jurisdiction determines that there are violations of this Code, a written notice shall be issued to confirm such findings. 
Any order or notice issued pursuant to this Code shall be served upon the owner, operator, occupant, or other person responsible for the condition or violation, either by personal service or mail or by delivering the same to, and leaving it with, some person of responsibility upon the premises. For unattended or abandoned locations, a copy of such order or notice shall be posted on the premises in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to such premises and the order or notice shall be mailed by registered or certified mail, with return receipt requested, to the last known address of the owner, occupant, or both. 
Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this Code or who fails to carry out an order made pursuant to this Code or violates any condition attached to a permit, approval, or certificate shall be subject to the penalties established by this jurisdiction. 
Failure to comply with the time limits of an abatement notice or other corrective notice issued by the authority having jurisdiction shall result in each day that such violation continues being regarded as a new and separate offense. 
Any person, firm or corporation who shall willfully violate any of the applicable provisions of this Article shall be deemed guilty of a Class A municipal offense. Each separate day, or portion thereof, during which any violation of said Code occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as herein provided. The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for, and approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of the National Electrical Code. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of said Code shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use, which is authorized, is lawful. Any municipal offense under the National Electrical Code, 2014 Edition, shall be deemed one of "strict liability." 
(Code 1972, § 13.08.040; Ord. No. 37-2005, § 8(part), 2005; Ord. No. 2-2009, § 15, 2009; Ord. No. 23-2013, § 15, 2013; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 1; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 32, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.08.050. - Fees. 
    Fees concerning the electrical permits shall be established by Resolution of the Board of Trustees. 
(Ord. No. 01-2017, § 11, 1-10-2017; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 33, 5-9-2017) 
CHAPTER 13.10. - ANSI/ASME SAFETY CODE FOR ELEVATORS AND ESCALATORS 

Section 13.10.010. - Adopted by reference. 
    Pursuant to the power and authority conferred by the laws of the State, there is hereby adopted by reference thereto, the American National Standard Institute ANSI/ASME Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators ASME A17.1-2013, including Requirements for Moving Walks, Material Lifts and Dumbwaiters With Automatic Transfer Devices ASME A17.2-2014, Guide for Inspection of Elevators, Escalators, Moving Walks, ASME A17.3-2011 Safety Code for Existing Elevators and Escalators, ASME A18.1 -2014 Safety Standard for Platform Lifts and Stairway Chair Lifts, and ICC/ANSI Al17.1-2009 Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities, promulgated by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 5032 Alhambra Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90032, and the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue NW 6th Floor, Washington, DC 20001. The purpose of these Codes is to provide for the safety of life and limb, and promote the public welfare by regulating the installation, alteration, addition, repair, relocation, and use of elevators and escalators. The provisions of the Code are not intended to prevent the use of systems, methods, or devices of equivalent or superior of quality, strength, fire resistance, effectiveness, durability and safety to those prescribed by the Code, providing that there is technical documentation to demonstrate the equivalency of the system, method, or device. 
(Code 1972, § 13.10.010; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 34, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.10.020. - Copies on file and available for sale. 
    At least one copy of the American National Standard Institute ANSI/ASME Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators ASME A17.1-2013 ASME, Guide for Inspection of Elevators, Escalators, Moving Walks, A17.3-2011 ASME Safety Code for Existing Elevators and Escalators A17.2-2014, ASME Safety Standard for Platform Lifts and Stairway Chair Lifts A18.1-2014, and ICC/ANSI Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities A117.1-2009, together with one copy of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, shall be kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk or the Building Official. Copies of said Code shall be available for sale to the public at a moderate price. 
(Code 1972, § 13.10.020; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 35, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.10.030. - Penalties. 
A.  Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of the American National Standard Institute ANSI/ASME Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators ASME A17.1-2013, ASME Guide for inspection of Elevators, Escalators, Moving Walks A17.2-2014, ASME Safety Code for Existing Elevators and Escalators A17.3-2011, ASME Safety Standard for Platform Lifts and Stairway Chair Lifts A18.1-2014, and ICC/ANSI Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities A117.1-2009, or any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions of these Codes or fails to carry out an order made pursuant to this Code or who violates any condition attached to a permit, approval or certificate shall be deemed guilty of a Class A municipal offense. Each separate day, or portion thereof; during which any violation of said Code occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as herein provided. The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for, and approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of the above referenced Codes. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of said Codes shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use, which is authorized, is lawful. Any municipal offense under the said Codes shall be deemed one of "strict liability." 
B.  The imposition of the penalties herein described shall not prevent the legal officer of the jurisdiction from instituting the appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation; or to prevent illegal occupancy of a structure or premises; or to stop an illegal act, conduct of business or occupancy of a structure on or about any premises. 
(Code 1972, § 13.10.030; Ord. No. 37-2005, § 10(part), 2005; Ord. No. 2-2009, § 17, 2009; Ord. No. 23-2013, § 17, 2013; Amended Ord. No. 03-2015, § 2, 2015; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 36, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 36, 5-9-2017) 
CHAPTER 13.11. - INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE 

Section 13.11.010. - Adopted by reference. 
    Pursuant to the power and authority conferred by the laws of the State, there is hereby adopted by reference thereto, the International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 Edition, promulgated by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue NW 6th Floor, Washington, DC 20001. The purpose of this Code is to protect the safety of residents of this Town by prescribing standards regulating the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical service, water heating and illumination systems and equipment which will enable the effective and efficient use of energy in new building construction. 
(Code 1972, § 13.11.010; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 37, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.11.020. - Amendments. 
    The International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 Edition, is hereby amended as follows: 
A.  Section 302: Section 302, entitled Design Conditions, is hereby amended by the adding of the following Section 302.2, entitled Exterior Design Conditions: 
Winter, Design Dry-Bulb -22ºF Summer, Design Dry-Bulb 87ºF Summer, Design Wet-Bulb 62ºF Degree - Days Heating 8426 Degrees North Latitude 39º39" Climate Zone 6  
B.  Table C402.1.3, entitled Opaque Thermal Envelope Insulation Component Minimum Requirements, the Climate Zone 6 column amended. The entry entitled Walls, Above Grade, the entry entitled Wood Framed and other, shall be amended to read R-21. 
(Code 1972, § 13.11.020; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 38, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.11.030. - Copies on file and available for sale. 
    At least one copy of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 Edition, together with one copy of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, shall be kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk or the Building Official. Copies of said Code shall be available for sale to the public at a moderate price. 
(Code 1972, § 13.11.030; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 39, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.11.040. - Penalties. 
    It shall be a Class A municipal offense for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, renovate, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, convert, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the Town or cause or permit the same to be done contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this Code. Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed, continued or permitted. Any municipal offense under this section shall be deemed one of "strict liability." 
(Code 1972, § 13.11.040; Ord. No. 37-2005, § 11(part), 2005; Ord. No. 2-2009, § 18, 2009; Ord. No. 23-2013, § 18, 2013; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 40, 5-9-2017) 
CHAPTER 13.12. - INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE 

Section 13.12.010. - Adopted by reference. 
    Pursuant to the power and authority conferred by the laws of the State, there is adopted by reference thereto the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, with Appendices B, C, D, F, G, H and I thereto promulgated by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue NW 6th Floor, Washington, DC 20001. The purposes of the Code are to protect the safety of the residents of the Town by prescribing minimum standards for buildings and other structures. The subject matter of this Code is the minimum requirements consistent with nationally recognized good practice for providing a reasonable level of life safety and property protection from the hazards of fire, explosion or dangerous conditions in new and existing buildings, structures and premises, and to provide safety to fire fighters and emergency responders during emergency operations within the Town. 
(Ord. No. 10-2017, § 41(13.12.010), 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.12.020. - Amendments. 
    The International Fire Code, ("IFC 2015 Code") is hereby amended to read as follows: 
A.  Section 101.1. Section 101.1, entitled Title, is amended to read as follows: These regulations shall be known as The Fire Code of the Town of Eagle and the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District (Fire District), hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
B.  Section 104.1. Section 104.1 entitled General, is amended to include the following sentences: 
The Town of Eagle Building Official shall have the same authority as the Fire Code Official to enforce and render interpretation of this Code. In the case of dispute with regard to new construction or remodel, the Building Official's interpretation shall be final. With regard to maintenance, the Fire Code Official's interpretation shall be final. 
In cases of more than a ten working day turnaround on Plan Review by the Fire District or when there is an anticipated more than ten working day turn around, the Town may direct a qualified third party review of plans. Similarly, in cases where there is more than a five working day delay in construction inspection, the Town may direct a qualified third party inspection. 
C.  Section 105.1.1. Section 105.1.1, entitled Permits Required, is amended to include the following: 
Fees concerning fire suppression system and equipment installation permits shall be established by resolution of the Board of Trustees. 
D.  Section 105.1.6. Section 105.1.6 entitled Annual Permit is hereby deleted. 
E.  Section 105.1.6.1. Section 105.1.6.1 entitled Annual Permit Records is hereby deleted. 
F.  Section 105.3.9. Section 105.3.9, a new section entitled Refund, is added and shall read as follows: 
The Fire Code Official may authorize refunding of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. The Fire Code Official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this Code. The Fire Code Official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan reviewing is done. The Fire Code Official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment. 
G.  Section 108.1. Section 108.1, entitled Board of Appeals Established, is amended to read as follows: 
Any person aggrieved by orders, decisions or determination made by the Fire Code Official in applying the provisions of this Code adopted by reference thereunder, as herein defined, may appeal such decision to the Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Eagle as set forth in Chapter 13.15 of the Eagle Municipal Code. 
H.  Section 108.3. Section 108.3, entitled Qualification, is hereby deleted. 
I.  Section 308.1.4. Section 308.1.4, entitled Open-Flame Cooking Devices, exception #3 is amended to read as follows: 
1.  LP gas cooking devices having LP gas container with a liquid propane capacity no greater than 4.7 gallons. 
J.  Section 503.1.2. Section 503.1.2 entitled Additional Access, is amended to read as follows: 
The Fire Code Official shall make recommendations to the Town in regard to vehicular access to a site. The Town Engineer is the responsible party at the Town to determine vehicular access and shall respond to the Fire Code Official during the Plan Review Process. The determination of the Town Engineer shall be incorporated into the permit. 
K.  Section 603.4. Section 603.4, entitled Portable Unvented Heater, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Portable unvented fuel-fired heating equipment shall be prohibited inside any occupancy within the Town of Eagle. 
L.  Section 603.4.1. Section 603.4.1 is hereby deleted. 
M.  Section 603.6. Section 603.6, entitled Chimneys and Appliances, is amended to include the following additional sentence: 
Chimneys used with fireplaces or heating appliances in which solid fuel is used shall be maintained with an effective means of arresting sparks. 
N.  Section 901.6.2.1. Section 901.6.2.1, entitled Records Information, the last sentence is amended to read as follows: 
Records of all systems inspection, test and maintenance required by the referenced standards shall be maintained on the premises for a minimum of three years and shall be copied to The Fire Code Official within 30 days of the inspection. 
O.  Section 901.11. A new Subsection 901.11 entitled Responding to Nuisance Alarms, is added to Section 901, entitled General, and shall read as follows: 
Section 901.11 Responding to Nuisance Alarms. If the Fire District responds to more than three nuisance alarms within a 30 day period, the property owner may be fined by the Fire District for each offense. For three to four nuisance alarms within 30 days a fine may be $200.00. For five nuisance alarms within 30 days, a fine may be $400.00. For the sixth and more nuisance alarms within 30 days, a fine may be the current full cost of personnel and equipment for a one hour time period. 
P.  Section 903.1.2. A new Subsection 903.1.2, entitled Personnel Qualification, is added to Section 903 entitled Automatic Sprinkler Systems, and shall read as follows: 
Section 903.1.2 Personnel Qualifications. Fire Suppression System personnel shall be registered with the Colorado Division of Fire Safety as a Fire Suppression System contractor and be qualified and experienced in the installation, inspection, testing and maintenance of fire sprinkler systems. Qualified personnel shall meet #1 and also one (1) of the following #2-7 requirements: 
1.  *National Institute for Certification in Engineering Technologies (NICET). Level II minimum is required for field supervisors and Level III minimum certification for plan submittals. 
2.  Factory trained or certified. 
3.  Journeyman certification program through an organized labor union. 
4.  Certified by examination by a state or local authority. 
5.  A minimum of 8 hours of continuing education annually. 
6.  Trained and qualified personnel employed by an organization listed by a national testing laboratory for the servicing of fire sprinkler systems. 
7.  Completion of apprentice program through an accredited educational program. 
Q.  Section 903.3.1.3. Section 903.3.1.3, entitled NFPA13D Sprinkler Systems, is amended to add the following: 
If an owner elects but is not required by the Eagle Municipal Code to install automatic sprinkler systems in one or two family dwellings or in townhouses, they are permitted to be installed in accordance with the NFPA13D or in accordance with the International Residential Code Section R2904. 
Automatic sprinkler systems required in Group R-3 and R-4 congregate living facilities shall be permitted to be installed throughout in accordance with NFPA13D. 
R.  Section 904.1.1. Section 904.1.1, entitled Certification of Service Personnel, for fire-extinguishing equipment, is amended to include the following additional sentences: 
Service Personnel shall be registered with the Colorado Division of Fire Safety as a Fire Suppression contractor and be qualified and experienced in the installation, inspection, testing and maintaining fire-extinguishing systems. Qualified personnel shall meet #1 and also one of the following #2-7 requirements: 
1.  *National Institute for Certification in Engineering Technologies (NICET). Level II minimum is required for field supervisors and Level III minimum certification for plan submittals. 
2.  Factory trained or certified. 
3.  Journeyman certification program through an organized labor union. 
4.  Certified by examination by a state or local authority. 
5.  A minimum of eight hours of continuing education annually. 
6.  Trained and qualified personnel employed by an organization listed by a national testing laboratory for the servicing of fire-extinguishing systems. 
7.  Completion of apprentice program through an accredited educational program. 
S.  Section 907.1 General. Section 907.1, entitled General, is amended to include the following additional subsection: 
Section 907.1.4. Personnel qualifications. Fire Alarm System personnel shall be qualified and experienced in the installation, inspection, testing and maintenance for fire alarm systems. Personnel shall be certified through the National Institute for Certification in Engineering Technologies (NICET) at a minimum of Level II for field supervisors and a minimum of Level III for plan submittals. Personnel shall also meet one of the following requirements #1-6: 
1.  Factory trained or certified. 
2.  Journeyman certification program through an organized labor union. 
3.  Certified by examination by a state or local authority. 
4.  A minimum of 8 hours of continuing education annually. 
5.  Trained and qualified personnel employed by an organization listed by a national testing laboratory for the servicing of fire alarm systems. 
6.  Completion of apprentice program through an accredited educational program. 
T.  Section 907. Section 907, entitled Fire Alarm and Detection Systems, shall be amended as follows: 
Section 907.2.1 Group A: Delete the Exceptions 
Section 907.2.2 Group B: Delete the Exceptions 
Section 907.2.3 Group E: Delete Exception #4 
Section 907.2.4 Group F: Delete the Exceptions 
Section 907.2.7 Group M: Delete Exception #2 
Section 907.2.8.1 Group R-1: Delete Exception #2 
Section 907.2.9.1 Group R-2: Delete Exceptions #2 and 3 
Section 907.2.10.1 Group R-4: Delete Exceptions #2 and 3 
U.  Section 907.5.3. A new Section 907.5.3, entitled Fire Alarm Notification Upon Silencing, shall be added to Section 907.5 and shall read as follows: 
When a general alarm is silenced (by the Fire Department) the fire alarm system shall be capable of silencing the audible alarms while still providing visual notification to occupants. 
(Ord. No. 10-2017, § 41(13.12.020), 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.12.030. - Copies on file and available for sale. 
    At least one copy of the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, together with one copy of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, shall be kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk or Building Official and The Fire Code Official. Copies of said Code shall be available for sale to the public at a moderate price. 
(Ord. No. 10-2017, § 41(13.12.030), 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.12.040. - Penalties. 
    The section of the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, Section 109 entitled Violations, which contains a penalty clause is herewith amended and adopted as follows: 
A.  Section 109.1. Section 109.1, entitled Unlawful Acts: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the Town or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this Code. 
B.  Section 109.3. Section 109.3, entitled Notice of Violation: The Building Official or Fire Code Official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition or occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of the International Fire Code, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. 
C.  Section 109.3.3. Section 109.3.3, entitled Prosecution of Violation: If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the Building Official or Fire Code Official is authorized to request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of this Code or of the order to direction made pursuant thereto. 
D.  Section 109.4. Section 109.4, entitled Violation Penalties: Any person who violates a provision of this Code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the Building Official or Fire Code Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provision of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a Class A municipal offense and each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the Code is committed, continued or permitted. Any municipal offense under this section shall be deemed on of "strict liability." 
(Ord. No. 10-2017, § 41(13.12.040), 5-9-2017) 
CHAPTER 13.13. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Section 13.13.010. - Building Official, designated. 
    The Town Manager shall designate a person to serve as the Town Building Official. The Board of Trustees may authorize the Town Manager to serve in the capacity of Building Official. The Building Official is authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of this Title and the codes adopted by reference thereunder. The Town may contract with other persons or other governmental entities to perform inspections and other duties of the Building Official provided for in this Title and the codes adopted by reference thereunder. 
(Code 1972, § 13.12.010; Ord. No. 37-2005, § 12(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.13.020. - Interpretation. 
    The Town Building Official shall be deemed the Judge as to the proper interpretation of the rules and requirements of this Title and the codes adopted by reference thereunder pertaining to the construction, alteration, enlargement or improvement of buildings and structures regulated by this Title or the codes adopted by reference thereunder; provided, however, the Building Official shall not be permitted to modify any substantive rules and regulations contained in this Title and the codes adopted by reference thereunder. 
(Code 1972, § 13.12.020; Ord. No. 37-2005, § 12(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.13.030. - Promulgation of regulations. 
    The Town Building Official shall be authorized to promulgate from time to time additional regulations, design standards, tables, drawings, and guidelines not in conflict with the provisions of this Title and the codes adopted by reference thereunder. 
(Code 1972, § 13.12.030; Ord. No. 37-2005, § 12(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.13.040. - Building Official, powers and duties. 
A.  The Building Official is charged with the administration and enforcement of this Title and all codes adopted by reference thereunder by the Board of Trustees. 
B.  The Building Official shall have the power to: 
1.  Enter any premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of administering this Title. 
2.  Direct that tests of materials, devices, construction methods, structural assemblies or foundation conditions be made, or sufficient evidence or proof be submitted at the expense of the owner where such evidence or proof is necessary to determine whether the material, devices, construction or foundation meets the requirements of this Title. The records of such test shall be kept available for inspection during the construction of the building or structure and for such a period thereafter as required by the Building Official. 
3.  Direct by written notice, or by attaching a placard to the premises, the correction of any condition where, in the opinion of the Building Official, such a condition violates the provisions of this Title. 
4.  Revoke a permit where there is a violation of the provisions of Section 13.13.060. 
(Code 1972, § 13.12.040; Ord. No. 37-2005, § 12(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.13.050. - Responsibility of owner. 
    Neither the granting of a permit, nor the approval of the drawings and specifications, nor inspections made by the Building Official shall in any way relieve the owner of such building or structure from full responsibility for carrying out all work in accordance with the requirements of this Title and the codes adopted by reference thereunder. 
(Code 1972, § 13.12.050; Ord. No. 37-2005, § 12(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.13.060. - Prohibitions. 
A.  No person shall commence or continue any work in respect to any building, structure, factory-built housing unit, manufactured home, mobile home or equipment without first obtaining required permits from the Town Building Department. 
B.  No person shall construct or commence any work in respect to any private or subsurface wastewater disposal facilities without first obtaining a permit from the Town Building Department and, if required, a permit from the County Environmental Health Department. 
C.  The written approval of the Building Official and, if required, the County Environmental Health Department shall be obtained before the backfilling on any subsurface wastewater disposal facilities. 
D.  The written approval of the Building Official shall be obtained before: 
1.  The placing or pouring of any concrete; 
2.  A foundation below the land surface is backfilled or covered; 
3.  The structural framework of a building or structure is covered or concealed. 
E.  In respect to any work undertaken in violation of the provisions of Subsections (C) and (D) of this section that have been installed and have not been approved, the Building Official or the public works department, may at any time require that such work, in whole or in part, be exposed for inspection. 
F.  No person shall occupy any building, factory-built housing unit, manufactured home, or mobile home until wastewater disposal facilities, meeting the minimum standards of the State Department of Public Health and Environment and the Town Public Works Department, have been installed and have been approved. No person shall occupy any building, factory-built housing unit, manufactured home, or mobile home unless domestic water facilities have been installed and have been approved, in writing, by the Town public works department. 
(Code 1972, § 13.12.060; Ord. No. 37-2005, § 12(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
CHAPTER 13.14. - PERMITS AND FEES 

Section 13.14.010. - Permits required. 
    The Building Official shall promulgate a table that sets forth the projects which require permit(s), if any, and specifies the specific type of permit(s) required and the site inclusion requirements. It shall be the duty of the applicant for a proposed project which is not specifically set forth in said table to contact the Building Official for a determination of the type of permit(s) required, if any, and the site inclusion requirements. 
(Code 1972, § 13.13.010; Ord. No. 37-2005, § 13(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.14.020. - Waiver of permit requirements. 
    The Building Official may waive any permit requirements contained within this Title or the codes adopted by reference thereunder only after a determination is made that the effect of such a waiver is minor and will not affect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Town. 
(Code 1972, § 13.13.020; Ord. No. 37-2005, § 13(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.14.030. - Issuance of permits. 
A.  The Building Official shall issue a permit where: 
1.  Application for a permit has been made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
2.  The proposed work set out in the application conforms to this Title, the Town Land Use and Development Code, and all other laws, regulations, resolutions or orders applicable within the Town, including the necessity of a development permit if required pursuant to Chapter 4.06. 
3.  All construction drawings, applications, and permit fees have been submitted and approved, including those for plumbing, electrical, and mechanical portions of the project. A footing and foundation permit may be awarded prior to the reception of other permit information if adequate structural and site plan information has been provided. 
B.  The Building Official shall not issue a permit where: 
1.  The proposed work, as set forth in the application, or the proposed use of the building or structure when completed, does not comply with the provisions of the Town Land Use and Development Code. 
2.  The following subdivision improvements, in the subdivision where the proposed building or structure is located, as required in Section 4.14.240(G), have not been installed or have not been approved by the Town Engineer: 
a.  Survey monuments. 
b.  Wastewater lines and laterals to each lot. 
c.  Water mains and laterals to each lot. 
d.  Fire hydrants. 
e.  Storm drainage structures. 
f.  Grading, base construction and paving of streets and alleys. 
g.  Soil stabilizing structures. 
h.  Utilities, including telephone, cable television, electrical service, and gas lines, or as required by the applicable subdivision improvements agreement or development permit. 
3.  The proposed site is located in a development requiring a development permit pursuant to Chapter 4.06 and said development permit has not been issued. 
4.  The proposed site is located, all or in part, within any area determined by the Building Official to necessitate special building requirements as a result of potential avalanche, earth movement, floods, surface water, or other potentially hazardous conditions, or is located within an area of special flood hazard as designated pursuant to Chapter 4.16, and any special permits required by said chapter have not been obtained by the applicant. All special building requirements included in any special permit shall be incorporated into the permit issued to the applicant under this Title. 
5.  In the opinion of the Building Official, the results of the tests referred to in Section 13.13.040(B)(2) are not satisfactory. 
(Code 1972, § 13.13.030; Ord. No. 37-2005, § 13(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.14.040. - Application, contents. 
    An application for a permit issued under this Title shall: 
A.  Be made on the form prescribed by the Building Official. 
B.  Be signed by the applicant. 
C.  Be accompanied by the fee prescribed for the work to be undertaken. 
D.  State the intended use of the building or structure. 
E.  Include copies in duplicate for single-family structure and in triplicate for multi-family or commercial structure of a plot plan, architectural, structural, foundation plans, drawings drawn to architectural or engineer scale and specifications of the work to be carried out as required by Section 106 of the International Building Code, 2015 Edition, and the International Residential Code, 2015 Edition. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 106 of the International Building Code, 2015 Edition, and International Residential Code, 2015 Edition, the plot plan shall show and include: 
1.  Property lines; 
2.  Outline of proposed and existing building with setbacks from property lines indicated on all sides; 
3.  All easements, utility, water and wastewater lines; 
4.  Driveway and driveway intersection with public roads, including grades, width, and necessary culverts and ditches; 
5.  Parking places dimensioned and numbered, with snow removal area(s) indicated; 
6.  Proposed method of drainage of water away from foundation and into drainage way; 
7.  Proposed revegetation or landscape plan with erosion and sediment control; 
8.  Location of live streams, ponds or lades, all other dry washes; and 
9.  Contain any other information required by this Title, any applicable code adopted by reference under this Title, or the Building Official. 
(Code 1972, § 13.13.040; Ord. No. 37-2005, § 13(part), 2005; Ord. No. 2-2009, § 19, 2009; Ord. No. 23-2013, § 19, 2013; Ord. No. 10-2017, §§ 42, 43, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.14.050. - Permits/sign board on site. 
A.  An address sign board, which does not require a sign permit, must be posted at all building sites for construction permitted through the Building Official. The sign board shall provide a place to mount the permit card where it can be seen during various inspections. The Building Official may promulgate recommended dimensions for said board as a guideline only. 
B.  The sign board must be legible and visible from the road that serves the driveway or access and must provide a weatherproof cover for the building permit card. The sign board must contain the following information: 
1.  Building permit number; 
2.  Owner's name; 
3.  Property address; 
4.  Lot, block and filing numbers; and 
5.  Contractor's name. 
C.  The person to whom the permit is issued shall, during construction, post in a conspicuous place on the property in respect of which the permit was issued a copy of the building permit or a poster or placard approved by the Building Official in lieu thereof. 
D.  The person to whom the building permit is issued shall, during construction, keep a copy of the approved drawings and specifications referred to in Section 13.14.040(E) on the property in respect of which the permit was issued. 
(Code 1972, § 13.13.050; Ord. No. 37-2005, § 13(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, §§ 42, 44, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.14.060. - Permits, general conditions. 
    Every permit is issued upon the condition that: 
A.  Construction is to be started within six months from the date of the issuance of that permit; 
B.  Construction is not to be discontinued or suspended for a period of more than one year; 
C.  If construction has been discontinued or suspended for a period of over one year, one-half of the building fee may be paid to reinstate the permit if work is to continue and be finished. 
D.  The exterior of any building shall be finished in durable, weather-resistant materials prior to the employment of the particular use for which the building is intended. 
(Code 1972, § 13.13.060; Ord. No. 23-2013, § 19, 2013; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.14.070. - Permit fees, general. 
A.  The estimated value of the work shall be reviewed by the Building Official and shall be based on the declared cost of materials and labor for each permit for each building or structure. The Building Official shall account for all fees paid under this Title for any building, mobile home placement, manufactured home placement, or factory-built unit placement. All fees collected shall be deposited in the Town's general fund, unless otherwise specified herein. 
B.  If the Building Official discovers any person undertaking work in violation of this Title, he shall notify the violator to cease such act or acts, and such violator shall pay for such applicable permit(s) twice the amount of the fee otherwise levied. 
(Code 1972, § 13.13.070; Ord. No. 37-2005, § 13(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.14.080. - Building permit fees. 
    The Schedule of fees to be charged for the issuance of permits under Title 13 of the Eagle Municipal Code shall be established by resolution of the Board of Trustees. 
(Ord. No. 01-2017, § 12, 1-10-2017; Ord. No. 10-2017, §§ 42, 45, 5-9-2017) 
CHAPTER 13.15. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Section 13.15.010. - Permit requirements guideline. 
Specific Projects No Permit 
Required Permit(s) Required Review Required Site Plan Required New Structures, Factory-Built Structures, and Manufactured Housing on Private Land Building of new residential structures such as dwellings, sheds over 120 square feet, garages, additions, patio enclosures, and carports 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 10, 11 BD, PD, EG X Building of new nonresidential commercial structure 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 10, 11 BD, EH, PD, EG X Moving of existing structure to new location 1, 6 BD, PD, EG X Moving of manufactured housing into a mobile home park 1, 3, 8 BD, PD X Moving and setting of factory-built structure on building site 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 BD, PD, EG X Changing the use of a structure (ex., changing a single-family residence into a restaurant or shop, to convert a garage into an apartment, or to convert attic space into usable living space) 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 9, 10, 12 BD, PD, EG X Grading With No Other Construction All grading 5 EG X Non-structural sidewalks/slabs X Sidewalks and driveways more than 30 inches above grade, over any basement or story below, or which are part of an accessible route within property lines 1, 5 BD, PD X All non-structural landscaping X Site work, landscaping, or excavation of fill creating a permanent change in property elevation more than 6 inches 1, 5 BD, PD X Retaining walls which are over 4 feet tall in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall 1 BD, EG X Condemned Buildings Demolition of whole or part of building, factory-built structures, or 
manufactured housing 1 BD, PD Additions, Alterations to Exterior Construction and On-Site Accessory Construction One story detached buildings used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses, and similar uses, provided the projected roof area exceeds 120 square feet, larger than 8 feet by 10 feet, and/or the height of said building exceeds 10 feet at peak of roof 1 BD, PD X Any work which involves the installation, removal, or cutting of any 
structural beams, joist replacement, or bearing support 1 BD, PD Additions and major alterations involving bedroom, bathroom, kitchen, living room, or other accessory rooms 1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 10 BD, PD X Additions and major alterations involving an attached or detached garage or shop 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 BD, PD X Decks and patios not over 20 square feet and/or 30 inches above grade with no permanent construction above the floor line X Decks, entry porches, patios, etc., over 20 square feet and/or 30 inches above grade 1, 3 BD, PD X Fences over 6 feet in height on side or back yard or over 3 feet in the front yard 1 BD, PD, EG X Fences used for agricultural purposes only or those fences under 6 feet in height on side and back yard X Replacement of existing fencing, same height, material, and location in the back or side yards X Fences under 3 feet in front yard with approved materials (picket, wrought iron, etc.) X Installation of handicap accessible ramp 1 BD, PD X Erection of exterior signs (except as exempt in zoning resolutions, i.e., garage sale signs, temporary advertising, etc.) 7 BD, PD, EG Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural purposes, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet and/or said structure is not over 10 feet in height X Swings and other playground equipment accessory to detached one- and two-family dwellings X Prefabricated swimming pools less than 24 inches water depth with a surface area of less than 250 square feet and are installed above ground X Fixed or retractable awnings supported by an exterior wall that do not project over property lines, do not project more than 54 inches from the exterior wall, not more than 40 square feet in projected area, and/or do not require additional support X Exterior Repair and Replacement and/or Addition Replacement of roof when done with new material or replacement of 25% or more of the roof sheathing 1 BD Repair or replacement of exterior siding 1 BD Replacement, addition, or repair of existing windows and frames when modification is made to the opening 1 BD Replacement, addition, or repair of exterior doors and fire-rated interior doors when modification is made to the opening 1 BD, PD Installation of storm windows and doors, glazing, and glass replacement X Repair or replacement of gutters and downspouts X New aluminum, steel, or vinyl on soffits, fascia boards, rake boards, and overhangs with no change to existing openings X Interior Repair and Replacement and/or Addition Foundation repair when value of job exceeds $3,000.00 and/or must be engineered 1 BD, EG Ordinary repairs to residential buildings and structures up to 4 units X Tuck pointing, plaster patching, exterior and interior painting, floor sanding and refinishing, tiling, carpeting, replacement of flooring with like materials, wall paper, cabinet installation, counter tops, and similar finish work-interior or exterior X Wall paneling applied directly to wall surfaces X Acoustical ceiling tile applied directly to ceiling surfaces X Installation of battery-operated smoke detectors X Installation of hard-wired smoke detectors 9 BD Installation of fire sprinklers or alarm system 10 BD Replacement of any minor electrical, mechanical, or plumbing part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe X The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste, or vent pipe; provided, however, that if any concealed tap, drain pipe, water, soil, waste, or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made X The clearing of stoppages of the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves, or fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes, or fixtures X Portable heating appliance, ventilation equipment, or cooling unit X Emergency repairs: Where equipment replacements and repairs must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted 
within the next working business day to the Building Official. (This table is a permit requirement guideline only, and does not take precedence over the International Codes, as adopted by the Town.)  
Key: Routing Abbreviations: 1 - Building BD - Building Department 2 - Plumbing EH - Environmental health 3 - Electrical PD - Planning Department 4 - Mechanical EG - Engineering 5 - Grading 6 - Individual wastewater disposal 7 - Sign 8 - Manufactured housing hookup 9 - Fire alarm system 10 - Fire sprinkler system 11 - Right-of-way construction permit 12 - Special use permit  
(Code 1972, § 13.14.010; Ord. No. 37-2005, § 14(part), 2005; Ord. No. 2-2009, § 23, 2009; Ord. No. 23-2013, § 25, 2013; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.15.020. - Carbon monoxide detectors. 
    All dwelling units as defined in the International Building Code and the International Residential Code that are hereafter built, remodeled, added onto or that have unfinished areas finished, shall have carbon monoxide detectors installed in them under the following conditions: A carbon monoxide detector shall be installed centrally located outside each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms; a carbon monoxide detector shall be installed on each level of a multi-level dwelling unit; a carbon monoxide detector shall be installed in any bedroom located over a garage. National Fire Protection Association NFPA 520 Standard for installation of carbon monoxide (CO) warning equipment in dwelling units shall be used as a guide for installing carbon monoxide detectors. 
(Code 1972, § 13.14.020; Ord. No. 2-2009, § 24, 2009; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
CHAPTER 13.16. - APPEALS 

Section 13.16.010. - Application for appeal. 
    Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Building Official denying, issuing, or revoking a permit or in applying the provisions of this Title or any code adopted by reference thereunder to the construction, alteration, or repair of a structure, as herein defined, may appeal such decision to the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(Code 1972, § 13.15.010; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.16.020. - Time for appeal. 
    An appeal shall be commenced within 15 days from the date of the decision appealed from by filing a written notice of appeal with the Town Manager setting forth the decision appealed from and the grounds for said appeal. 
(Code 1972, § 13.15.020; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.16.030. - Commission action on appeal. 
    Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the Town Manager shall schedule said appeal for hearing within 30 days. The Town Manager shall thereupon mail written notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing to the Building Official and to the appellant. 
(Code 1972, § 13.15.030; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.16.040. - Hearings. 
    Hearings shall be public and shall be conducted as nearly as possible in conformity with Chapter 2.20. The Planning and Zoning Commission may adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the conduct of hearings and thereafter such rules and regulations shall govern the conduct of such hearings. 
(Code 1972, § 13.15.040; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.16.050. - Decision. 
    The Commission shall issue its findings and decision thereon in writing no later than 30 days after the conclusion of the hearing. The Town Manager shall mail copies of the findings and decision to the Building Official and the appellant. 
(Code 1972, § 13.15.050; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.16.060. - Appeals from the Commission. 
    Any decision issued by the Planning and Zoning Commission on an appeal filed under this chapter shall be final. Any further appeal from the decision of the Commission shall be made to the district court, as provided by law. 
(Code 1972, § 13.15.060; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
CHAPTER 13.17. - SOLID FUEL BURNING DEVICES 

Section 13.17.010. - Purpose and applicability. 
A.  These regulations are enacted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the residents and visitors in the Town. These regulations are intended to achieve the following more specific purposes: 
1.  To protect and improve the air quality in the Town; 
2.  To provide heat sources that are efficient and have a reduced polluting effect; and 
3.  To generally protect the air for the purpose of the public's overall health, safety and welfare. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all areas within the Town. 
(Code 1972, § 13.16.010; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.17.020. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Gas appliance means a fully self-contained, Underwriter's Laboratories (U.L.) listed and American Gas Association (A.G.A.) listed fireplace unit which does not require venting through a chimney and which does not permit the use of solid fuel. 
    Gas log fireplace means a gas appliance as previously defined equipped with an A.G.A. listed and U.L. listed artificial log unit, which is approved for the burning of natural gas. 
    Pellet boiler system means a closed heating appliance that burns compressed wood or biomass pellets intended to supply hot water or steam for space heating. 
    Pellet stove device means an appliance that burns compressed wood or biomass pellets to create a source of radiant heat and includes an automated fuel feeding system. The only approved pellet stove devices allowed in the Town must be included on the State Department of Public Health and Environment's list of certified residential burning devices. 
    Solid fuel burning device means any fireplace, stove, firebox or device intended and/or used for the purpose of burning wood, pulp, paper, coal or other non-gaseous fuel. This definition does not include barbeque devices. 
    Wood burning fireplace means any solid fuel burning device which has an open hearth or fire chamber or similar prepared place in which a fire may be made and which is built in conjunction with a chimney. 
(Code 1972, § 13.16.020; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 29-2007, § 1, 2007; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.17.030. - Wood burning fireplaces/solid fuel burning devices prohibited. 
    No wood burning fireplace shall be constructed or installed in any building or structure within the Town limits for any use in any zone district. 
(Code 1972, § 13.16.030; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Amended Ord. No. 29-2007, § 2, 2007; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.17.040. - Permitted devices. 
    Only gas appliances, gas log fireplaces, pellet stoves and pellet boiler systems shall be permitted to be installed or constructed within the Town limits for any use in any zone district. 
(Code 1972, § 13.16.040; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Amended Ord. No. 29-2007, § 3, 2007; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.17.050. - Nonconforming devices, fireplaces and appliances. 
A.  Nonconforming solid fuel burning devices, certified solid fuel burning devices, wood burning fireplaces, gas appliances and gas log fireplaces, lawfully constructed or installed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, may continue to be used, subject to any limitations or restrictions contained in this section. 
B.  No existing solid fuel burning devices shall be structurally altered, unless it is modified in such a manner that it complies with all the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Whenever any structure is substantially demolished or destroyed, whether by the intent of its owner or lessee, or by natural disaster, any restoration or reconstruction shall meet all the provisions of this Title. 
(Code 1972, § 13.16.050; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.17.060. - Refuse burning prohibited. 
    The burning of refuse in any solid fuel device is prohibited within the Town. 
(Code 1972, § 13.16.060; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.17.070. - Building permits. 
    A building permit shall be required for the installation of any gas appliance, gas log fireplace, pellet stove, or pellet boiler system. However, to encourage the conversion of solid fuel burning fireplaces and devices to gas log fireplaces and gas appliances, pellet stoves, and pellet boiler systems, all applicable building permit fees for such conversions shall be waived by the Town. 
(Code 1972, § 13.16.070; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Amended Ord. No. 29-2007, § 4, 2007; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.17.080. - Penalties. 
    It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this chapter or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person performing any act prohibited or declared to be unlawful by this chapter or failing to perform an act required by or otherwise made mandatory by this chapter commits a Class A municipal offense. Any such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which a violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by such person and shall be punished accordingly. In addition to penalties provided in this section, any conditions caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance, and may be abated by the Town as such, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Code 1972, § 13.16.080; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 155, 2001; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
CHAPTER 13.18. - CONSTRUCTION WITHIN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY 

Section 13.18.010. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard life, limb, property and the public welfare by regulating the opening, excavating and restoration of the public right-of-way or of public places and the property thereto and providing for the use and maintenance of the same. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.010; Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.020. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Construction Within the Public Right-of-Way Ordinance of the Town of Eagle." 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.020; Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.030. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adjacent property means the property abutting the public right-of-way or public place. 
    Applicant means any person who makes application for a permit. 
    Emergency means any unforeseen circumstances or occurrence which constitutes a clear and immediate danger to persons or property. 
    Excavation means any opening in the surface of the public right-of-way or a public place. 
    Permit means permit for the use of or construction within the public right-of-way required by this chapter. 
    Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, company, organization, public or private utility, governmental body or quasi-governmental body, including improvement, water or sanitation districts, and shall include its agents, employees, and contractors. Unless the context otherwise requires, "person" does not include the Town, its agents or employees. 
    Private utility or public utility means any person subject to the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission, or any person providing gas, electricity, water, telephone, cable television, or other utility product or services. 
    Public street means the entire space between the right-of-way boundary lines. 
    Public Works Director means the Public Works Director of Eagle, his designated representative, or any duly authorized agent or representative acting on his behalf. 
    Town Manager means the Town Manager of the Town of Eagle, his designated representative, or any duly authorized agent or representative acting on his behalf. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.030; Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.040. - Permit required. 
A.  No person shall use any right-of-way or public land for private purpose, or to perform any excavation, perform any construction, or fill any excavation in any public street, right-of-way or other public place in the Town without first obtaining a permit to do so from the Town. 
B.  No person shall construct or install any street, street improvements, curb, gutter, or sidewalk in or upon any public street, right-of-way or other public place in the Town except as provided by ordinance and in compliance with the standards and specifications. 
C.  A separate permit shall be required for each location at which work is performed, including work performed by persons that have been issued annual permits. 
D.  The permit shall be kept on the site of the work being performed and shall be presented upon request to any authorized representative of the Town. 
E.  Any person using or excavating in a public right-of-way or place without having first obtained a permit shall have all operations suspended and shall obtain a permit applicable to that use or excavation and shall pay twice the usual fee. 
F.  Any person who performs excavation in the public right-of-way or in a public place relating to an emergency without first obtaining a permit must notify the Public Works Director and obtain a permit on the first working day thereafter. Should such person fail to make this notification and obtain the required permit, the matter shall be dealt with as provided in Subsection (E) of this section. 
G.  Any person using an annual permit as described in Section 13.18.090 shall make application for all work performed as required in Section 13.18.060. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.040; Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.050. - Qualifications of applicant. 
A.  Applicants must furnish proof, to the satisfaction of the Town, evidencing qualifications and experience necessary to accomplish the work for which the permit is sought. The Town for good and sufficient reason may refuse to allow the applicant a construction within the public right-of-way permit for part or parts of the work for which the permit is sought. 
B.  This requirement does not apply to public utilities, private utilities, or the Town. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.050; Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.060. - Application for permit. 
A.  Application for a permit shall be made to the Town on forms provided by the Town. The application shall state the name and address of the principal place of business of the applicant and such further information as may be required for the administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
1.  The location, description and dimensions of the excavation work to be performed; 
2.  The approximate time which will be required to complete all work, including backfilling of any excavation and removal of all materials, equipment and debris from the site, removal of all obstructions, and restoration of the surface as required by this chapter; 
3.  The approximate size of any excavation to be made and the purpose of such excavation. 
B.  The Town may require that the application be accompanied by such plans as deemed necessary to permit the Public Works Director to determine the relationship of the job to existing or proposed facilities within the public right-of-way. 
C.  The Town may require that the permittee comply with such special conditions regulating the performance of the work as may be deemed necessary to protect public health and safety or to assure compliance with the regulations and ordinances of the Town. 
D.  The Town shall approve or disapprove an application within a reasonable time. Plans should be submitted to the Town at least ten days prior to the need for a permit. 
E.  The Town may refuse to grant a permit if: 
1.  The application is incomplete and the deficiencies therein have not been remedied after reasonable notice to the applicant; 
2.  The work for which the application for the permit is made is unnecessary, improper or in violation of the applicable ordinances, rules, or regulations; 
3.  The applicant is in default of the provisions or conditions of any other outstanding permit without good cause; 
4.  Permit fees pursuant to Section 13.17.070 have not been paid; or 
5.  The requirements for deposit or security bond pursuant to Section 13.18.080 have not been satisfied. 
G.  At the discretion of the Public Works Director, a permit may be issued for more than one excavation or category of work, provided that: 
1.  All of the work will be performed by one person; 
2.  All of the work will be performed at one location or near vicinity; 
3.  All of the work will be performed in one continuous operation without interruption or delay; 
4.  All work is similar to each location or all categories of work are integral to the final product. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.060; Amended Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.070. - Permit fees. 
A.  Applicants shall pay the required fee to the Town before the issuance of any permit under the provisions of this chapter for administrative, inspection and replacement costs incurred by the Town for excavation or other work. 
B.  The fee for each permit issued shall be $50.00. 
C.  The fee for each annual permit issued shall be $150.00 per year. 
D.  Whenever any person or company anticipates more than five street openings or excavations per year, that person or company may pay a single fee of $150.00. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.070; Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.080. - Deposit or security bond required. 
A.  Every applicant, before being issued a permit under this chapter, shall furnish the Town a cash deposit or other form of cash security in an amount which shall be determined by the Public Works Director, but shall not exceed $500.00, conditioned upon the permittee's faithful performance of all the rules, regulations, conditions and requirements of this chapter and any additional requirements of the Public Works Director, unless the applicant has in effect the security bond provided in Subsection (B) of this section, or is otherwise exempt. 
B.  In lieu of the cash deposit required by Subsection (A) of this section, the applicant may furnish the Town with a security bond in a form acceptable to the Town Manager in an amount to be determined by the Public Works Director, but not less than $1,000.00, issued by a surety company licensed to do business in the State for a period of one year. Said surety bond may be maintained with the Town on a continuing basis, if it is renewed annually, and a separate deposit for each permit shall not be required. 
C.  The holder of an annual permit shall be exempt from the requirements of Subsection (A) or (B) of this section unless default has occurred in performance of the indemnification agreement required by Section 13.17.090(A) for issuance of the annual permit. 
D.  Upon notice to the applicant, for reasonable cause, the Town may at any time increase or reduce the amount of the required security or waive the same as conditions warrant. 
E.  The Town shall refund the cash deposit or release the security bond one year after the work, as described in the permit, has been completed. The amount of refund shall be the full amount of the original deposit except that the deposit shall be reduced by costs of restoration or corrective measures performed by the Town or those hired by the Town, pursuant to Sections 13.18.350 and 13.18.370. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.080; Amended Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.090. - Annual permit. 
    An annual permit may be issued by the Town to: 
A.  Any utility company providing electric, telephone, natural gas, water, sewer or cable television service on a regular basis to the residents of the Town. Annual permittees are exempted from posting a deposit or surety bond for street construction work, provided the utility company files a letter with the Public Works Director, signed by the appropriate officers of the company, agreeing to reimburse the Town for all costs incurred in repairing street openings made by the utilities, agreeing to indemnify the Town pursuant to Section 13.18.130, and agreeing to abide by all the terms of this chapter. Each utility company shall submit a list of persons authorized to sign permit applications and keep that list current. 
B.  Except as specifically provided in this chapter, the annual permit provided for in this chapter shall not exempt or relieve the permittee, or the agents or employees of the permittee, from any of the requirements or provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.090; Amended Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.100. - Certificate of insurance. 
A.  Every applicant, before being granted a permit under the provisions of this chapter, shall furnish the Town with proof of insurance to cover liability for injuries, death or property damage occurring as a result of the work at the site for which the permit is issued. 
B.  The proof of insurance that the applicant furnishes must be in such form as is approved by the Town with an insurance company licensed to do business in the State. 
C.  Such proof of insurance shall be specified for all operations of the permittee and for all his vehicles to be used in the course of his operations in the Town. 
D.  The limits of insurance coverage shall be $400,000.00 per single occurrence and $150,000.00 per person, per single occurrence. 
E.  Annual permittees are exempted from the requirements of this section. 
F.  Subcontractors performing work for permittees or annual permittees shall be required to furnish proof of insurance pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.100; Amended Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.110. - Permit issuance. 
    The application, together with such other papers or plans as may be attached thereto, together with any additional regulations as stipulated by the Public Works Director, pursuant to Section 13.18.160, when approved and signed by the Public Works Director, shall constitute the permit. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.110; Amended Ord. No. 2-1987 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.120. - Permit-Nontransferable. 
A.  Permits under this chapter are not transferable, and the work shall not be made in any place other than the location specifically designated in the permit, or by any person, agent or independent contractor other than the permittee, unless specifically provided in the permit. 
B.  Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent a permittee or annual permittee from subcontracting the work to be performed under a permit; provided, however, that the holder of the permit shall be and remain responsible for the performance of the work under the permit, and for all bonding, insurance and other requirements of this chapter. All subcontractors shall conform to the insurance requirements of Section 13.18.100. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.120; Amended Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.130. - Same-Town non-liability. 
    Prior to the issuance of any permit under this chapter, every applicant shall agree to hold the Town, its officers, employees and agents harmless from any and all costs, damages and liabilities which may accrue or be claimed to have accrued by reason of any work performed under a permit issued under this chapter and in addition shall agree to indemnify the Town therefor. The acceptance of a permit shall constitute such an agreement by the applicant. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.130; Amended Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.140. - Permit expiration, extension. 
    Every permit shall expire at the end of the period of time set out in the permit. If the permittee is unable to commence or to complete the work within the specified time, he shall, prior to the expiration date, present in writing to the Public Works Director a request for an extension of time, setting forth the reasons for the requested extension. If, in the opinion of the Public Works Director, such an extension is necessary and not contrary to the public interest, the permittee may be granted additional time for the completion of the work being done. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.140; Amended Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.150. - Permit revocation, suspension. 
    Any permit may be revoked by the Public Works Director, after notice to the permittee, on the following grounds: 
A.  Violation of any condition of the permit or of any provision of this chapter; 
B.  Violation of any provision of any other applicable ordinance or law relating to the work; 
C.  Existence of any condition or the performance of any act constituting a nuisance or endangering lives or properties of others. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.150; Amended Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.160. - Additional regulations, Public Works Director. 
    In granting any permit, the Public Works Director may attach such other conditions as may be reasonably necessary to prevent damage to public or private property or to prevent the operation from being conducted in a manner hazardous to life or property or in a manner likely to create a nuisance. Such conditions may include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
A.  Restrictions as to the size and type of equipment. 
B.  Designation of routes upon which equipment and materials may travel or be transported. 
C.  The place and manner of disposal of excavated materials. 
D.  Requirements as to the cleaning of streets, the prevention or reduction of noise, and other results offensive or injurious to the neighborhood, the general public, or any portion thereof. 
E.  Regulations as to the use of streets in the course of the work. 
F.  Minimum depth of any utility or service line shall be 18 inches below finish grade or when under asphalt 24 inches below finish grade. 
G.  Temporary patches or other measures that may be necessary to protect the public and the public way. 
H.  Additional deposits or securities above the requirements of Section 13.18.080 that may be necessary to ensure that the cost of repair or maintenance is paid by the permittee. 
I.  The notification of some or all residents near the site of the work and/or public or private utilities regarding the specific work to be performed. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.160; Amended Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.170. - Limitations on cutting asphalt. 
A.  Permits to construct within the public right-of-way which would involve excavation within any paved street shall be issued with the provision that said excavation shall only be authorized when the following conditions have been met: 
1.  Alternate routes for the utility or proposed installation which would minimize or negate the necessity to excavate within the affected paved street are not feasible. Said alternate routes may include, but not be limited to, a shift in horizontal alignment of the proposed installation, double frontage of the utility main in the case of service connections, making use of nearby easements which would allow an alternate route, or any other method approved by the Public Works Director. 
2.  There are no useable conduits in place crossing under the affected paved streets in an accessible location to the proposed work site. 
3.  In the case of transverse installations, under the full street width jacking and/or boring are not feasible. Jacking and/or boring shall generally be considered feasible except as herein provided, unless and until it has been demonstrated by the applicant that subsurface conditions prevent the possibility of jacking and/or boring. This demonstration shall include, but not be limited to, no fewer than three attempts at jacking and/or boring, at least one of which has been witnessed by the Public Works Director, that result in failure in each instance. Instances in which jacking and/or boring shall be considered infeasible at the time of application shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  Repair of a utility main which lies directly under the pavement; 
b.  Service connections to the utility main which lies directly under the pavement that cannot make use of an access hole and jacking and/or boring; 
c.  Installations where line and grade is absolutely essential to the function of the proposed facility; 
d.  Or installations in areas of known geologic difficulty, i.e., rocks and boulders; 
e.  Where jacking and/or boring might damage existing utilities. 
B.  Situations not mentioned above shall be considered on a case by case basis, and decided by the Public Works Director. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.170; Amended Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.180. - Jacking and/or boring. 
    Jacking and/or boring shall be performed subject to the following conditions: 
A.  Transverse installations within the right-of-way shall be jacked and/or bored without disturbing the surface or any structure above. 
B  Vertical excavations for the purpose of jacking and/or boring shall not be closer horizontally than the depth of the excavation to the paved surface, or outside the road prism, whichever is a greater distance from the paved surface. 
C.  Transverse installations by jacking and/or boring shall be for the purpose of installing a permanent casing pipe, through which utilities shall be installed, unless the carrier pipe itself is jacked and/or bored, or the jacked pipe is used to retrieve a carrier pipe of the same size. 
D.  Bores shall not be larger than lines or encasements. 
E.  Water assisted boring will be permitted, as determined by the Public Works Director. Water jetting will not be permitted. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.180; Amended Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.190. - Size restriction. 
    The opening which may be made in the street at any one time shall be no greater than will permit the reasonable use of the street by the public and will not cause substantial hazards in the use of the street by the public. Reasonable and adequate provisions shall be made for use of the street by the public, and the use of the street by the public may not be blocked entirely unless prior approval has been granted by the Public Works Director, the Police Department and the Fire Department. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.190; Amended Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.200. - Location of utilities. 
    The location of all utility facilities shall be located and clearly marked sufficiently ahead of trench excavation work to avoid damage to those facilities and to permit their relocation, if necessary. The permittee shall be solely responsible for obtaining and maintaining the utility marking throughout construction. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.200; Amended Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.210. - Pipe drain and culvert protection. 
    Pipe drains, pipe culverts, or other facilities encountered shall be protected from damage by the permittee and kept clean from construction debris. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.210; Amended Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.220. - Street drainage. 
    When work performed by the permittee interferes with the established drainage system of any street, provision shall be made by the permittee to provide proper alternate drainage to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.220; Amended Ord. No. 2-1987, § 22, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.230. - Protective measures and routing of traffic. 
A.  It shall be the duty of every person excavating or engaging in any other construction on any right-of-way to place and maintain barricades and warning devices to warn the general public of such construction or excavation. 
B.  Such barriers, warning signs, and lights shall conform to the Town specifications. Warning lights shall be electrical markers or flashers. The Public Works Director, upon discovery of any default on the permittee's part to maintain warning lights and barricades at the scene of the work, shall have the authority to suspend the work until the deficiencies are remedied, obtain the necessary lights and barricades and charge the permittee as provided in Section 13.18.370(B). 
C.  The permittee shall take appropriate measures to ensure that, during the performance of the construction work, normal traffic conditions shall be maintained at all times as nearly as possible. If the work to be performed will disrupt the normal flow of traffic, the Public Works Director may require barricades, detours and traffic control plans from the permittee prior to the performances of the work. Crossings at intersections shall be kept open to traffic unless prior written approval is given. 
D.  When traffic conditions permit, the Town Manager may, in writing, permit the closing of streets and alleys to all traffic for a period of time to be prescribed by said Public Works Director. The Public Works Director may require that the permittee give notification to various public agencies and to the general public. In such cases, such written approval shall not be valid until such notice is given. 
E.  Warning signs shall be placed far enough in advance of a construction operation to alert traffic of such construction in a timely manner, and cones or other approved devices shall be placed to channel traffic, in accordance with the instruction of the Public Works Director and Police Chief. 
F.  Upon request by individual property owners for the use of Town owned barricades and protective measures, the Public Works Director may authorize the use of such Town owned equipment subject to availability. The Public Works Director may require an additional cash deposit or security for the use of the Town owned property. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.230; Amended Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.240. - Protection of adjacent property. 
A.  The permittee shall at all times at his own expense preserve and protect from injury any adjacent property or structure by providing proper foundations and by taking other measures suitable for the purpose of preventing damage to any adjacent property. 
B.  When for the protection of property it is necessary to enter upon such property for the purpose of taking appropriate protective measures, the permittee shall obtain written permission from the owner of such property to enter thereupon, and the Town Manager shall take whatever action he deems necessary. 
C.  The permittee shall, at his own expense, shore up and protect all buildings, walls, fences, or other property likely to be damaged during the progress of his excavation work and the permittee shall be responsible for all damage to public or private property or highways resulting from his failure to properly protect or carry out said work. 
D.  Whenever it may be necessary for the permittee to trench through any lawn area, such area shall be restored to a condition equal to or better than existed prior to construction. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.240; Amended Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.250. - Access to fire hydrants and driveways. 
    Access to private driveways shall be provided, except during working hours when construction operations prohibit provision of such access; provided, however, that access to private driveways shall be restored promptly, and the blocking of private driveways shall be only for such a period of time as is necessary to complete the work immediately in front of the private driveway. Free access must be provided at all times to fire hydrants. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.250; Amended Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.260. - Care of excavated materials. 
A.  All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench or in any street shall be piled and maintained in such a manner so as not to endanger those working in the trench, so as not to endanger pedestrians or other traffic and so as to ensure that minimal inconvenience is created to those using streets and adjoining property. 
B.  Where the confines of the area being excavated are too narrow to permit the piling of excavated material beside the excavation, the permittee may be required to haul the excavated material away from the site. 
C.  It shall be the permittee's responsibility to secure the necessary permission and make all necessary arrangements for disposing of all excavated materials. 
D.  All trench and tunnel excavations and construction shall conform to the safety requirements for placing of shoring, bracing, and ladders in excavations in effect at the time of the work being performed. 
E.  Whenever necessary, tow boards or bins may be required to prevent the spreading of dirt and other excavated materials into traffic lanes. 
F.  Excavated materials shall not be used as a barricade. 
G.  Materials being used in the work or equipment being used for the work shall not be used as barricades, unless suitably marked. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.260; Amended Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.270. - Time of day work may be performed. 
    Work authorized by a permit shall be performed between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, unless the permittee obtains written consent from the Public Works Director to do the work earlier or later than the stated hours or on a weekend. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.270; Amended Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.280. - Seasonal restrictions on work. 
    No street-cut permit authorized under this chapter shall be issued so as to allow a street opening or pavement cut between November 15 and April 15, except in accordance with the following: 
A.  Public works may issue a permit for a street opening or pavement cut between November 15 and December 1 if it is determined that special or unforeseen circumstances require the issuance of the permit or if the applicant for the permit is a public utility. If the Public Works Director determines that an extension should be allowed, the applicant may be required to comply with any of the following additional items: 
1.  Post an additional sum to pay the costs of cold-patching the cut, maintenance of the cut, or possible damage to the public way that may occur over the winter; 
2.  To temporarily cold-patch the excavation; or 
3.  To do any other reasonable thing that the Public Works Director determines is necessary to protect the public way until the excavation is permanently closed. In addition, any applicant requesting an extension shall agree to provide a permanent patch or repair for the street cut the following summer when the ground and weather permit the same. 
B.  In no event shall a permit be issued after December 1 except in the case of an emergency or upon specific approval by a resolution of the Town Board. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.280; Amended Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.290. - Emergency work. 
A.  Any person maintaining pipes, lines or facilities in the public way may proceed with work upon existing facilities without a permit when emergency conditions demand the work to be done immediately, provided a permit could not reasonably and practicably have been obtained beforehand. 
B.  Any person commencing emergency work in the public way without a permit shall immediately thereafter apply for a permit or give notice on the first regular business day on which Town offices are open for business after such work is commenced, and a permit may be issued which shall be retroactive to the date when the work has begun, in the discretion of the Public Works Director. 
C.  In the event that emergency work is commenced within any public way of the Town, the Police Department shall be notified within one-half hour from the time work is commenced. The person commencing and conducting such work shall take all necessary safety precautions for the protection of the public and the direction and control of traffic. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.290; Amended Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.300. - Backfilling and restoration, specifications designated. 
    All pavement cuts, openings, and excavations shall be backfilled, surfaced, and restored, as set forth in Sections 13.18.310 through 13.18.360. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.300; Amended Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.310. - Backfilling-Paved streets. 
    Backfilling under paved streets shall be made in accordance with the following specifications: 
A.  Materials. 
1.  Materials shall be granular, consisting essentially of sand, gravel, rock, slag, disintegrated granite, or a combination of such materials. It shall be a well-graded mixture containing sufficient soil mortar, crusher dust or other binding material which, when placed and compacted, will result in a firm, stable foundation. Material composed of uniformly sized particles or which contains pockets of excessively fine or excessively coarse material will not be acceptable. The material shall meet the following gradation: 
Sieve Designation Percent by Weight Passing 21/2-inch 100 2-inch 95-100 No. 4 0-60 No. 200 5-15  
2.  All material passing the No. 40 sieve shall have a liquid limit of not over 35 and a plasticity index of not over six. Test for liquid limit and plasticity index shall be in accordance with A.A.S.H.O. designations T-89 and T-91, respectively. 
B.  Base course. The top six inches under asphalt shall be backfilled with Class 6 three-fourth inch roadbase and compacted in accordance with Subsection (C) of this section. 
C.  Construction methods. The material shall be deposited in layers not to exceed eight inches in thickness prior to compacting, provided the bottom layer shall not exceed 15 inches in thickness. The material shall be compacted using moisture-density control. Compaction shall be obtained by means of suitable mechanical equipment. No puddling or jetting will be allowed. Backfill shall be compacted to not less than 95 percent of the theoretical laboratory density as determined by A.A.S.H.T.O. Method T-99. Field densities shall be determined by approved methods. The amount of water used in compacting the specified backfill shall be that necessary to achieve the required minimum density. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.310; Amended Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.320. - Same-Unpaved streets. 
    Backfilling of unpaved streets shall be made in accordance with the following specifications: 
A.  Materials. The bottom six inches and the top 12 inches of backfill shall be the same type of material specified in Section 13.17.310(A). The excavation material may be used for the remainder of the backfill, provided that no materials greater than six inches in diameter shall be used for backfill. 
B.  Construction methods. The material shall be deposited in layers not to exceed eight inches in thickness prior to compacting, provided the bottom layer shall not exceed 15 inches in thickness. The material shall be compacted using moisture-density control. Compaction shall be obtained by means of suitable mechanical equipment. No puddling or jetting will be allowed. Backfill for the portion of the trench to be completed using materials specified in Section 13.18.310(A) shall be compacted in accordance with the requirements of Section 13.18.310(C). Backfill for the remainder of the trench shall be compacted to not less than 95 percent of the theoretical laboratory density as determined by A.A.S.H.T.O. Method T-99. The amount of water used for compacting the remaining trench soils shall be not less than two percent dry of optimum nor more than optimum moisture. Field densities shall be determined by approved methods. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.320; Amended Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.330. - Same-Unpaved non-vehicular places. 
    Excavations in unpaved places not used as vehicular ways shall be backfilled in accordance with the following specifications: 
A.  Materials. The bottom six inches shall be the same type material specified in Section 13.18.310(A). Suitable excavated material may be used for the remainder of the backfill, provided that no materials greater than six inches in any dimension shall be used for backfill. 
B.  Construction methods. The material shall be deposited in layers not to exceed 12 inches in thickness prior to compacting, provided the bottom layer shall not exceed 15 inches in thickness. The material shall be compacted using moisture-density control. Compaction shall be obtained by means of suitable mechanical equipment. No puddling or jetting will be allowed. Backfill for the portion of the trench to be compacted using materials specified in Section 13.18.310(A) shall be compacted in accordance with the requirements of Section 13.18.310(C). Backfill for the remainder of the trench shall be compacted to not less than 95 percent of the theoretical laboratory density as determined by A.A.S.H.T.O. Method T-99. The amount of water used for compacting the remaining trench soils shall be not less than two percent dry of optimum for more than optimum moisture. Field densities shall be determined by approved methods. All sodded, landscaped or grassed areas shall be restored to the original condition. Before sod replacement is accomplished, the trench shall be crowned sufficiently to allow for natural subsidence. 
C.  Narrow trenches. Where narrow trenches (less than six inches in top width) are excavated to shallow depths (less than 48 inches) by means of conventional ditching machines in areas outside the road prism and/or paved areas for purpose of installing direct burial cables or conduit such as telemetry lines, television cables, telephone lines, electrical lighting circuits, or natural gas lines, backfilling requirements as called for above may be waived in lieu of the following: Narrow trenches shall be uniformly backfilled with suitable excavated material or other approved materials. Specialized compaction requirements will not be applied provided that the width of the trenches does not exceed six inches. The backfilled narrow trenches shall be satisfactorily crowned to allow for natural subsidence. The over-filled trench shall be so completed that surface water runoff is neither interrupted nor ponded and drainage routes remain unaffected. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.330; Amended Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.340. - Same-Quality control. 
    Quality control of backfill compaction may be monitored by the Public Works Director or Town Engineer by utilizing standard compaction testing methods. 
A.  The Public Works Director or Town Engineer shall have the authority to require the permittee to obtain standard compaction tests during the backfilling process. The soils engineer or testing laboratory shall be approved by the Public Works Director or Town Engineer. 
B.  When compaction tests are required by the Public Works Director or Town Engineer, at least one compaction test shall be taken on each compacted level of backfill per 100 feet or in locations designated by the Public Works Director or Town Engineer if the project is of a smaller scope than 100 feet. 
C.  In the event that compaction tests do not meet the backfill standards required by Section 13.18.330, the areas not meeting the minimum density requirements shall be recompacted and retested until density requirements are met. 
D.  If the permittee fails to perform required compaction tests, the Public Works Director or Town Engineer shall have the authority to order the permittee to cease backfill operations until such time as the compaction tests are performed. 
E.  If compaction testing is required, no paving or repaving operations shall occur until the compaction tests have been approved by the Public Works Director or Town Engineer. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.340; Amended Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.350. - Restoration-Asphalt surfaces. 
    The cut and restoration of asphalt surfaces shall be made in the following manner: 
A.  The initial pavement cut shall be made a minimum of one foot wider than the trench on all sides of the trench, a minimum of three feet wide, and the cut in the paving shall be made with a power circular saw or cutter, shall be in straight lines and with a minimum of angles. 
B.  Resurfacing shall be performed by a person or firm experienced in resurfacing work. The Public Works Director or Town Engineer may demand proof of experience and qualifications of the person or firm before allowing permanent restoration. 
C.  Between November 15 and April 15 or when hot bituminous asphalt is not readily available, the permittee shall temporarily cover the top surface of the backfill with a minimum of two inches of cold mix. 
1.  All temporary surfacing material shall conform as closely as possible to the level of the adjoining paved surface and shall be compacted to be a safe surface for pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
2.  The permittee shall maintain the temporary paving in safe condition for pedestrian and vehicular traffic until hot bituminous asphalt is available, at which time the permanent resurfacing shall be completed by the permittee. 
D.  Between April 15 and November 15 permanent resurfacing shall be completed with hot bituminous asphalt of a mix design acceptable to the Public Works Director or Town Engineer. The work shall be performed in a manner that will permanently restore the asphalt surface to the level of the adjoining paved surfaces, with suitable compaction. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.350; Amended Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.360. - Same-Adjacent surfaces, costs. 
    If the Public Works Director finds that paved surfaces adjacent to the construction may have been damaged during the progress of the work, the permittee shall be required to perform or pay the cost of resurfacing. The cost of resurfacing shall be the sole responsibility of the permittee. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.360; Amended Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.370. - Corrective measures. 
A.  For a period of one year following the completion of work, the Public Works Director, upon discovery of any defect in materials or workmanship for which a construction in the public right-of-way permit is issued, shall: 
1.  In the event of any emergency, order Town personnel or a private contractor to do such work as may be necessary to complete such work to acceptable standards, particularly where hazards exist due to the failure of the permittee to restore or maintain the public street, highway, or right-of-way pursuant to the provisions and conditions of his permit; 
2.  In other cases, give notice to the permittee and his sureties in writing of the nature and location of such defects, including notice of a reasonable time, not less than 14 calendar days, within which such defects are to be repaired. 
a.  Such period of time may be extended by the Public Works Director upon application, for reasonable cause shown; 
b.  In the event of failure of the permittee to perform the required repairs within the period provided by such notice, the Town personnel or a private contractor on order of the Town shall make such repairs as may be necessary. 
B.  The Town shall recover any and all costs of work performed by the Town personnel or any private contractor hired by the Town, including the cost of labor, equipment, materials, Attorney's fees, court costs, and administrative costs at the expense of the permittee by applying any deposit, bond or other security in its possession to payment thereof, and shall recover any remaining unpaid balance of such costs from the permittee by legal action or otherwise. 
C.  The Public Works Director, upon discovery of any defect or defects in the work for which a right-of-way use and excavation permit was issued and which is not corrected to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director by the permittee, shall disqualify said permittee from performing either parts of or all work for which the permit was originally issued and may refuse to issue future permits to said permittee for a period of one year. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.370; Amended Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.380. - Notice of improvements. 
    When the Town schedules a major improvement in any public way, the Public Works Director shall notify all affected private and public utilities of the nature, scope and timing of said improvements. When final plans are approved, the Town Clerk shall give notice to all persons owning property abutting the public way about to be improved, and to all private and public utilities owning or operating substructures in said way, and all such persons, public utilities, and private utilities shall, within six months from the giving of such notice, make all connections as well as any repairs thereto which would necessitate excavation of the public ways. The time may be extended if permission is requested in writing and approved by the Public Works Director. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.380; Amended Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.390. - Restrictions upon opening new street surfaces. 
    No permit shall be issued by the Public Works Director which would allow an excavation or opening in a newly paved, or rebuilt street surface less than one year old, unless the applicant can clearly demonstrate that public health, safety, or interest require that the proposed work be permitted, or unless an emergency condition exists. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.390; Amended Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.400. - Map of underground facilities required. 
    Every public utility, private utility or person owning, using, controlling or having an interest in pipes, conduits, ducts or other structures under the surface of any street used for the purpose of supplying or conveying gas, electricity, telephone, cable television, water or sewer to or from the Town, or to or from its inhabitants, or for any other purpose, shall file with the Public Works Director, within 120 days after the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, a map or set of maps, each drawn to a scale of not less than one inch to 400 feet, showing the location, size and description of all such installations. The owner agrees upon reasonable notice from the Town or any permittee to accurately locate his installations upon the ground as shown on the maps. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.400; Amended Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.410. - Map, corrected annually. 
    By March 1 of each year, such person shall file with the Public Works Director a corrected map or set of maps, drawn to the scale designated in Section 13.18.400 showing installations and abandonments during the previous year; provided, however, if no further installations have been made during the previous year, there may be filed with the Public Works Director a written statement to that effect. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.410; Amended Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.420. - Sidewalk construction and repair. 
    Property owners desiring to restore or construct sidewalks in the public right-of-way and adjacent to their property may perform that work subject to the following conditions: 
A.  Said property owner shall be exempt from the provisions of Section 13.18.070, Section 13.18.080, and Section 13.18.100. 
B.  The property owner shall submit plans with the permit application that demonstrates: 
1.  The location, dimensions and elevation of the sidewalk improvements; and 
2.  Plans for providing protective measures to ensure the safety of pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.420; Amended Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 1987; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
Section 13.18.430. - Violations, penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a Class A municipal offense and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day, or portion thereof, during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted. Said offense shall be deemed to be one of strict liability. 
(Code 1972, § 13.17.430; Amended Ord. No. 10-2001, § 156, 2001; Amended Ord. No. 37-2005, § 16(part), 2005; Ord. No. 10-2017, § 42, 5-9-2017) 
CHAPTER 13.24. - CONTRACTORS' LICENSES 

Section 13.24.010. - Registration required, fees. 
A.  It is unlawful for any building, plumbing, electrical or special contractor, as defined in this Code, to engage in any work or in the business, trade or calling of such building, plumbing, electrical or special contractor in the Town, without first securing a registration from the Town and paying the annual registration fee, if applicable. 
B.  The registration fees for building contractors, plumbing contractors, special contractors, and general contractors shall be established from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees. 
C.  No fee shall be charged for registration for electrical contractors, as defined in C.R.S. § 12-23-111(15). 
(Code 1972, § 13.24.010; Ord. No. 4-1976, § 1, 1976; Amended Ord. No. 43, § 1, 2005; Ord. No. 2017-2, § 1, 1-10-2017; Ord. No. 01-2017, § 13, 1-10-2017) 
Section 13.24.020. - Building contractor qualifications. 
    Before a building contractor's registration shall be issued, the applicant for the registration shall pay the registration fee and supply a current and valid proof of commercial general liability insurance to the Town. 
(Code 1972, § 13.24.020; Ord. No. 168, § VIII(part), 1973; Amended Ord. No. 43, § 1, 2005; Ord. No. 2017-2, § 1, 1-10-2017) 
Section 13.24.030. - Electrical contractor qualifications. 
A.  Before an electrical contractor's registration shall be issued, the applicant for the registration shall supply a current and valid proof of commercial general liability insurance to the Town and shall also supply proof that either the owner of the firm, co-partnership, corporation or association, or combination thereof, is the holder of a valid master electrician's license from the State Electrical Board and that the license is in full force and effect. 
B.  All labor performed under the provisions of this Code must be performed either by a properly licensed master electrician or by a duly licensed and qualified journeyman electrician, either or both of whom hold a license to that effect. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit the use of helpers on the job, provided such helpers are in subordinate positions under the supervision of a master electricians or journeyman electrician at all times and never in responsible charge of any job or work. 
C.  Any master or journeyman electrician desiring to work in the Town must be the holder of a master electrician's license or a journeyman electrician's license, issued by the State Electrical Board, and the license shall be kept in full force and effect. The revocation or cancellation of a license by the State Electrical Board shall be a cancellation and a revocation of the privilege to work in the Town as a master or journeyman electrician. 
(Code 1972, § 13.24.030; Ord. No. 4-1976, § 3, 1976; Amended Ord. No. 43, § 1, 2005; Ord. No. 2017-2, § 1, 1-10-2017) 
Section 13.24.040. - Plumbing contractor qualifications. 
A.  Before a plumbing contractor's registration shall be issued, the applicant for the registration shall supply a current and valid proof of commercial general liability insurance to the Town and shall also supply proof that either the owner of the firm, co-partnership, corporation or association, or combination thereof, is the holder of a valid plumbing contractor's license and a master's plumbing license from the State Plumbing Board and that the license is in full force and effect. 
B.  All labor performed under the provisions of this Code must be performed either by a properly licensed master plumber or by a duly licensed and qualified journeyman plumber, either or both of whom hold a license to that effect. The people mentioned shall hold either master plumber's or journeyman plumber's licenses from the State. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit the use of helpers on the job, provided such helpers are in subordinate positions under the supervision of a master or journeyman plumber at all times and never in responsible charge of any job or work. 
C.  Any master or journeyman plumber desiring to work in the Town must first satisfy the Town inspector of his qualifications. A valid, existing license issued by the State to the applicant shall be prima facie evidence of his qualifications. 
(Code 1972, § 13.24.040; Ord. No. 168, § VIII(part), 1973; Amended Ord. No. 43, § 1, 2005; Ord. No. 2017-2, § 1, 1-10-2017) 
Section 13.24.050. - Insurance required. 
    Before a registration is issued, the applicant shall file a liability insurance policy with the Town or, in lieu of the policy, a certificate that such policy issued by some insurance carrier authorized to do business in the State is in full force. The policy shall provide for property damage liability in the sum of $25,000.00 for each accident and bodily injury liability of $100,000.00 for each person, with a total of $300,000.00 for each accident to insure against all accidents, damages and loss which may be sustained by the Town or any person therein by reason of the contractor's carelessness or negligence in connection with such work. 
(Code 1972, § 13.24.050; Ord. No. 4-1976, § 4, 1976; Amended Ord. No. 43, § 1, 2005; Ord. No. 2017-2, § 1, 1-10-2017) 
Section 13.24.060. - Registration, expiration. 
    All registrations issued under this Code shall expire on December 31 of each year. The registrant shall pay in full the annual fee on registrations issued prior to October 1 and one-half of the annual fee on registrations issued after October 1. 
(Code 1972, § 13.24.060; Ord. No. 4-1976, § 5, 1976; Amended Ord. No. 43, § 1, 2005; Ord. No. 2017-2, § 1, 1-10-2017) 
Section 13.24.070. - Revocation of registration. 
    Any registration granted under this Code may be revoked by the Board of Trustees if the registrant violates any ordinance or law relating to building trades and/or the Town building code, or who fails to promptly correct any defect or defects in his work after having been duly notified by the Town inspector, or is guilty of work which is a hazard to life and property; provided, however, no registration shall be revoked without a hearing being granted to the person holding the registration. Such hearing shall be before the Board of Trustees and the registrant given notice thereof and an opportunity to be heard. When a registration is revoked, a new registration shall not be granted again to the same registrant for a period of 30 days, or until the registrant shall have corrected fully the faulty work in accordance with the provisions of this Code and shall have made application and paid the fee for the original registration. 
(Code 1972, § 13.24.070; Ord. No. 168, § XI, 1973; Amended Ord. No. 43, § 1, 2005; Ord. No. 2017-2, § 1, 1-10-2017) 
Section 13.24.080. - Exceptions. 
    This chapter shall not apply to any person constructing his own home without the aid of a contractor provided said person only constructs one residence within any three-year period. Such person shall not be deemed a building contractor for the purposes of this chapter, shall not be required to pay the registration fees set out in Section 13.24.010, and shall not be required to maintain the insurance set forth in Section 13.24.050. 
(Code 1972, § 13.24.080; Ord. No. 43, § 1, 2005; Amended Ord. No. 43, § 1, 2005; Ord. No. 2017-2, § 1, 1-10-2017) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1972 CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1972 Code, as updated through February 28, 2017, which are included herein. Sections of the 1972 Code, as updated, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1972 Code 
Section Section 
this Code 1.01.020 1.01.010 1.01.030 1.01.020 1.01.040 1.01.030 1.01.050 1.01.040 1.01.060 1.01.050 1.01.070 1.01.060 1.01.100 1.01.070 1.04.010 1.04.010 1.04.020 1.04.020 1.04.030 1.04.030 1.04.040 1.04.040 1.08.010 1.08.010 1.12.010 1.12.010 1.12.020 1.12.020 1.16.010 1.16.010 2.02.010 2.02.010 2.02.020 2.02.020 2.02.030 2.02.030 2.02.040 2.02.040 2.02.050 2.02.050 2.02.060 2.02.060 2.02.070 2.02.070 2.04.010 2.04.010 2.04.011 2.04.020 2.04.012 2.04.030 2.04.013 2.04.040 2.04.020 2.04.050 2.04.030 2.04.060 2.04.035 2.04.070 2.04.050 2.04.080 2.04.060 2.04.090 2.04.080 2.04.100 2.04.090 2.04.110 2.04.100 2.04.120 2.04.105 2.04.130 2.04.110 2.04.140 2.06.010 2.06.010 2.06.020 2.06.020 2.06.030 2.06.030 2.06.040 2.06.040 2.06.050 2.06.050 2.08.010 2.08.010 2.08.020 2.08.020 2.08.030 2.08.030 2.08.040 2.08.040 2.08.050 2.08.050 2.08.060 2.08.060 2.08.070 2.08.070 2.08.080 2.08.080 2.08.090 2.08.090 2.08.100 2.08.100 2.08.110 2.08.110 2.08.120 2.08.120 2.08.130 2.08.130 2.08.140 2.08.140 2.08.150 2.08.150 2.08.160 2.08.160 2.08.170 2.08.170 2.08.180 2.08.180 2.08.190 2.08.190 2.08.200 2.08.200 2.08.210 2.08.210 2.11.010 2.11.010 2.11.020 2.11.020 2.11.030 2.11.030 2.16.010 2.16.010 2.16.020 2.16.020 2.16.030 2.16.030 2.16.040 2.16.040 2.16.050 2.16.050 2.16.060 2.16.060 2.16.070 2.16.070 2.20.010 2.20.010 2.20.020 2.20.020 2.20.030 2.20.030 2.20.040 2.20.040 2.20.050 2.20.050 2.20.060 2.20.060 2.20.070 2.20.070 2.20.080 2.20.080 2.24.010 2.24.010 2.24.020 2.24.020 2.24.030 2.24.030 2.24.040 2.24.040 2.24.050 2.24.050 2.24.060 2.24.060 2.24.070 2.24.070 2.24.080 2.24.080 2.26.010 2.26.010 2.26.020 2.26.020 2.32.010 2.32.010 2.32.020 2.32.020 2.32.030 2.32.030 2.32.040 2.32.040 2.32.050 2.32.050 2.32.060 2.32.060 2.32.070 2.32.070 2.32.080 2.32.080 3.04.010 3.04.010 3.04.020 3.04.020 3.04.030 3.04.030 3.04.050 3.04.040 3.04.060 3.04.050 3.04.062 3.04.060 3.04.065 3.04.070 3.04.070 3.04.080 3.04.080 3.04.090 3.04.090 3.04.100 3.05.010 3.05.010 3.05.020 3.05.020 3.05.030 3.05.030 3.05.040 3.05.040 3.05.050 3.05.050 3.05.060 3.05.060 3.05.070 3.05.070 3.05.080 3.05.080 3.05.090 3.05.090 3.05.100 3.05.100 3.05.120 3.05.110 3.08.010 3.08.010 3.08.020 3.08.020 5.02.010 5.02.010 5.02.015 5.02.020 5.02.020 5.02.030 5.02.025 5.02.040 5.02.030 5.02.050 5.02.040 5.02.060 5.02.042 5.02.070 5.02.044 5.02.080 5.03.010 5.03.010 5.03.020 5.03.020 5.03.030 5.03.030 5.03.040 5.03.040 5.03.050 5.03.050 5.03.060 5.03.060 5.03.070 5.03.070 5.03.080 5.03.080 5.03.090 5.03.090 5.03.100 5.03.100 5.03.110 5.03.110 5.04.010 5.04.010 5.04.020 5.04.020 5.04.030 5.04.030 5.04.040 5.04.040 5.04.050 5.04.050 5.05.010 5.05.010 5.05.020 5.05.020 5.05.030 5.05.030 5.05.040 5.05.040 5.05.050 5.05.050 5.05.060 5.05.060 5.05.070 5.05.070 5.05.080 5.05.080 5.05.090 5.05.090 5.05.100 5.05.100 5.05.110 5.05.110 5.05.120 5.05.120 5.05.130 5.05.130 5.05.140 5.05.140 5.05.150 5.05.150 5.05.160 5.05.160 5.05.170 5.05.170 5.05.180 5.05.180 5.05.190 5.05.190 5.06.010 5.06.010 5.06.020 5.06.020 5.06.030 5.06.030 5.06.040 5.06.040 5.06.050 5.06.050 5.06.060 5.06.060 5.06.070 5.06.070 5.06.080 5.06.080 5.06.090 5.06.090 5.06.100 5.06.100 5.06.110 5.06.110 5.10.010 5.10.010 5.10.020 5.10.020 5.10.025 5.10.030 5.10.035 5.10.040 5.10.037 5.10.050 5.10.040 5.10.060 5.10.045 5.10.070 5.10.050 5.10.080 5.10.060 5.10.090 5.10.070 5.10.100 5.13.010 5.13.010 5.13.020 5.13.020 5.13.030 5.13.030 5.13.040 5.13.040 5.13.050 5.13.050 5.13.060 5.13.060 5.13.070 5.13.070 5.13.080 5.13.080 5.14.010 5.14.010 5.14.020 5.14.020 5.14.030 5.14.030 5.14.040 5.14.040 5.14.050 5.14.050 5.14.060 5.14.060 5.14.070 5.14.070 5.14.080 5.14.080 5.14.090 5.14.090 5.14.100 5.14.100 5.14.110 5.14.110 5.14.120 5.14.120 5.14.130 5.14.130 5.14.140 5.14.140 5.14.150 5.14.150 5.14.160 5.14.160 5.14.170 5.14.170 5.14.180 5.14.180 5.14.185 5.14.190 5.14.190 5.14.200 5.15.010 5.15.010 5.15.020 5.15.020 5.15.030 5.15.030 5.15.040 5.15.040 5.15.050 5.15.050 5.15.060 5.15.060 5.15.070 5.15.070 5.15.080 5.15.080 5.15.090 5.15.090 5.15.100 5.15.100 5.15.110 5.15.110 5.15.120 5.15.120 5.15.130 5.15.130 5.15.140 5.15.140 5.15.150 5.15.150 5.15.160 5.15.160 5.15.170 5.15.170 5.15.180 5.15.180 5.15.190 5.15.190 5.15.200 5.15.200 5.15.210 5.15.210 6.02.010 6.02.010 6.02.020 6.02.020 6.02.030 6.02.030 6.02.040 6.02.040 6.02.050 6.02.050 6.02.060 6.02.060 6.03.010 6.03.010 6.03.020 6.03.020 6.03.030 6.03.030 6.03.040 6.03.040 6.03.050 6.03.050 6.03.060 6.03.060 6.03.070 6.03.070 6.03.080 6.03.080 6.03.090 6.03.090 6.03.100 6.03.100 6.03.110 6.03.110 6.03.120 6.03.120 6.03.130 6.03.130 6.03.140 6.03.140 6.03.150 6.03.150 6.04.010 6.04.010 7.04.010 7.04.010 7.04.020 7.04.020 7.04.030 7.04.030 7.04.035 7.04.040 7.04.038 7.04.050 7.04.039 7.04.060 7.04.040 7.04.070 7.04.050 7.04.080 7.04.060 7.04.090 7.04.065 7.04.100 7.04.070 7.04.110 8.12.010 8.12.010 8.12.020 8.12.020 8.12.030 8.12.030 8.12.040 8.12.040 8.12.050 8.12.050 8.12.060 8.12.060 8.12.065 8.12.070 8.12.070 8.12.080 8.12.080 8.12.090 8.12.090 8.12.100 8.12.100 8.12.110 8.12.110 8.12.120 8.12.120 8.12.130 8.12.130 8.12.140 8.12.140 8.12.150 8.12.150 8.12.160 8.12.160 8.12.170 8.12.170 8.12.180 8.12.180 8.12.190 8.12.190 8.12.200 8.12.200 8.12.210 8.12.210 8.12.220 8.12.220 8.12.230 8.12.230 8.12.240 8.12.240 8.12.250 8.12.250 8.12.260 8.12.260 8.12.270 8.12.270 8.12.280 8.12.280 8.12.290 8.12.290 8.12.300 8.12.300 8.12.310 8.12.310 8.12.320 8.12.320 8.12.330 8.12.330 8.12.340 8.12.340 8.12.350 8.12.350 8.12.360 8.12.360 8.12.370 9.02.010 9.02.010 9.02.020 9.02.020 9.02.030 9.02.030 9.04.010 9.04.010 9.04.020 9.04.020 9.04.030 9.04.030 9.04.040 9.04.040 9.04.050 9.04.060 9.04.060 9.04.070 9.04.080 9.04.080 9.06.010 9.06.010 9.06.020 9.06.020 9.06.030 9.06.030 9.06.040 9.06.040 9.06.050 9.06.050 9.06.060 9.06.060 9.08.010 9.08.010 9.08.020 9.08.020 9.08.030 9.08.030 9.08.040 9.08.040 9.08.050 9.08.050 9.08.060 9.08.060 9.08.070 9.08.070 9.08.080 9.08.080 9.08.090 9.08.090 9.08.100 9.08.100 9.08.110 9.08.110 9.10.010 9.10.010 9.10.020 9.10.020 9.10.030 9.10.030 9.10.040 9.10.040 9.12.010 9.12.010 9.12.020 9.12.020 9.12.030 9.12.030 9.12.040 9.12.040 9.12.050 9.12.050 9.12.060 9.12.060 9.12.070 9.12.070 9.12.080 9.12.080 9.12.090 9.12.090 9.12.100 9.12.100 9.12.110 9.12.110 9.12.120 9.12.120 9.12.130 9.12.130 9.12.140 9.12.140 9.12.150 9.12.150 9.12.160 9.12.160 9.12.170 9.12.170 9.14.010 9.14.010 9.14.015 9.14.020 9.14.020 9.14.030 9.14.030 9.14.040 9.14.040 9.14.050 9.14.050 9.14.060 9.14.060 9.14.070 9.14.070 9.14.080 9.14.080 9.14.090 9.14.090 9.14.100 9.14.100 9.14.110 9.15.005 9.15.010 9.15.010 9.15.020 9.15.020 9.15.030 9.15.030 9.15.040 9.15.040 9.15.050 9.15.050 9.15.060 9.15.060 9.15.070 9.15.070 9.15.080 9.15.080 9.15.090 9.15.090 9.15.100 9.15.100 9.15.110 9.15.110 9.15.120 9.15.120 9.15.130 9.15.130 9.15.140 9.15.140 9.15.150 9.15.150 9.15.160 9.15.160 9.15.170 9.16.010 9.16.010 9.16.020 9.16.020 9.16.030 9.16.030 9.16.040 9.16.040 9.16.050 9.16.050 9.16.060 9.16.060 9.16.070 9.16.070 9.16.075 9.16.080 9.16.080 9.16.090 9.16.090 9.16.100 9.16.100 9.16.110 9.18.010 9.18.010 9.18.020 9.18.020 9.18.030 9.18.030 9.18.040 9.18.040 9.18.050 9.18.050 9.18.060 9.18.060 9.18.070 9.18.070 9.20.010 9.20.010 9.20.020 9.20.020 9.20.030 9.20.030 9.20.035 9.20.040 9.20.040 9.20.050 9.20.050 9.20.060 9.20.060 9.20.070 9.20.070 9.20.080 9.20.080 9.20.090 9.20.100 9.20.100 9.20.110 9.20.110 9.20.120 9.20.120 9.20.130 9.20.130 9.20.140 9.20.140 9.22.010 9.22.010 9.22.020 9.22.020 9.22.030 9.22.030 9.24.010 9.24.010 9.24.020 9.24.020 9.24.030 9.24.030 9.24.040 9.24.040 9.24.050 9.24.050 9.24.060 9.24.060 9.24.070 9.24.070 9.24.080 9.24.080 9.24.090 9.24.090 9.24.100 9.24.100 9.26.010 9.26.010 9.26.020 9.26.020 9.26.030 9.26.030 9.26.040 9.26.040 9.26.050 9.26.050 9.26.055 9.26.060 9.26.060 9.26.070 9.26.070 9.26.080 9.28.010 9.28.010 9.28.020 9.28.020 9.28.030 9.28.030 9.28.040 9.28.040 9.28.050 9.28.050 9.28.055 9.28.060 9.28.060 9.28.070 9.28.070 9.28.080 9.28.080 9.28.090 11.04.010 11.04.010 11.04.030 11.04.020 11.04.040 11.04.030 11.04.060 11.04.040 11.04.070 11.04.050 11.04.080 11.04.060 11.04.090 11.04.070 11.04.100 11.04.080 11.04.110 11.04.090 11.08.010 11.08.010 11.08.020 11.08.020 11.08.030 11.08.030 11.08.040 11.08.040 11.08.050 11.08.050 11.09.010 11.09.010 11.09.020 11.09.020 11.09.030 11.09.030 11.09.040 11.09.040 11.10.010 11.10.010 11.10.020 11.10.020 11.10.030 11.10.030 11.10.040 11.10.040 11.10.050 11.10.050 11.10.060 11.10.060 11.10.070 11.10.070 11.10.080 11.10.080 11.10.090 11.10.090 11.10.100 11.10.100 11.12.010 11.12.010 11.12.020 11.12.020 11.12.030 11.12.030 11.12.040 11.12.040 11.14.010 11.14.010 11.14.020 11.14.020 11.14.030 11.14.030 11.14.040 11.14.040 11.14.050 11.14.050 11.14.060 11.14.060 11.14.070 11.14.070 11.14.080 11.14.080 11.14.090 11.14.090 11.14.100 11.14.100 11.14.110 11.14.110 11.14.120 11.14.120 11.14.130 11.14.130 11.14.140 11.14.140 11.14.150 11.14.150 11.14.160 11.14.160 12.04.010 12.04.010 12.04.020 12.04.010 12.04.030 12.04.010 12.04.040 12.04.010 12.04.050 12.04.010 12.04.060 12.04.010 12.04.070 12.04.010 12.04.080 12.04.010 12.04.090 12.04.010 12.04.100 12.04.010 12.04.110 12.04.010 12.04.120 12.04.010 12.04.130 12.04.010 12.04.140 12.04.010 12.06.010 12.06.010 12.06.020 12.06.020 12.06.030 12.06.030 12.06.040 12.06.040 12.06.050 12.06.050 12.06.060 12.06.060 12.07.010 12.07.010 12.07.020 12.07.020 12.07.030 12.07.030 12.07.040 12.07.040 12.07.050 12.07.050 12.07.060 12.07.060 12.07.070 12.07.070 12.08.010 12.08.010 12.08.020 12.08.020 12.08.030 12.08.030 12.08.040 12.08.040 12.08.050 12.08.050 12.08.060 12.08.060 12.08.070 12.08.070 12.08.080 12.08.080 12.08.090 12.08.090 12.12.010 12.12.010 12.12.020 12.12.020 12.12.030 12.12.030 12.12.040 12.12.040 12.12.050 12.12.050 12.12.060 12.12.060 12.12.070 12.12.070 12.12.080 12.12.080 12.12.090 12.12.090 12.12.100 12.12.100 12.12.110 12.12.110 12.12.120 12.12.120 12.12.130 12.12.130 12.12.140 12.12.140 12.12.150 12.12.150 12.12.160 12.12.160 12.12.170 12.12.170 12.12.180 12.12.180 12.12.190 12.12.190 12.12.200 12.12.200 12.12.210 12.12.210 12.12.220 12.12.220 12.12.230 12.12.230 12.12.240 12.12.240 12.12.250 12.12.250 12.12.260 12.12.260 12.12.270 12.12.270 12.12.280 12.12.280 12.12.290 12.12.290 12.12.300 12.12.300 12.12.310 12.12.310 12.12.320 12.12.320 12.12.330 12.12.330 12.12.340 12.12.340 12.12.350 12.12.350 12.12.360 12.12.360 12.12.370 12.12.370 12.16.010 12.16.010 12.16.020 12.16.020 12.16.025 12.16.030 12.16.030 12.16.040 12.16.040 12.16.050 12.16.050 12.16.060 12.16.060 12.16.070 12.16.070 12.16.080 12.16.080 12.16.090 12.16.090 12.16.100 12.16.100 12.16.110 12.16.110 12.16.120 12.16.120 12.16.130 12.16.130 12.16.140 12.16.140 12.16.150 12.16.150 12.16.160 12.16.160 12.16.170 12.20.010 12.20.010 12.20.020 12.20.020 12.20.030 12.20.030 12.20.040 12.20.040 12.20.050 12.20.050 12.20.060 12.20.060 12.20.070 12.20.070 12.20.080 12.20.080 12.20.090 12.20.090 12.20.100 12.20.100 12.22.010 12.22.010 12.22.020 12.22.020 12.22.030 12.22.030 12.22.040 12.22.040 12.22.050 12.22.050 12.22.060 12.22.060 12.24.010 12.24.010 12.24.020 12.24.020 12.24.030 12.24.030 12.24.040 12.24.040 12.24.050 12.24.050 12.24.060 12.24.060 12.24.070 12.24.070 12.24.080 12.24.080 12.24.090 12.24.090 12.24.100 12.24.100 12.24.110 12.24.110 12.26.010 12.26.010 12.26.020 12.26.020 12.26.030 12.26.030 12.26.040 12.26.040 12.26.050 12.26.050 12.26.060 12.26.060 12.26.070 12.26.070 12.32.010 12.32.010 12.32.020 12.32.010 12.32.030 12.32.010 12.32.040 12.32.010 12.32.050 12.32.010 12.32.060 12.32.010 12.32.070 12.32.010 12.32.080 12.32.010 12.32.090 12.32.010 12.32.100 12.32.010 12.32.110 12.32.010 12.32.120 12.32.010 12.32.130 12.32.010 12.32.140 12.32.010 12.32.150 12.32.010 12.32.160 12.32.010 12.34.010 12.34.010 12.34.020 12.34.020 12.34.030 12.34.030 12.34.040 12.34.040 12.34.050 12.34.050 12.34.060 12.34.060 12.36.010 12.36.010 12.36.020 12.36.020 12.36.030 12.36.030 12.36.040 12.36.040 12.36.050 12.36.050 12.36.060 12.36.060 12.36.070 12.36.070 12.36.080 12.36.080 12.36.090 12.36.090 12.36.100 12.36.100 12.36.110 12.36.110 12.36.120 12.36.120 12.36.130 12.36.130 12.36.140 12.36.140 12.36.150 12.36.150 12.36.160 12.36.160 12.36.170 12.36.170 12.36.180 12.36.180 12.36.190 12.36.190 12.36.200 12.36.200 12.36.210 12.36.210 12.36.220 12.36.220 12.38.010 12.38.010 12.38.020 12.38.020 12.38.030 12.38.030 12.38.040 12.38.040 12.38.050 12.38.050 12.38.060 12.38.060 13.01.010 13.01.010 13.01.020 13.01.020 13.01.030 13.01.030 13.01.050 13.01.040 13.01.060 13.01.050 13.02.010 13.02.010 13.02.020 13.02.010 13.03.010 13.03.010 13.03.020 13.03.020 13.03.030 13.03.030 13.03.040 13.03.040 13.04.010 13.04.010 13.04.020 13.04.020 13.04.030 13.04.030 13.04.040 13.04.040 13.05.010 13.05.010 13.05.020 13.05.020 13.05.030 13.05.030 13.05.040 13.05.040 13.06.010 13.06.010 13.06.020 13.06.020 13.06.030 13.06.030 13.06.040 13.06.040 13.07.010 13.07.010 13.07.020 13.07.020 13.07.030 13.07.030 13.07.040 13.07.040 13.08.010 13.08.010 13.08.020 13.08.020 13.08.030 13.08.030 13.08.040 13.08.040 13.10.010 13.10.010 13.10.020 13.10.020 13.10.030 13.10.030 13.11.010 13.11.010 13.11.020 13.11.020 13.11.030 13.11.030 13.11.040 13.11.040 13.12.010 13.13.010 13.12.020 13.13.020 13.12.030 13.13.030 13.12.040 13.13.040 13.12.050 13.13.050 13.12.060 13.13.060 13.13.010 13.14.010 13.13.020 13.14.020 13.13.030 13.14.030 13.13.040 13.14.040 13.13.050 13.14.050 13.13.060 13.14.060 13.13.070 13.14.070 13.14.010 13.15.010 13.14.020 13.15.020 13.15.010 13.16.010 13.15.020 13.16.020 13.15.030 13.16.030 13.15.040 13.16.040 13.15.050 13.16.050 13.15.060 13.16.060 13.16.010 13.17.010 13.16.020 13.17.020 13.16.030 13.17.030 13.16.040 13.17.040 13.16.050 13.17.050 13.16.060 13.17.060 13.16.070 13.17.070 13.16.080 13.17.080 13.17.010 13.18.010 13.17.020 13.18.020 13.17.030 13.18.030 13.17.040 13.18.040 13.17.050 13.18.050 13.17.060 13.18.060 13.17.070 13.18.070 13.17.080 13.18.080 13.17.090 13.18.090 13.17.100 13.18.100 13.17.110 13.18.110 13.17.120 13.18.120 13.17.130 13.18.130 13.17.140 13.18.140 13.17.150 13.18.150 13.17.160 13.18.160 13.17.170 13.18.170 13.17.180 13.18.180 13.17.190 13.18.190 13.17.200 13.18.200 13.17.210 13.18.210 13.17.220 13.18.220 13.17.230 13.18.230 13.17.240 13.18.240 13.17.250 13.18.250 13.17.260 13.18.260 13.17.270 13.18.270 13.17.280 13.18.280 13.17.290 13.18.290 13.17.300 13.18.300 13.17.310 13.18.310 13.17.320 13.18.320 13.17.330 13.18.330 13.17.340 13.18.340 13.17.350 13.18.350 13.17.360 13.18.360 13.17.370 13.18.370 13.17.380 13.18.380 13.17.390 13.18.390 13.17.400 13.18.400 13.17.410 13.18.410 13.17.420 13.18.420 13.17.430 13.18.430 13.24.010 13.24.010 13.24.020 13.24.020 13.24.030 13.24.030 13.24.040 13.24.040 13.24.050 13.24.050 13.24.060 13.24.060 13.24.070 13.24.070 13.24.080 13.24.080  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Legislation Date Section Section 
this Code Ord. No. 131 1969 3 7.04.020 4 7.04.070 5 7.04.080 6 7.04.090 Ord. No. 139 1971 1 1.04.010 2 1.04.020 3 1.04.030 4 1.04.040 Ord. No. 156 1972 1 11.08.010 2 11.08.020 3 11.08.030 4 11.08.040 5 11.08.050 Ord. No. 157 1972 2 1.01.010 3 1.01.020 4 1.01.030 5 1.01.040 6 1.01.050 7 1.01.060 10 1.01.070 Ord. No. 168 1973 VIII(part) 13.24.020 VIII(part) 13.24.040 XI 13.24.070 Ord. No. 169 1974 art. I, § 1 2.02.010 art. I, § 2 2.02.020 art. I, § 3 2.02.030 art. II, § 1 2.06.010 art. II, § 2 2.06.020 art. II, § 3 2.06.030 art. II, § 4 2.06.040 art. II, § 5 2.06.050 Ord. No. 184 1975 4 2.24.040 5 2.24.050 6 2.24.060 7 2.24.070 8 2.24.080 Ord. No. 4-1976 1976 1 13.24.010 3 13.24.030 4 13.24.050 5 13.24.060 Ord. No. 14-1976(part) 1976 - 7.04.010 - 7.04.020 - 7.04.070 - 7.04.080 - 7.04.090 Ord. No. 1-1978(part) 1978 - 2.32.010 - 2.32.020 - 2.32.030 - 2.32.040 Ord. No. 1-1978(part) 1978 - 2.32.050 - 2.32.060 - 2.32.070 - 2.32.080 Ord. No. 1-1985 1985 1 2.24.020 2 2.24.030 Ord. No. 1986-03 3-5-1986 app. A 4.18.060 4.03.010 4.03.010 4.03.020 4.03.020 4.03.030 4.03.030 4.03.040 4.03.040 4.03.050 4.03.050 4.03.060 4.03.060 4.03.070 4.03.070 4.03.080 4.03.080 4.03.090 4.03.090 4.03.100 4.03.100 4.04.010 4.04.010 4.04.020 4.04.020 4.04.030 4.04.030 4.04.040 4.04.040 4.04.050 4.04.050 4.04.060 4.04.060 4.04.070 4.04.070 4.04.080 4.04.080 4.04.090 4.04.090 4.04.100 4.04.100 4.05.010 4.05.010 4.05.020 4.05.020 4.05.030 4.05.030 4.05.040 4.05.040 ch. 4.06, intro. ¶ 4.06.010 4.06.010 4.06.020 4.06.020 4.06.030 4.06.030 4.06.040 4.06.040 4.06.050 4.06.050 4.06.060 4.06.060 4.06.070 4.07.010 4.07.020 4.07.020 4.07.040 4.07.030 4.07.100 4.07.040 4.07.110 4.07.050 4.07.140 4.07.060 4.07.160 4.08.010 4.08.010 4.08.020 4.08.020 4.08.040 4.08.040 4.08.050 4.08.050 4.08.060 4.08.070 4.08.070 4.08.080 4.08.080 4.08.090 4.08.090 4.08.100 4.08.100 4.08.110 4.08.110 4.08.120 ch. 4.09, intro. ¶ 4.09.010 4.09.010 4.09.020 4.09.020 4.09.030 4.09.030 4.09.040 ch. 4.10, intro. ¶ 4.10.010 4.10.010 4.10.020 4.10.020 4.10.030 4.11.010 4.11.010 4.11.020 4.11.020 4.11.030 4.11.030 4.11.040 4.11.040 ch. 4.12, intro. ¶ 4.12.010 4.12.010 4.12.020 4.12.020 4.12.030 4.12.030 4.12.040 4.12.040 4.12.050 4.12.050 4.12.060 4.13.010 4.13.010 4.13.020 4.13.020 4.13.030 4.13.030 4.13.040 4.13.050 4.13.050 4.13.060 4.13.060 4.13.070 4.13.070 4.13.090 4.13.080 4.13.110 4.13.090 4.13.120 4.13.100 4.13.130 4.13.110 4.13.140 4.13.120 4.13.150 4.13.130 4.13.160 4.13.140 4.13.170 4.13.150 4.13.180 4.13.160 4.13.190 4.13.170 4.13.200 4.13.180 4.13.210 4.13.190 4.13.240 4.14.010 4.15.010 4.15.010 4.16.010 4.15.020 4.16.020 4.15.030 4.16.030 4.15.040 4.16.040 4.15.050 4.16.050 4.15.060 4.16.050 4.15.070 4.16.050 4.15.080 4.16.050 4.15.090 4.16.050 4.15.100 4.16.050 4.15.110 4.16.060 4.15.120 4.16.060 4.15.130 4.16.060 4.15.140 4.16.060 4.15.150 4.16.070 4.15.160 4.16.070 4.15.170 4.16.070 Amended 5-13-1986 5-13-1986 - 4.04.060 Amended 7-22-1986 7-22-1986 - 4.04.070 Ord. No. 2-1987 1987 1 13.18.010 - 13.18.020 - 13.18.030 - 13.18.040 - 13.18.050 - 13.18.070 Amended Ord. No. 2-1987 1987 1 13.18.060 - 13.18.080 - 13.18.090 - 13.18.100 - 13.18.110 - 13.18.120 - 13.18.130 - 13.18.140 - 13.18.150 - 13.18.160 - 13.18.170 - 13.18.180 - 13.18.190 - 13.18.200 - 13.18.210 - 13.18.230 - 13.18.240 - 13.18.250 - 13.18.260 - 13.18.270 - 13.18.280 - 13.18.290 - 13.18.300 - 13.18.310 - 13.18.320 - 13.18.330 - 13.18.340 - 13.18.350 - 13.18.360 - 13.18.370 - 13.18.380 - 13.18.390 - 13.18.400 - 13.18.410 - 13.18.420 22 13.18.220 Amended 8-9-1988 8-9-1988 - 4.05.030 - 4.11.030 - 4.12.030 Amended 12-27-1988 12-27-1988 - 4.04.060 Amended 6-2-1991 6-2-1991 - 4.03.040 - 4.03.060 - 4.03.070 - 4.03.080 - 4.03.100 - 4.04.010 - 4.04.060 - 4.04.070 - 4.04.090 - 4.05.010 - 4.05.020 - 4.06.020 - 4.06.040 - 4.06.060 - 4.07.020 - 4.07.040 - 4.07.140 - 4.08.090 - 4.09.030 - 4.09.040 - 4.11.020 - 4.11.040 - 4.11.050 - 4.12.030 - 4.12.040 - 4.12.060 - 4.13.170 Amended 8-1-1991 8-1-1991 - 4.11.040 - 4.11.050 Amended 8-15-1993 8-15-1993 - 4.04.060 Amended 10-12-1993 10-12-1993 - 4.03.100 Amended 10-21-1993 10-21-1993 - 4.04.070 Amended 11-21-1993 11-21-1993 - 4.03.040 - 4.03.060 Amended 6-23-1994 6-23-1994 - 4.04.060 Amended 3-16-1995 3-16-1995 - 4.03.100 - 4.06.060 Amended 4-16-1995 4-16-1995 - 4.03.060 - 4.03.080 - 4.03.090 - 4.04.070 - 4.04.090 - 4.06.070 - 4.11.040 - 4.11.050 - 4.12.020 - 4.12.040 - 4.12.050 - 4.12.060 - 4.13.240 Amended 8-11-1995 8-11-1995 - 4.13.080 Amended 3-22-1996 3-22-1996 - 4.07.160 Amended 4-20-1996 4-20-1996 - 4.03.070 - 4.06.060 - 4.06.070 - 4.12.020 - 4.12.030 - 4.12.040 - 4.12.050 Amended 7-15-1996 7-15-1996 - 4.05.010 - 4.06.020 Amended 10-16-1996 10-16-1996 - 4.07.020 Ord. No. 9-1996 1996 1(part) 5.05.010 - 5.05.020 - 5.05.030 - 5.05.040 - 5.05.050 - 5.05.060 - 5.05.070 - 5.05.080 - 5.05.090 - 5.05.100 - 5.05.110 - 5.05.120 - 5.05.130 - 5.05.140 - 5.05.150 - 5.05.160 - 5.05.170 - 5.05.180 - 5.05.190 Ord. No. 28-1996 1996 1(part) 12.38.010 - 12.38.020 - 12.38.030 - 12.38.040 - 12.38.050 Amended 2-25-1997 2-25-1997 - 4.07.100 - 4.07.160 Amended 4-17-1997 4-17-1997 - 4.03.040 - 4.03.100 - 4.05.010 - 4.06.020 Amended 11-21-1997 11-21-1997 - 4.07.140 Tc> 4.13.220 - 4.14.110 Amended 12-21-1997 12-21-1997 - 4.14.140 Ord. No. 10 1997 1(part) 2.11.030 Ord. No. 18-1997 1997 1(part) 12.32.010 2(part) 12.34.010 - 12.34.020 - 12.34.030 - 12.34.040 - 12.34.050 - 12.34.060 4(part) 12.36.010 - 12.36.030 - 12.36.040 - 12.36.060 - 12.36.070 - 12.36.080 - 12.36.090 - 12.36.100 - 12.36.110 - 12.36.120 - 12.36.130 - 12.36.140 - 12.36.150 - 12.36.160 - 12.36.170 - 12.36.180 - 12.36.190 - 12.36.200 - 12.36.210 - 12.36.220 Amended Ord. No. 18-1997 1997 3(part) 12.38.010 - 12.38.020 - 12.38.030 - 12.38.040 - 12.38.050 Amended 2-20-1998 2-20-1998 - 4.13.220 Amended 9-17-1998 9-17-1998 - 4.14.110 Amended 1-26-1999 1-26-1999 - 4.14.110 Amended 8-24-1999 8-24-1999 - 4.07.020 - 4.07.160 Amended 9-29-1999 9-29-1999 - 4.14.120 - 4.14.130 - 4.14.140 Amended 1-13-2000 1-13-2000 - 4.07.010 Amended 2-13-2000 2-13-2000 - 4.03.040 - 4.04.070 - 4.04.090 - 4.06.020 - 4.06.040 - 4.06.060 - 4.06.070 - 4.07.020 - 4.07.030 - 4.07.040 - 4.07.050 - 4.07.060 - 4.07.070 - 4.07.080 - 4.07.090 - 4.07.150 - 4.07.160 - 4.08.040 - 4.08.050 - 4.08.060 - 4.08.080 - 4.08.090 - 4.09.040 - 4.12.020 - 4.12.030 - 4.12.060 - 4.13.040 - 4.13.090 - 4.17.020 Ord. No. 9-2001 2001 1(part) 2.08.010 - 2.08.020 - 2.08.030 - 2.08.040 - 2.08.050 - 2.08.060 - 2.08.070 - 2.08.080 - 2.08.090 - 2.08.100 - 2.08.110 - 2.08.120 - 2.08.130 - 2.08.140 - 2.08.150 - 2.08.160 - 2.08.170 - 2.08.180 - 2.08.190 - 2.08.200 - 2.08.210 Amended Ord. No. 10-2001 2001 1(part) 1.12.010 3 2.32.030 4 2.32.040 5 2.32.050 6 2.32.060 7 2.32.070 8 3.04.020 9 3.04.090 10 3.05.110 12 5.02.080 14 5.05.110 15 5.10.020 16 7.04.080 17 7.04.100 18 7.04.100 19 7.04.100 46 9.02.030 47 9.02.030 48 9.12.010 49 9.12.020 50 9.12.030 51 9.12.040 52 9.12.050 53 9.12.060 54 9.12.070 55 9.12.080 56 9.12.090 57 9.12.100 58 9.12.110 59 9.12.120 61 9.12.140 62 9.12.150 63 9.12.160 64 9.12.170 65 9.14.010 66 9.14.010 67 9.14.020 68 9.14.030 69 9.14.040 70 9.14.050 71 9.14.060 72 9.14.070 73 9.14.080 74 9.14.090 75 9.14.100 76 9.14.110 77 9.15.020 78(part) 9.15.030 79 9.15.040 80 9.15.060 81 9.15.070 88 9.16.010 89 9.16.020 90 9.16.030 91 9.16.040 92 9.16.050 93 9.16.060 94 9.16.070 95 9.16.080 96 9.16.090 97(part) 9.18.030 98 9.18.050 99 9.18.060 100 9.18.070 101 9.20.010 102 9.20.020 103 9.20.030 104 9.20.050 105 9.20.060 106 9.20.070 107 9.20.080 108 9.20.090 110 9.20.100 111 9.20.110 112 9.20.120 113 9.20.130 114 9.20.140 115 9.22.010 116 9.22.020 117 9.22.030 119 9.24.090 120 9.26.020 121 9.26.030 122 9.26.040 123 9.26.050 124 9.26.080 126 9.28.010 127 9.28.020 128 9.28.030 129 9.28.090 132 11.10.020 133 11.10.030 134 12.16.010 135 12.16.100 136 12.16.160 137 12.16.170 138 12.20.070 139 12.22.060 140 12.24.040 141 12.24.050 142 12.24.070 143 12.24.090 144 12.24.100 145 12.24.110 146 12.34.060 155 13.17.080 156 13.18.430 Ord. No. 11-2001 2001 1 5.10.060 Amended Ord. No. 19 2001 1(part) 12.16.020 3(part) 12.34.020 Amended 12-6-2001 12-6-2001 - 4.04.060 Amended Ord. No. 26 2001 1 12.20.100 Amended Ord. No. 27 2001 1 12.38.060 2(part) 12.38.060 Amended Ord. No. 28-2001 2001 1 7.04.110 Amended 9-8-2002 9-8-2002 - 4.04.110 - 4.05.010 - 4.06.040 - 4.12.020 Amended 9-13-2002 9-13-2002 - 4.13.100 Amended Ord. No. 33 2002 1 12.20.100 Amended Ord. No. 34-2002 2002 1 12.38.060 Amended Ord. No. 35-2002 2002 1 7.04.110 Ord. No. 14-2003 2003 1 9.20.040 Amended Ord. No. 20-2003 2003 1 2.02.040 Ord. No. 30-2003 2003 2(part) 5.10.080 - 5.10.090 3(part) 5.10.100 Amended Ord. No. 30-2003 2003 1(part) 5.10.010 Amended Ord. No. 35-2003 2003 1(part) 5.10.010 2(part) 5.10.080 3(part) 5.10.090 4(part) 5.10.100 Ord. No. 45-2003 2003 1 5.06.010 - 5.06.020 - 5.06.030 - 5.06.040 - 5.06.050 - 5.06.060 - 5.06.090 - 5.06.100 - 5.06.110 Ord. No. 48-2003 2003 2 9.20.020 4 9.26.010 12 9.26.060 13 9.26.070 Amended Ord. No. 48 2003 5 9.26.020 6 9.26.030 8 9.26.040 9 9.26.040 10 9.26.040 11 9.26.050 14 9.26.080 Amended Ord. No. 54 2003 1 12.20.100 Amended Ord. No. 55-2003 2003 1 12.38.060 Amended Ord. No. 56-2003 2003 1 7.04.110 Amended Ord. No. 5-2004 2004 1 5.10.040 Ord. No. 12-2004 2004 6(part) 7.04.090 Amended Ord. No. 12 2004 2 1.12.020 Amended Ord. No. 12-2004 2004 3 2.04.050 4(part) 2.24.080 7(part) 9.14.030 9(part) 11.10.100 12(part) 12.16.060 - 12.16.070 - 12.16.080 - 12.16.090 - 12.16.100 - 12.16.110 - 12.16.120 - 12.16.130 - 12.16.140 - 12.16.150 - 12.16.160 - 12.16.170 13(part) 12.38.020 Amended Ord. No. 13-2004 2004 1(part) 2.04.040 2(part) 2.04.070 Amended Ord. No. 14-2004 2004 1 2.24.030 Ord. No. 19 2004 1 11.14.010 - 11.14.020 - 11.14.030 - 11.14.040 - 11.14.050 - 11.14.060 - 11.14.070 - 11.14.080 - 11.14.090 - 11.14.100 - 11.14.110 - 11.14.120 - 11.14.130 - 11.14.140 - 11.14.150 - 11.14.160 2(part) 12.16.030 Amended Ord. No. 24-2004 2004 1 9.12.130 2 9.12.140 Amended Ord. No. 12 2005 2 12.20.100 Ord. No. 15-2005 2005 1(part) 8.12.010 - 8.12.020 - 8.12.030 - 8.12.040 - 8.12.050 - 8.12.060 - 8.12.080 - 8.12.090 - 8.12.100 - 8.12.110 - 8.12.120 - 8.12.130 - 8.12.140 - 8.12.150 - 8.12.160 - 8.12.170 - 8.12.180 - 8.12.190 - 8.12.200 - 8.12.210 - 8.12.220 - 8.12.230 - 8.12.240 - 8.12.250 - 8.12.260 - 8.12.270 - 8.12.280 - 8.12.290 - 8.12.300 - 8.12.310 - 8.12.320 - 8.12.330 - 8.12.340 - 8.12.350 - 8.12.360 - 8.12.370 Ord. No. 31-2005 2005 1(part) 5.10.010 2(part) 5.10.070 Amended Ord. No. 33-2005 2005 5 12.34.020 6 12.34.020 7 12.34.020 8(part) 12.34.020 Amended Ord. No. 33-2005(part) 2005 - 12.16.030 Ord. No. 37-2005 2005 1(part) 13.01.010 - 13.01.020 - 13.01.030 - 13.01.040 - 13.01.050 2(part) 13.02.010 3(part) 13.03.040 4(part) 13.04.040 5(part) 13.05.040 6(part) 13.06.040 7(part) 13.07.040 8(part) 13.08.040 10(part) 13.10.030 11(part) 13.11.040 12(part) 13.13.010 - 13.13.020 - 13.13.030 - 13.13.040 - 13.13.050 - 13.13.060 13(part) 13.14.010 - 13.14.020 - 13.14.030 - 13.14.040 - 13.14.050 - 13.14.070 14(part) 13.15.010 Amended Ord. No. 37-2005 2005 16(part) 13.16.010 - 13.16.020 - 13.16.030 - 13.16.040 - 13.16.050 - 13.16.060 - 13.17.010 - 13.17.020 - 13.17.030 - 13.17.040 - 13.17.050 - 13.17.060 - 13.17.070 - 13.17.080 - 13.18.010 - 13.18.020 - 13.18.030 - 13.18.040 - 13.18.050 - 13.18.060 - 13.18.070 - 13.18.080 - 13.18.090 - 13.18.100 - 13.18.110 - 13.18.120 - 13.18.130 - 13.18.140 - 13.18.150 - 13.18.160 - 13.18.170 - 13.18.180 - 13.18.190 - 13.18.200 - 13.18.210 - 13.18.220 - 13.18.230 - 13.18.240 - 13.18.250 - 13.18.260 - 13.18.270 - 13.18.280 - 13.18.290 - 13.18.300 - 13.18.310 - 13.18.320 - 13.18.330 - 13.18.340 - 13.18.350 - 13.18.360 - 13.18.370 - 13.18.380 - 13.18.390 - 13.18.400 - 13.18.410 - 13.18.420 - 13.18.430 Amended Ord. No. 42-2005 2005 1 12.38.060 Ord. No. 43 2005 1 13.24.080 Amended Ord. No. 43 2005 1 13.24.010 - 13.24.020 - 13.24.030 - 13.24.040 - 13.24.050 - 13.24.060 - 13.24.070 - 13.24.080 Amended Ord. No. 4-2006 2006 1 8.12.020 2 8.12.020 3 8.12.020 4(part) 8.12.020 6(part) 8.12.060 7(part) 8.12.280 Amended Ord. No. 10-2006 2006 1(part) 8.12.020 2 8.12.060 3(part) 8.12.060 Ord. No. 13 2006 1 12.36.050 Ord. No. 36-2006 2006 4 12.36.040 Amended Ord. No. 43 2006 1(part) 12.38.060 Amended Ord. No. 44 2006 1(part) 12.20.100 Amended Ord. No. 45-2006 2006 1(part) 7.04.110 Amended 3-8-2007 3-8-2007 - 4.04.070 Amended 5-8-2007 5-8-2007 - 4.03.070 - 4.05.010 - 4.05.030 - 4.06.060 - 4.06.070 - 4.12.030 - 4.12.040 Amended 5-22-2007 5-22-2007 - 4.04.090 - 4.07.040 Amended 11-27-2007 11-27-2007 - 4.12.010 - 4.12.020 - 4.12.030 - 4.13.240 Ord. No. 8-2007 2007 15 5.14.200 Ord. No. 15-2007 2007 1 13.02.010 Amended Ord. No. 16-2007 2007 1(part) 12.16.060 2 12.20.100 Amended Ord. No. 25 2007 2 12.38.060 3 12.36.050 Amended Ord. No. 26 2007 2 12.36.050 2(part) 12.20.100 Ord. No. 29-2007 2007 1 13.17.020 Amended Ord. No. 29-2007 2007 2 13.17.030 3 13.17.040 4 13.17.070 Ord. No. 12 2008 1 11.10.010 Amended Ord. No. 18-2008 2008 1 5.14.200 2 5.14.200 Amended Ord. No. 24-2008 2008 1 12.38.060 2 12.36.050 Amended Ord. No. 25 2008 1 12.20.100 Ord. No. 2-2009 2009 1 13.01.030 10 13.03.040 11 13.04.040 12 13.05.040 13 13.06.040 14 13.07.040 15 13.08.040 17 13.10.030 18 13.11.040 19 13.14.040 23 13.15.010 24 13.15.020 Amended Ord. No. 2-2009 2009 2 13.02.010 Ord. No. 3-2009 2009 1 12.07.070 Amended Ord. No. 4-2009 2009 1 9.28.050 2 9.28.060 Ord. No. 5-2009 2009 1 12.36.020 Ord. No. 7-2009 2009 1 12.07.030 Ord. No. 1 2010 2 5.13.080 Ord. No. 2010-1 1-12-2010 2 5.13.010 - 5.13.020 - 5.13.030 - 5.13.040 - 5.13.050 - 5.13.060 - 5.13.070 - 5.13.080 Amended 10-27-2010 10-27-2010 - 4.04.060 - 4.04.070 Amended Ord. No. 9 2010 1 2.24.020 2 2.24.020 3 2.24.030 4 2.24.050 6 2.24.080 Amended Ord. No. 12-2011 2011 1 12.16.050 2 12.16.060 3 12.16.100 Amended Ord. No. 14-2011 2011 1 12.38.060 Amended Ord. No. 15 2011 1 12.20.100 Amended Ord. No. 18-2011 2011 1 12.16.050 Amended Ord. No. 19-2011 2011 1 5.05.010 2 5.05.030 3 5.05.060 4 5.05.110 5 5.05.180 6 5.05.190 Amended 11-13-2012 11-13-2012 - 4.03.100 - 4.04.070 Amended Ord. No. 12-2012 2012 1 3.04.060 Ord. No. 13 2012 1 5.15.210 Amended Ord. No. 15-2012 2012 1 7.04.020 2 7.04.080 3 7.04.110 Amended Ord. No. 20 2012 1 12.20.100 Amended 10-22-2013 10-22-2013 - 4.03.040 - 4.04.060 - 4.04.070 - 4.04.100 Amended Ord. No. 7-2013 2013 1 8.12.060 2 8.12.060 Amended Ord. No. 8-2013 2013 3 11.10.070 Amended Ord. No. 12-2013 2013 1 12.16.060 2 12.36.050 Amended Ord. No. 13 2013 1 8.12.060 Ord. No. 15 2013 1 5.10.030 2 5.10.050 Ord. No. 17 2013 1 2.16.070 2 9.15.010 3 9.15.090 - 9.15.170 Ord. No. 18 2013 1 11.04.090 Ord. No. 23-2013 2013 10 13.03.010 - 13.03.020 - 13.03.030 - 13.03.040 11 13.04.010 - 13.04.020 - 13.04.040 12 13.05.020 - 13.05.030 - 13.05.040 13 13.06.020 - 13.06.040 14 13.07.040 15 13.08.040 17 13.10.030 18 13.11.040 19 13.14.040 - 13.14.060 25 13.15.010 Amended Ord. No. 23-2013 2013 1 13.01.030 1 13.02.010 Amended Ord. No. 29 2013 1 12.20.100 Amended Ord. No. 30 2013 1 12.38.060 Amended Ord. No. 33 2013 1 5.15.110 Amended 1-14-2014 1-14-2014 - 4.03.040 Amended 3-25-2014 3-25-2014 - 4.14.110 Amended 8-7-2014 8-7-2014 - 4.03.080 Ord. No. 26, series 2014 10-14-2014 1 7.04.020 1 7.04.100 Ord. No. 5 2014 1 2.26.020 Amended Ord. No. 12-2014 2014 1 5.05.180 Ord. No. 16 2014 1 11.09.040 Amended Ord. No. 19, series 2014 2014 - 4.16.070 Amended Ord. No. 21 2014 1-2 2.20.030 Amended Ord. No. 23-2014 2014 1 13.02.010 Ord. No. 27 2014 7 9.15.130 Amended Ord. No. 27 2014 4 9.15.010 5 9.15.010 6 9.15.090 Ord. No. 29 2014 1 11.04.030 Amended Ord. No. 32 2014 1 12.20.100 Amended Ord. No. 33 2014 1 12.38.060 Amended 3-10-2015 3-10-2015 - 4.06.020 Amended 3-24-2015 3-24-2015 - 4.03.080 Amended 4-28-2015 4-28-2015 - 4.03.040 Ord. No. 26-2015 9-8-2015 1 8.12.060 2 8.12.020 Ord. No. 29-2015 10-13-2015 1(12.16.050(B)) 12.16.060 2 12.36.050 Amended 10-27-2015 10-27-2015 - 4.03.040 - 4.04.060 - 4.04.070 Ord. No. 30-2015 10-27-2015 1 12.16.060 1 12.36.050 Ord. No. 32-2015 11-10-2015 1 12.20.050 Ord. No. 36-2015 12-8-2015 1(12.38.060(B)) 12.38.060 1(12.38.060(C)) 12.38.060 Ord. No. 37-2015 12-8-2015 1 12.20.100 Ord. No. 38-2015 12-8-2015 1 2.24.030 Ord. No. 1-2015 2015 1 5.05.060 Ord. No. 03, series 2015 2015 1 13.03.020 Amended Ord. No. 03-2015 2015 2 13.10.030 Ord. No. 06-2015 2015 1 5.04.050 Amended Ord. No. 07-2015 2015 1 5.05.020 2 5.05.040 Ord. No. 08, series 2015 2015 1 2.08.200 Amended Ord. No. 14-2015 2015 1 5.05.020 2 5.05.030 3 5.05.040 Ord. No. 15, series 2015 2015 1 8.12.020 2 8.12.020 4 8.12.020 5 8.12.020 6 8.12.020 7 8.12.020 11 8.12.070 Amended Ord. No. 15, series 2015 2015 8 8.12.060 9 8.12.060 10 8.12.060 12 8.12.290 Ord. No. 16-2015 2015 1 13.08.040 Ord. No. 19, series 2015 2015 1 13.03.020 Ord. No. 05-2016 1-26-2016 1 9.12.090 Ord. No. 07-2016 2-23-2016 1(8.12.020(N)) 8.12.020 2(8.12.040(A)) 8.12.040 3 8.12.060 4(8.12.060(D)) 8.12.060 4(8.12.060(K)) 8.12.060 5 8.12.180 6(8.12.190(C)) 8.12.200 7 8.12.230 8(8.12.220(A)) 8.12.230 8(8.12.220(B)) 8.12.230 9 8.12.290 Ord. No. 14-2016 2-23-2016 1 3.04.050 Ord. No. 11-2016 4-12-2016 1 2.04.040 2(2.04.035(E)) 2.04.070 Ord. No. 15-2016 5-10-2016 1(9.12.050(A)(4)) 9.12.050 Ord. No. 17-2016 6-14-2016 1(8.12.020(H)) 8.12.020 2(8.12.030(B)) 8.12.030 3(8.12.040(A)) 8.12.040 4(8.12.040(B)) 8.12.040 5(8.12.040(E)) 8.12.040 Ord. No. 17-2016 6-14-2016 6 8.12.050 Ord. No. 18-2016 6-14-2016 1(2.08.200(K)) 2.08.200 Ord. No. 26-2016 8-23-2016 1 4.03.040 2 4.04.070 3 4.04.100 4 4.04.100 5 4.04.100 6 4.04.100 Amending Ord. No. 35 2016 1 12.38.060 Ord. No. 36-2016 2016 1 12.20.100 Ord. No. 01-2017 1-10-2017 1(2.34.010) 2.34.010 2 5.06.070 3 5.10.070 4 5.13.010 5 5.15.060 6 5.15.060 7 5.15.150 8 12.16.050 8 12.16.060 9 12.16.070 10 12.36.050 11 13.08.050 12 13.14.080 13 13.24.010 Ord. No. 2017-2 1-10-2017 1 13.24.010 - 13.24.020 - 13.24.030 - 13.24.040 - 13.24.050 - 13.24.060 - 13.24.070 - 13.24.080 Ord. No. 2017-3 2-14-2017 1 4.13.220 2 4.13.230 Ord. No. 2017-6 2-28-2017 1 11.04.020 Ord. No. 08-2017 4-11-2017 1 4.07.010 2 4.07.010 3 4.07.010 4 4.07.010 5 4.07.010 6 4.07.020 7 4.07.020 8 4.07.020 10 4.07.040 11 4.07.050 12 4.07.060 13 4.07.070 15 4.07.080 16 4.07.090 17 4.07.140 18 4.07.140 19 4.07.140 20 4.07.140 21 4.07.140 22 4.07.140 23 4.07.140 24 4.07.140 25 4.03.040 Ord. No. 08-2017 4-11-2017 9 4.07.040 Ord. No. 13-2017 4-25-2017 1 4.03.060 2 4.03.060 3 4.13.190 4 4.13.190 5 4.13.190 6 4.13.190 7 4.13.190 8 4.13.190 9 4.13.190 10 4.13.190 11 4.14.010 12 4.14.020 13 4.14.040 14 4.14.040 15 4.14.050 16 4.14.050 17 4.14.060 18 4.14.070 19 4.14.080 20 4.14.080 21 4.14.080 22 4.14.080 23 4.14.110 24 4.14.110 25 4.14.120 26 4.14.130 27 4.14.140 28 4.14.140 Ord. No. 10-2017 5-9-2017 2 13.02.010 3 13.02.010 4 13.02.010 5 13.02.010 6 13.02.010 9 13.03.010 10 13.03.020 11 13.03.030 12 13.03.040 13 13.04.010 14 13.04.020 15 13.04.030 16 13.04.040 17 13.05.010 18 13.05.020 19 13.05.030 20 13.05.040 21 13.06.010 22 13.06.020 23 13.06.030 24 13.06.040 25 13.07.010 26 13.07.020 27 13.07.030 28 13.07.040 29 13.08.010 30 13.08.020 31 13.08.030 32 13.08.040 33 13.08.050 34 13.10.010 35 13.10.020 36 13.10.030 36 13.10.030 37 13.11.010 38 13.11.020 39 13.11.030 40 13.11.040 41(13.12.010) 13.12.010 41(13.12.020) 13.12.020 41(13.12.030) 13.12.030 41(13.12.040) 13.12.040 42 13.13.010 - 13.13.020 - 13.13.030 - 13.13.040 - 13.13.050 - 13.13.060 - 13.14.010 - 13.14.020 - 13.14.030 - 13.14.040 - 13.14.050 - 13.14.060 - 13.14.070 - 13.14.080 - 13.15.010 - 13.15.020 - 13.16.010 - 13.16.020 - 13.16.030 - 13.16.040 - 13.16.050 - 13.16.060 - 13.17.010 - 13.17.020 - 13.17.030 - 13.17.040 - 13.17.050 - 13.17.060 - 13.17.070 - 13.17.080 - 13.18.010 - 13.18.020 - 13.18.030 - 13.18.040 - 13.18.050 - 13.18.060 - 13.18.070 - 13.18.080 - 13.18.090 - 13.18.100 - 13.18.110 - 13.18.120 - 13.18.130 - 13.18.140 - 13.18.150 - 13.18.160 - 13.18.170 - 13.18.180 - 13.18.190 - 13.18.200 - 13.18.210 - 13.18.220 - 13.18.230 - 13.18.240 - 13.18.250 - 13.18.260 - 13.18.270 - 13.18.280 - 13.18.290 - 13.18.300 - 13.18.310 - 13.18.320 - 13.18.330 - 13.18.340 - 13.18.350 - 13.18.360 - 13.18.370 - 13.18.380 - 13.18.390 - 13.18.400 - 13.18.410 - 13.18.420 - 13.18.430 43 13.14.040 44 13.14.050 45 13.14.080 Ord. No. 14-2017 5-9-2017 1 6.03.070 Ord. No. 17-2017 6-27-2017 1 3.05.050 Ord. No. 23-2017 9-26-2017 1 2.08.205 Ord. No. 24-2017 9-26-2017 1 9.12.130 Ord. No. 28-2017 11-28-2017 1 3.04.020 2 3.04.066 3 3.04.067 Ord. No. 35-2017 12-12-2017 1(3.06.010) 3.06.010 1(3.06.020) 3.06.020 1(3.06.030) 3.06.030 1(3.06.040) 3.06.040 1(3.06.050) 3.06.050 1(3.06.060) 3.06.060 1(3.06.070) 3.06.070 1(3.06.080) 3.06.080 1(3.06.090) 3.06.090 1(3.06.100) 3.06.100 1(3.06.110) 3.06.110 1(3.06.120) 3.06.120 1(3.06.130) 3.06.130 1(3.06.140) 3.06.140 1(3.06.150) 3.06.150 1(3.06.160) 3.06.160 1(3.06.170) 3.06.170 1(3.06.180) 3.06.180 1(3.06.190) 3.06.190 Ord. No. 33-2017 12-18-2017 1 12.38.060 Ord. No. 01-2018  1-23-2018 1 12.16.060(A) Ord. No. 06-2018 3-13-2018 1 2.24.020 2 2.24.030 3 2.24.040 Ord. No. 08-2018 3-27-2018 1 11.04.030 Ord. No. 11-2018  4-10-2018 1 12.20.100(B) 2       Added 12.20.110 Ord. No. 12-2018  4-24-2018 1 2.24.020(D) Ord. No. 14-2018  5- 8-2018 1 12.20.100(B) 2 12.20.110(B) Ord. No. 15-2018  5-22-2018 - Adopting Ord. Ord. No. 16-2018  8-14-2018 1 4.03.080 Ord. No. 17-2018  6-12-2018 1 2.04.090 2       Added 2.04.095 Ord. No. 18-2018  6-12-2018 1 12.16.060(A) 2       Rpld 12.16.060(B) -       Rnbd 12.16.060(C) -       as 12.16.060(B) Ord. No. 19-2018  6-12-2018 1 12.20.030 Ord. No. 20-2018  7-24-2018 1 12.20.110(B) Ord. No. 21-2018  6-12-2018 1       Rpld Ch. 12.07, - 12.07.010-12.07.070 -       Added 12.07.010-12.07.070 Ord. No. 23-2018  7-24-2018 1       Rpld Ch. 12.07, - 12.07.010-12.07.070       Added 12.07.010, 12.07.020 Ord. No. 28-2018  8-14-2018 1 4.04.100(P)(4) 2 4.04.100(U)(4) 3 4.04.100(V)(2) - 4.04.100(Exh. A) 4 4.04.070 Ord. No. 29-2018  8-14-2018 1       Added 9.12.180 Ord. No. 30-2018  9-11-2018 1 9.28.070 2 9.28.080 3 9.28.090 Ord. No. 36-2018 11-27-2018 1 4.03.040 2 5.10.010 3 5.10.030 4 5.10.040 5 5.10.050 6 5.10.060 7 5.10.070 8 5.10.080 9 5.10.100 10 5.15.010 11 5.15.020 12 5.15.030 13 5.15.070 14 5.15.140 15 5.15.210 16 9.15.010 17 9.15.090 18 9.15.100 19 9.15.160 Ord. No. 37-2018 11-27-2018 1 3.04.066 Ord. No. 38-2018 12-11-2018 1       Added 7.05.010-7.05.090 Ord. No. 41-2018 12-11-2018 1 12.20.100 Ord. No. 42-2018 12-11-2018 1 12.38.060 Ord. No. 04-2019  2-12-2019 1 9.15.070 Ord. No. 07-2019  4- 9-2019 1 2.08.200 Ord. No. 10-2019  5-14-2019 1       Added 4.07.170 2       Added 4.13.250 Ord. No. 11-2019  5-14-2019 1       Added 5.10.110 Ord. No. 12-2019  5-14-2019 1       Rpld 11.14.010-11.14.160 2       Added 6.05.010-6.05.130  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Colorado State Law (C.R.S.). 
C.R.S. 
Section Section  
this Code tit. 4, art. 68 4.14.100 9-7-113 4.04.100 tit. 12, art. 59 9.15.090 12-23-111(15) 13.24.010 12-28-102, 12-28-103 5.10.030 12-47.1-103(5.5) 9.18.020 12.43.3-101 et seq. 4.04.100 tit. 13, art. 10 11.04.060 13-10-101 et seq. Ch. 2.08 13-10-112(2) 2.20.030 - 3.06.160 - 5.05.150 13-10-113 Ch. 1.12 13-10-113(2) 1.12.010 16-2.5-101 9.12.130 16-10-101 2.08.190 16-10-109 2.08.190 tit. 18 Ch. 2.11 tit. 18, art. 12 9.12.130 - 9.12.140 18-1-501 et seq. Ch. 9.04 18-1-601 et seq. Ch. 9.06 18-1-701 et seq. Ch. 9.08 18-1-711 9.15.090 - 9.15.110 - 9.15.140 18-1-801 et seq. Ch. 9.10 18-1-901(3)(1) 9.12.160 18-1.3-506 2.08.190 18-2-101 Ch. 9.04 18-3-201(2) 8.12.350 18-9-106 5.10.100 18-9-204.5 Tit. 3 (Note) - 8.12.020 18-12-105.1 9.12.130 - 9.12.140 18-12-214 9.12.130 - 9.12.140 18-18-102(5) 5.14.100 - 9.12.140 - 9.12.150 18-18-406(3) 5.15.020 18-18-406.3 9.15.090 tit. 24, art. 67 4.11.010 tit. 24, art. 68 4.17.010 - 4.17.030 - 4.17.130 - 12.16.050 24-5-101 5.15.020 24-10-101 et seq. 9-28-070 24-6-401 et seq. Ch. 2.04 24-67-101 et seq. Tit. 4 (Note) - 4.11.030 24-68-103 4.04.110 - 4.17.100 24-70-102 3.04.020 24-72-204(3)(a)(I) 4.04.100 25-1.5-106 4.04.100 25-1.5-106(10) 4.04.100 25-4-601 et seq. Tit. 8 (Note) 25-5-410(1)(i)(II) 9.15.010 - 9.15.090 25-8-202(b) 12.24.020 25-8-204 12.24.020 25-8-502 et seq. 12.24.010 tit. 29, art. 2 3.04.070 tit. 29, art. 20 4.16.010 29-1-101 et seq. Tit. 3 (Note) 29-1-603 Tit. 3 (Note) 29-1-801 et seq. 4.13.080 - 4.13.230 - 4.13.250 29-1-801 4.13.220 29-2-101 et seq. Tit. 3 (Note) 29-2-106.1 3.05.080 29-2-106.1(3)-(7) 3.05.080 29-2-106.1(8) 3.05.080 29-2-109 Tit. 3 (Note) 29-2-111 3.05.090 29-20-101 et seq. Tit. 4 (Note) 30-15-401(7) 7.04.060 - 7.04.110 tit. 31, art. 12 4.15.010 - 4.15.010 31-4-301 et seq. Tit. 2 (Note) 31-4-303 2.04.070 31-4-304 Ch. 2.04 - 2.04.010 - 2.04.050 31-4-306 2.16.020 31-4-401 2.04.030 - 2.08.060 31-10-101 et seq. Ch. 2.26 31-10-306 2.26.020 31-10-507 2.26.010 31-12-101 et seq. Tit. 4 (Note) - 12.26.010 31-12-106 4.15.010 31-12-107 4.15.010 - 4.18.060 31-15-103 1.01.020 31-15-105 8.12.350 31-15-302 Tit. 3 (Note) 31-15-302(1)(f)(I) 4.13.220 31-15-401 et seq. 9.02.010 31-15-401 8.12.010, Tit. 9 (Note) 31-15-401(1)(g) 9.18.010 31-15-401(1)(m) Tit. 8 (Note) 31-15-401(i) Tit. 8 (Note) 31-15-401(c) 9.24.020 31-15-501 Tit. 5 (Note) 31-15-601 Tit. 13 (Note) 31-15-707 Tit. 12 (Note) 31-15-707(b) 12.24.030 31-15-708 Tit. 12 (Note) 31-15-709 Tit. 12 (Note) 31-16-101 Ch. 1.12 31-16-201 et seq. 1.01.020 31-16-202 Tit. 11 (Note) - , Tit. 13 (Note) 31-16-206 11.04.090 31-20-105 3.06.140 - 4.03.080 - 5.13.070 - 7.04.110 - 11.04.030 - 12.16.050 - 12.20.060 - 12.36.220 - 12.38.030 31-23-101 et seq. Tit. 4 (Note) 31-23-201 et seq. Ch. 2.24 - 2.24.010 - 2.24.060 31-23-211 2.24.010 31-23-214 Tit. 4 (Note) 31-23-301 et seq. Ch. 2.24 31-23-307 4.03.050, 4.05.020 31-25-301 et seq. Tit. 6 (Note) 31-35-401 et seq. 12.34.010 tit. 33, art. 14.5 11.09.010 33-14-101 et seq. Ch. 11.08 - 11.08.040 33-14.5-108 11.09.020 33-41-101 et seq. 6.03.020 tit. 35, art. 9 3.04.020 35-9-115 3.04.020 35-80-101 et seq. 8.12.020 35-80-102(10) 8.12.020 38-33-101 et seq. 4.12.050 38-51-101 4.15.010 38-51-102 4.18.060 38-51-106 4.15.010 tit. 39, arts. 21, 26 3.04.070 39-12-103(3) 3.05.060 39-21-110.5 5.03.050 39-21-111 3.05.080 39-26-101 et seq. 3.04.020 - 3.04.030 - 3.04.040 - 3.04.050 39-26-102(6.7) 3.04.020 39-26-104(1)(a) 3.04.020 39-26-104(1)(e) 3.04.020 39-26-104(2) 3.04.020 39-26-201 3.05.020 39-26-706(1) 3.04.040 39-26-707(1)(e) 3.04.040 39-26-713(1)(a) 3.04.020 39-26-716(4)(a), (b) 3.04.020 39-28.8-101(1) 3.06.020 42-1-101 et seq. Tit. 11 (Note) 42-1-101(80) 11.04.030 42-1-102(11) 11.04.030 42-1-102(57) 9.15.130 42-1-102(106)(a) 9.15.130 42-2-127 11.04.030 42-3-204(1) 11.04.030 42-3-204(3) 11.04.030 42-4-110(1) Tit. 11 (Note) 42-4-111 11.04.030 42-4-237 11.09.030 42-4-1709(7) 11.04.060 42-4-1804(1)(c) 11.10.040 42-4-1805 11.10.080 42-4-1806 11.10.040 42-4-2103(3)(b) 11.10.060 42-4-2105 11.10.060 42-12-301 11.04.030 42-127(5.5), (5.6) 11.04.060 43-2-147 4.13.120 tit. 44 5.10.030 tit. 44, art. 3 5.10.010 - 5.10.040 - 5.10.060 - 5.10.100 - 5.15.070 - 9.15.010 - 9.15.090 44-3-101 et seq. 5.10.050 44-3-103 5.10.010 - 5.10.110 44-3-301 5.10.080 44-3-301(10) 5.10.010 - 5.10.070 44-3-301(10)(a) 5.10.070 44-3-301(11)(c)(III) 5.10.110 44-3-303 5.10.030 44-3-311 5.10.030 44-3-313(1)(d)(III) 5.10.040 44-3-413 5.10.080 44-3-414 5.10.080 44-3-701 5.10.080 44-3-901 5.10.080 44-3-901(6)(a) 5.10.080 tit. 44, art. 4 5.10.010 - 5.10.040 - 5.10.100 - 5.15.070 - 9.15.010 - 9.15.090 tit. 44, art. 5 5.10.030 - 5.10.050 - 9.15.010 - 9.15.090 44-5-105(3) 5.10.050 44-5-107(5)(a),(c) 5.10.050 tit. 44, art. 11 5.15.030 - 9.15.100 - 9.15.160 44-11-101 et seq. 5.15.010 - 5.15.020 44-11-102 5.15.020 44-11-104(2) 5.15.020 - 5.15.210 44-11-104(7) 5.15.020 44-11-104(11) 5.15.020 44-11-104(13) 5.15.020 - 5.15.030 44-11-104(16) 5.15.020 - 5.15.030 44-11-104(19) 5.15.020 - 5.15.030 44-11-106 5.15.030 44-11-201 5.15.020 44-11-402 5.15.030 44-11-403 5.15.020 44-11-404 5.15.020 - 5.15.030 - 5.15.140 44-11-601 5.15.210 tit. 44, art. 12 9.15.100 44-12-101 et seq. 4.03.040 251.5-106 4.04.100 1243.3-101 et seq. 4.04.100  
